
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04889/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment       |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|Tribunal                             |                                     |
|on 13 February 2019                  |On 17 April 2019                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     JKW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss H Foot, instructed by Binberg Peirce Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. Following a hearing at Birmingham on  15  October  2018  the  Upper
        Tribunal found a judge the First-Tier Tribunal  had  erred  in  law
        such that  the  decision  of  that  Tribunal  was  set  aside,  and
        directions given for a Resumed hearing to allow  this  Tribunal  to
        substitute a decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.



Background


     2. At the outset of  the  Resumed  hearing  Miss  Foot  confirmed  the
        appellant pursues a protection claim on the basis she is  a  member
        of a Particular Social Group (PSG) as a disabled person  in  Kenya,
        pursuant to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules on the  basis
        of insurmountable obstacles to her reintegrating  into  Kenya,  and
        article 8 ECHR.
     3. Notwithstanding clear directions regarding the  timescale  for  the
        provision of additional evidence and  a  debarring  provision  that
        evidence not filed in accordance with the directions would  not  be
        admissible without the express permission of  the  Upper  Tribunal,
        Miss Foot mentioned additional evidence  at  the  outset  that  she
        intended to  introduce  by  way  of  supplementary  questions.  The
        directions provided that witness statements stood as  the  evidence
        in chief with the witness being made available for the purposes  of
        cross-examination and re-examination only. There was no explanation
        for the failure to provide up-to-date witness statements especially
        in light of the representatives having requested  an  extension  of
        the time period set out in the directions which was  granted  by  a
        Lawyer of the Upper Tribunal  on  26  November  2018,  providing  a
        further two weeks to enable the appellant to comply.
     4. Additional witness  statements  were  drafted  at  court  from  the
        appellant and her husband [RE]. Copies were provided to  Mrs  Aboni
        upon completion who confirmed  she  was  not  prejudiced  by  their
        introduction. The additional statements were therefore admitted.
     5. The appellant was initially subject to cross-examination. There was
        no re-examination and no re-examination of the appellant's  husband
        after which submissions were received from the advocates.
     6. The current factual position as it stood at the date of the hearing
        shows a material change and that on 2 February 2019  the  appellant
        moved into a new flat with her husband whom she has  married.  This
        is a housing association flat rented from Waterloo Housing which is
        an open plan spacious living space which they are in the process of
        making suitable for the appellant's needs. The appellant stated the
        central heating and cooking are electric which reduces any risk  of
        her leaning on  a  gas  cooker  which  she  has  done  before.  The
        applicant also claims she still requires use of all  the  equipment
        described in her earlier witness statement. There is a reference at
        [59] to an earlier undated witness statement appearing at  page  39
        of the appellants Upper Tribunal bundle in the following terms:


             59.  In addition to the above,  I  have  also  had  a  lot  of
                  support from an organisation named Vista, a  charity  that
                  helps blind people specifically. I have  a  rehabilitation
                  officer named Fiona Hind who is from Vista and she used to
                  visit me every week until very recently. Vista provided me
                  with support immediately after I  became  blind  and  they
                  showed me how to live my life as a blind person. Fiona has
                  given me lessons on technical skills around my house,  how
                  to type and lessons on using Velcro around my home to show
                  me the end of my fridge door or where the kettle is.  This
                  is helpful for me to go about my day-to-day life. She  has
                  started from scratch and teach me things like walking with
                  my stick, how to cross the  road  and  how  to  eat.  With
                  Fiona's help, I can now travel  to  hospital  appointments
                  alone from my house as I have learnt  the  route  and  the
                  buses I need to take. This was not an easy thing to  learn
                  and I got lost many times in the beginning, when  I  first
                  moved to my current  address.  They  have  also  given  me
                  important props which I use in my day-to-day life such  as
                  binoculars,  walking  stick,  magnifying  glass   and   TV
                  magnifier. Vista also provided me with  a  computer  mouse
                  magnifier in the past to allow me to read paper  documents
                  in a magnified form on a  computer  screen.  Fiona  really
                  helped lift my spirits when I became blind. I was  feeling
                  deflated and depressed and she helped  me  to  believe  in
                  myself and see that I could continue to  do  many  of  the
                  things I did before, when I had sight.


     7. The appellant claims to need a particular type  of  light  bulb  to
        mimic natural daylight which has been installed in  the  flat.  The
        appellant claims her husband also helps her to get around the  flat
        and tells her the colour of objects which helps of  ensure  she  is
        dressed correctly; claiming that she might put on odd  slippers  or
        shoes if she does not get help. The appellant claims  to  need  the
        same level of support described in her previous statement when  she
        goes out, for example if her husband cannot go to church  with  her
        her friend needs to come with her. The appellant claims if  she  is
        in an unfamiliar place she will become anxious  and  explained  she
        has particular routes she needs to follow, or she  will  get  lost.
        The appellant claims she recently got out on  an  unfamiliar  route
        going home and had to call her husband who explained  to  her  over
        the telephone where she was and how to get home. In  terms  of  her
        mental health the appellant claims she is  taking  Sertraline,  100
        milligrams tablet a day, and also receives cream for use on a  rash
        on her skin which is a side effect of the chemotherapy regime.  The
        appellant claims in terms of her leukaemia she has regular  reviews
        with  her  GP  for  checkups.  The  appellant  no  longer  receives
        counselling from a  community  nurse  from  the  Leicester  General
        Hospital but has been advised by the counsellor  to  use  her  time
        with her younger sister [J] as therapy which the  appellant  refers
        to as her "happy place".
     8. The witness statement from the appellant's husband [RE] confirms he
        is currently employed by three different employers  from  which  he
        receives �16,800 per annum net which equates to �1400 per month net
        from which he supports himself and the appellant. At [4 -  6]  [RE]
        writes:


             4.   If [J] was sent back to Kenya in all honesty,  I  do  not
                  think I would be able to go with her. I do not believe our
                  relationship would survive in Kenya.  I  have  family  and
                  support here and I am a British citizen. I do not think  I
                  would be able to support [J] in Kenya, given how much of a
                  struggle day-to-day life will be for me  as  well  as  for
                  her.


             5.   We do not even know if I would be able to get a  Visa  to
             live there.


             6.   In terms of [J] vision and her day-to-day needs, I  don't
                  think she gives herself enough room for  error.   I  don't
                  think  she  is   cautious   enough   and   I   think   she
                  underestimates her limitations.  This  is  partly  a  good
                  thing, because it has driven her to  achieve  a  lot,  and
                  this makes her feel good about herself. But  I  think  she
                  puts herself under great strain. I also think optimism can
                  be a risk to her because she underestimates her weaknesses
                  and is not always good at asking for help.


     9. The medical evidence is set out at the  appellant's  appeal  bundle
        between [157-238]. The most recent correspondence is that dated  26
        June  2017  composed  of  a  medical  legal  report  from  Dr  Mary
        Robertson, a Chartered  and  Consultant  Clinical  Psychologist,  a
        letter from  Dr  Tyadellis  an  Ophthalmology  Registrar  from  the
        University of Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust and a letter from Dr
        Bhuller  a  Consultant  in  Paediatric,  Teenage  and  Young  Adult
        Haematology also from the University  Hospitals  of  Leicester  NHS
        Trust.
    10. Dr Robertson was, in addition to undertaking a diagnosis,  asked  a
        number of questions by the appellant's advocates. The  Opinion  and
        Recommendations section of Dr Robertson's  report  is  set  out  at
        Appendix A below.
    11. There is reference in the medical evidence to the stigma  that  the
        appellant feels she will be the victim of if returned to Kenya. The
        appellant relies on a report from her country expert Dr Kodi  dated
        5 July 2017 found at pages 43 - 52 of Section B of the  appellant's
        appeal bundle. The appellant is a member of the Agikuyu, also known
        as Kikuyu, who Dr Kodi states are one of the largest  of  about  40
        ethnic groups in Kenya making up about 22% of  the  population  and
        playing a dominant role in all sectors of the economy and  who  are
        renowned for their entrepreneurship. Dr Kodi states, however,  that
        the Agikuyu consider somebody who had been diagnosed with leukaemia
        or who had disability, such as blindness, to be cursed, a view that
        is widely shared and found in other ethnic groups in Kenya.  It  is
        also the expert's opinion that family members will  be  ashamed  to
        have a relative with her disability and would be likely to shun the
        appellant rather than associate with  her  and  that  she  will  be
        considered a burden on her relatives. Dr Kodi states it is unlikely
        family will be willing to pay for  her  medical  treatment  if  she
        needed  it  which  it  is  said  could  possibly  explain  why  the
        appellant's family in Kenya have not made contact  with  her  since
        hearing she had been diagnosed with leukaemia. Dr Kodi's opinion is
        that it was unlikely that people of Agikuyu background outside  the
        appellant's family will assist a blind person in Kenya and that  as
        she will be considered a burden on society the appellant  will  not
        be able to make friends and form relationships.
    12. In relation to availability of medical care, Dr Kodi refers to  the
        evidence calling for very specialised and  regular  care  that  the
        appellant is unlikely to access  through  the  national  healthcare
        service of Kenya as a result of lack of availability  of  treatment
        and highly trained personnel as well  as  stigma  attached  to  her
        condition as a blind person. Dr Kodi noted the shortage  of  health
        personnel continued to affect services in Kenya referring  to  poor
        working conditions and doctors striking over low pay.
    13. In relation to the available services, Dr Kodi refers to  a  number
        of organisations that provide assistance to the blind such  as  the
        Kenyan Society for the Blind which is said to  be  underfunded  and
        overstretched. Most funding coming from foreign aid. Dr Kodi refers
        to data indicating there are more  than  250,000  blind  people  in
        Kenya most of whom are in need of assistance and that  deprived  of
        such  assistance  struggling  families  have  no  choice   but   to
        marginalise their deaf/blind children. It is Dr Kodi's opinion that
        the Kenyan Society for Blind or  any  other  organisation  will  be
        unlikely to take up a new and complex case  such  as  that  of  the
        appellant.
    14. In relation to return  as  a  single  woman,  Dr  Kodi  states  the
        appellant will be quite vulnerable and could be taken advantage  of
        by malevolent individuals. She will be in  grave  danger  of  being
        mistreated and even raped. Rape of  young  women  and  girls  is  a
        serious problem throughout Kenya including in rural areas  with  at
        least 300 cases of rape reported every day in  Kenya  although  the
        actual number of unreported rapes is unknown. Dr Kodi  believes  it
        is unlikely  the  appellant  will  be  able  to  access  education,
        employment, and housing, without family support which she will  not
        have.  Dr Kodi believes it is  unlikely  with  her  disability  the
        appellant could compete  with  the  thousands  of  able-bodied  and
        highly educated young people seeking jobs for  reasons  which  were
        identified as  limiting  opportunities  due  to  social  rejection,
        discriminatory employment  practices,  architectural  barriers  and
        inaccessibility of transport. Dr Kodi states relocation  would  not
        be a means to solve the problems as the appellant  would  face  the
        same prejudices in Nairobi and that things may be  even  worse  for
        her in the countryside where people's  views  are  more  rooted  in
        traditions and cultures which consider anybody with a disability as
        a cursed person who can bring misfortune to  those  who  associated
        with him or her.



Discussion


    15. The appellant claims a grant of international protection by way  of
        refugee status on the basis of persecution as a disabled person  in
        Kenya and therefore a member of a Particular Social Group (PSG).
    16.  In Minister voor Immigratie en Aisel  v X, Y and Z C-199/12 and C-
        201/12 CFEU Fourth Chamber it was held that the  definition  of  "a
        particular social group" in  Article  10(1)  of  the  Qualification
        Directive required that two conditions were met. First, members  of
        such a group had to share an innate characteristic  or  belief,  so
        fundamental to identity or  conscience  that  they  should  not  be
        forced to renounce it. Secondly, it was necessary for the group  to
        possess a distinct identity in the relevant country because members
        were perceived as different by the surrounding society.
    17. In SSHD v K and Fornah v SSHD [2006] UKHL 46 Lord  Bingham  derived
        the following principles from the legal authorities, including  the
        Qualification  Directive.  (1)  The  Refugee  Convention  was   not
        concerned with all cases of discrimination, only  with  persecution
        based  on  discrimination,  the  making   of   distinctions   which
        principles of fundamental human  rights  regarded  as  inconsistent
        with the right of every human being. (2) To identify a social group
        the society of which it formed part had to first be  identified;  a
        particular social group  might  be  recognisable  as  such  in  one
        country but not in another. (3) A social group need not be cohesive
        to be recognised as such. (4) There  could  only  be  a  particular
        social group if it existed  independently  of  the  persecution  to
        which it was subject.
    18. It was not submitted on the respondent's behalf that the  appellant
        did not belong to the suggested PSG but rather  that  even  if  the
        appellant's medical disability was accepted she will not experience
        ill-treatment sufficient to amount to persecution due to this.
    19.  The  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International   Protection
        (Qualification) Regulations 2006.  Regulation 5(1) states:


             "In  deciding  whether  a  person  is  a  refugee  an  act  of
             persecution must be:
             (a) sufficiently serious by its nature  or  repetition  as  to
             constitute a severe violation  of  a  basic  human  right,  in
             particular a right from which derogation cannot be made  under
             Article 15 of the  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human
             Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or
             (b) an accumulation of various measures, including a violation
             of a human right which is sufficiently severe as to affect  an
             individual in a similar manner as specified in (a).


             (2) An act of persecution may, for example, take the form of:
             (a) an act of physical or mental violence, including an act of
             sexual violence;
             (b) a legal, administrative, police, or judicial measure which
             in itself is discriminatory  or  which  is  implemented  in  a
             discriminatory manner;
             (c) prosecution or punishment, which  is  disproportionate  or
             discriminatory;
             (d) denial of judicial redress resulting in a disproportionate
             or discriminatory punishment;
             (e)prosecution or punishment for refusal to  perform  military
             service in a conflict, where performing military service would
             include crimes or acts falling under regulation 7.
             (3) An act of persecution must be committed for at  least  one
             of the reasons in Article 1(A) of the Geneva Convention. "


    20. In Shah and Islam and Others v SSHD HL (1999) INLR 144 Lord Hoffman
        said that  the  concept  of  discrimination  in  matters  affecting
        fundamental rights and freedoms is central to an  understanding  of
        the Refugee Convention.  It is concerned  not  with  all  cases  of
        persecution, even if they involve denials of human rights, but with
        persecution that is based on discrimination.
    21. The Secretary of  State's  position  is  that  what  the  appellant
        identifies as the reality of life for her in Kenya, as a result  of
        the issues referred to by Dr Kodi, is discrimination not sufficient
        to cross the threshold of persecution.
    22. This is not a case involving past persecution for  the  appellant's
        illness only manifested itself  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  the
        blindness occurring as a result  of  the  treatment  the  appellant
        received in the UK. It is  not  suggested  the  appellant  will  be
        subjected to direct persecution by the  authorities  in  Kenya  but
        that she may be shunned by members of her ethnic group and find  it
        difficult  if  not  impossible  to  re-establish  herself   through
        employment or education for the reasons identified  in  the  expert
        report.
    23. Two cases relevant  to  the  issue  of  disability  are  SHH  v  UK
        Application 60367/10 EctHR (Fourth Section) in which the  applicant
        claimed  that  as  a  disabled  person  he  would  be  at  risk  in
        Afghanistan, being more susceptible to violence  and  homelessness.
        The court found that the difficulties for disabled people were  not
        the fault of the Afghan authorities and  that  where  the  problems
        facing an applicant would  be  largely  the  result  of  inadequate
        social provision the approach adopted in N was the appropriate one.
         On the evidence the appeal was dismissed.
    24. In R(on the application of HN and SA)(Afghanistan [2016]  EWCA  Civ
        123 the Claimants asserted on a JR application that they  would  be
        at  risk  as  a  result  of  the  worsening  security  position  in
        Afghanistan and also as vulnerable individuals - HN, by  reason  of
        mental  health  problems  and  SA  by  reason  of  being  a  former
        unaccompanied child. The Claimants' applications were dismissed.
    25. I find the appellant has failed to discharge the  burden  of  proof
        upon her to the required standard to establish she is  entitled  to
        be recognised as a refugee on the facts of this appeal. It  is  not
        disputed the appellant is likely to face discrimination, but it has
        not been made out this is of a systemic nature from the authorities
        or others from whom the authorities have been  shown  unwilling  or
        unable to provide protection to the Horvath standard. Although  the
        appellant is likely to face discrimination I do not  find  that  it
        has been made out this will be  systemic  discrimination  with  the
        rights of disabled people not being sufficiently enforced  such  as
        to entitle the appellant to a grant of international protection.
    26. In relation to the Immigration Rules, the respondent's case is that
        it was not accepted that very significant obstacles existed to  the
        appellant's integration into Kenya. It is said the appellant claims
        to be dependent upon her husband, but he is not always with her and
        is working most of the day  and  that  the  appellant  is  able  to
        function independently carrying on  her  private  life  whilst  her
        husband is at work.  This  submission  is  relevant  to  the  claim
        pursuant to paragraph 276ADE.
    27.  In  Treebhawon  and  Others  (NIAA  2002  Part  5A  -   compelling
        circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  mere
        hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles,  mere  upheaval  and  mere
        inconvenience, even where multiplied, are unlikely to  satisfy  the
        test of "very significant obstacles" in paragraph 276  ADE  of  the
        Immigration Rules.  In Parveen v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 932 Underhill
        LJ commented on that observation " I have to say that I do not find
        that a very useful gloss on the words  of  the  rule.  It  is  fair
        enough to observe that the  words  "very  significant"  connote  an
        "elevated" threshold, and I have no difficulty with the observation
        that the test will not be met by "mere inconvenience or  upheaval".
        But I am not sure that saying that "mere" hardship or difficulty or
        hurdles, even if multiplied,  will  not  "generally"  suffice  adds
        anything of substance. The task of the Secretary of State,  or  the
        Tribunal, in any given case is simply to assess  the  obstacles  to
        integration  relied  on,  whether  characterised  as  hardship   or
        difficulty or anything else, and to decide whether they regard them
        as "very significant"".
    28. In this case it is necessary, when  considering  this  element,  to
        consider how all the pieces of the evidential jigsaw link together.
        The appellant left Kenya as a young person to come  to  the  United
        Kingdom in good health. Her experiences of living within Kenya  are
        of living within her family  and  tribal  unit  with,  despite  her
        mother fleeing, the appellant having a secure foundation  in  which
        to grow and develop. The  appellant  came  to  the  United  Kingdom
        lawfully in what was believed at the time to be good health. Within
        the United  Kingdom  her  life  completely  changed  when  she  was
        diagnosed, again as a young person, with leukaemia  for  which  she
        received treatment on  the  NHS  which  has  been  successful.  The
        appellant  has  now  received  the  "all   clear"   which   medical
        professionals will not give an individual suffering from  any  form
        of cancer until an appropriate period has passed since the  end  of
        their  treatment  and  there  has   been   no   obvious   sign   of
        leukaemia/cancer recurring. During the course  of  the  appellant's
        treatment, as a  result  of  the  chemotherapy  she  received,  the
        appellant  lost  her  sight.  Ocular  toxicity  induced  by  cancer
        chemotherapy includes a broad spectrum of disorders, reflecting the
        unique anatomical, physiological and biochemical  features  of  the
        eye one of the consequences of which is loss of sight.  Fortunately
        for the  appellant,  and  contrary  to  the  earlier  reports,  the
        appellant has recovered some sight but is not likely to recover all
        the  vision  that  she  previously  enjoyed.  The  appellant   has,
        understandingly, in addition to the physical aspects of her illness
        and treatment suffered  considerable  psychological  and  emotional
        trauma  as  identified  in  the  report  of  Dr  Robertson.  Whilst
        developments since the report was written have been encouraging  it
        is not a case that any of the experts say without  hesitation  that
        the appellant is unaffected by what has occurred  to  her  and,  in
        terms of mental health issues,  or  that  returning  the  appellant
        would not have a negative impact.
    29. The Secretary of State's case is that there will be no difficulties
        the appellant is unable to overcome if she is  returned  to  Kenya.
        Although the appellant has recently married it appears  to  be  the
        case that if returned the appellant will not have  the  benefit  of
        her husband's support and unlikely  to  have  the  support  of  her
        family or members of her tribal group for the  reasons  established
        by Dr Kodi.  It also appears to be the case that the Kenyan Society
        for the Blind and other NGOs will hesitate in providing  assistance
        as a result of pressures on resources, lack of available resources,
        and complexity issues. Dr Kodi is of the view that as a result  the
        reality for the appellant on return is that  she  will  be  without
        support.
    30. There is clear evidence of obstacles that the appellant  will  face
        to her reintegration into Kenya and  whether  these  are  obstacles
        that she will be able to overcome  requires  a  careful  subjective
        analysis. It is not made out the appellant will be able  to  change
        the opinions of her family or tribal group who consider her  cursed
        as a result of her suffering  cancer  and  blindness,  even  if  on
        return she is now only partially sighted. I place weight  upon  the
        report  of  Dr  Kodi  that  this  will  mean  the  appellant   will
        effectively have to fend for herself in a country where she has not
        lived for a number of  years  and  possibly  in  the  capital  city
        Nairobi. I accept that in the more rural areas  the  appellant  may
        face further difficulties as  a  result  of  the  more  traditional
        entrenched view that the appellant is cursed as  a  result  of  the
        medical issues. The appellant has been consistent in  her  evidence
        that in such a  situation  she  will  not  be  able  to  cope.  The
        psychological evidence is that the  appellant's  coping  mechanisms
        require a structured routine and evidence  from  other  sources  is
        that she is able to lead the life with the degree  of  independence
        she currently has as a result of the fact it is  enjoyed  within  a
        familiar environment where  the  appellant  is  reasonably  certain
        where she is, where  things  are,  and  the  ability  to  call  for
        assistance if  need  arises.  This  is  amply  illustrated  by  the
        evidence of the appellant having to find a  different  route  home,
        becoming lost and having to contact her husband for assistance.
    31. It is not disputed the appellant is in  remission  and  needs  less
        input from the medical and support professionals as she has in  the
        past, but that such support as she currently  enjoys  will  not  be
        present in Kenya. It is also the case that the  appellant  requires
        suitable accommodation to enable her to live a meaningful life  and
        that without knowledge of day to day life in Kenya or support there
        is arguable merit in the appellant's contention that  she  will  be
        unable to find or access such  accommodation,  will  be  unable  to
        secure employment, or to pay for the same. There is also a material
        difference between the reality of life for a disabled person in the
        United Kingdom where advances in the understanding of  society  for
        the needs of the disabled and provision such as  the  Equality  Act
        enable support to be available and prevent,  as  far  as  possible,
        discrimination and enable a person to lead as near normal a life as
        possible, and  Kenya  where  the  atmosphere  from  the  public  is
        hostile. It is also the situation, according to  the  psychological
        report, that the appellant  requires  emotional  support  from  her
        mother, friends, mental health professionals, and others  who  have
        provided assistance to her to enable her to function at her best.
    32. The Secretary of State does not dispute the  submission  that  both
        family and private life rights are engaged in  the  United  Kingdom
        recognised by article 8 and that the issue in  the  appeal  is  the
        proportionality of the appellant's return. Mrs Aboni submission  on
        this point was that the appellant can return to Kenya where she can
        make an application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom under
        the Immigration Rules.
    33. In R (on the application of Chen) v SSHD (Appendix FM - Chikwamba -
        temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC)
        it was held that (i) Appendix FM does not include consideration  of
        the question whether it would  be  disproportionate  to  expect  an
        individual to return to his home country to make an entry clearance
        application to re-join family members in  the  U.K.  There  may  be
        cases in which there are no insurmountable obstacles to family life
        being enjoyed outside the U.K. but where  temporary  separation  to
        enable an individual to make an application for entry clearance may
        be disproportionate. In all cases, it will be for the individual to
        place before the Secretary of State evidence  that  such  temporary
        separation will interfere disproportionately with protected rights.
        It will not be enough to rely solely upon the  case-law  concerning
        Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40. (ii) Lord  Brown  was  not  laying
        down a legal test when he suggested in Chikwamba that  requiring  a
        claimant to make an application  for  entry  clearance  would  only
        "comparatively  rarely"  be  proportionate  in  a  case   involving
        children (per Burnett J, as he then was, in R (Kotecha  and  Das  v
        SSHD [2011] EWHC 2070  (Admin)).    However,  where  a  failure  to
        comply in a particular capacity is the only issue  so  far  as  the
        Rules are concerned, that may well be an  insufficient  reason  for
        refusing the case under Article 8 outside the rules.
    34. It is not disputed there is a positive obligation upon  the  United
        Kingdom as Article 8 ECHR entails a positive obligation on the part
        of the state to protect the physical integrity  of  persons  within
        their jurisdiction. It is not disputed this is a case where, in all
        likelihood, if the appellant applied  for  leave  to  re-enter  she
        would succeed pursuant  to  Appendix  FM  and/or  on  human  rights
        grounds. The appellant speaks English and is of independent means.
    35. The protection of private life under article 8 ECHR  encompasses  a
        person's physical and psychological integrity. A sound mental state
        is an important factor for the possibility to enjoy  the  right  to
        private life (Bensaid v UK para 47).
    36. The evidence on the Psychologist is that returning the appellant to
        Kenya will have a significant effect upon  her  mental  health  and
        ability to function  particularly  without  the  requisite  support
        systems. Although I accept it may be possible for the appellant  to
        take with her  some  of  the  portable  items  such  as  magnifying
        glasses, Velcro, and other items that she has  used  to  facilitate
        the quality of life in the United Kingdom these only  work  if  the
        environment in which the appellant is functioning  is  familiar  to
        her; such as her home.
    37. Considering the factors set out in section 117 of the 2002 Act  and
        balancing the competing arguments in this case I find the appellant
        has made out that in the real world in which these matters need  to
        be assessed and her lack of experience of living in  Kenya  in  the
        circumstances in which she will now face on return without  support
        of either family, tribal group, or external organisations committed
        to enabling her to re-establish herself and secure paid employment,
        issues of which she has no direct control, means this is one of the
        rare  cases  in  which  the  appellant  will  face   insurmountable
        obstacles to her reintegration into life in  Kenya.  Even  if  that
        finding was not accepted and the issue was the question of  whether
        the decision is proportionate pursuant to article 8 ECHR, I find on
        the basis of the appellant's  physical  and  moral  integrity,  the
        respondent's acceptance that return will be  for  the  purposes  of
        applying to re-enter with it not being shown  the  appellant  would
        not succeed on such an application, that the  impact  of  returning
        the appellant to Kenya, even during the period of  time  whilst  an
        application  was  being  made,  will  be  so  detrimental  to   her
        psychological well-being and possible exposure to risk of  harm  as
        identified to  Dr  Kodi,  including  rape  or  any  other  form  of
        exploitation,  that  the  respondent's   decision   and   resultant
        interference with the appellant's protected  right  to  family  and
        private life is not proportionate.
    38. As there is no ground of appeal under the Immigration Rules I  find
        the ground of appeal on which the appellant is able to  succeed  is
        the  human  rights  grounds  and,  accordingly,  allow  the  appeal
        pursuant to article 8 ECHR for the reasons set out above.



Decision

    39. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.






Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 11 April 2019


Appendix A

        17.  Assessment of [K] current psychological state setting out  any
             directly observed symptoms of possible as well  as  any  self-
             reported symptoms.


        17.1      For a diagnosis  of  Major  Depressive  Disorder  in  the
             severe range. As outlined in paragraph 14.1 -  14.5  [K]  also
             meets criteria for an Adjustment Disorder with  mixed  anxiety
             and depression. However, given the duration  and  severity  of
             her symptoms, I am of  the  view  that  she  has  reached  the
             threshold  for  a  primary  diagnosis  of   Major   Depressive
             Disorder.


        17.2       [K]  also  meets  criteria  for  a  diagnosis  of  Panic
             Disorder. A detailed description of symptoms and  how  I  have
             reached  my  conclusions  is  outlined  in  this  report.  Her
             symptoms  have  a  significant  impact   on   her   day-to-day
             functioning and interpersonal relationships.


        17.3      [K's] symptoms began after she was diagnosed with  cancer
             and was rendered blind due to complications from  chemotherapy
             treatment.  She  describes  no  history   of   mental   health
             difficulties  prior  to  these  events.  In  my  opinion,  the
             uncertainty regarding her future and her fear of returning  to
             Ken year is exasperating her symptoms.  Much  of  her  anxiety
             about return relates to her sense of vulnerability due to  her
             visual impairment and how she would  adapt  in  an  unfamiliar
             environment without support and her worries about her health.


        17.4      [K] presentation, self-report and results on standardised
             assessment tools are all consistent with  her  diagnosis.  She
             gave a reasonable account of her current difficulties  in  the
             relationship  between  her  reported   history   and   current
             difficulties was reasonable. I have considered whether [K]  is
             malingering and I do not believe this to be the case.


        18.  What treatment/medication would assist [K]


        18.1       The  evidence  base  for  the  treatment  of  adjustment
             disorder is  limited  (Casey  and  Bailey,  2011)  with  brief
             therapy  is  usually  recommended.  These  include  individual
             psychotherapy, family therapy, behaviour therapy and self-help
             groups. The primary goal of treatment is to  relieve  symptoms
             and help the person achieve a level of functioning  comparable
             to that prior to the stressful event. Social  support  in  the
             form  of  friends,  family  and  the  community  are   usually
             prioritised. In addition the individuals coping, and  problem-
             solving skills are explored and developed and  the  individual
             is assisted in finding ways of adapting to and coping with the
             stress or. Relaxation techniques are also helpful  in  dealing
             with stress and anxiety.


        18.2      When medication is used, it is typically in  addition  to
             psychotherapy.  Prescription  medication  may  be  helpful  in
             easing  the  depression  or  the   anxiety   associated   with
             adjustment disorder. However, treatment of adjustment disorder
             usually excludes use of medication.


        18.3      Most people recover from adjustment disorder without  any
             remaining symptoms if they have no previous history of  mental
             illness and have access to stable social support.  Individuals
             suffering from adjustment disorder should work to develop  and
             maintain a healthy diet and  sleep  patterns,  as  well  as  a
             strong social support system.


        18.4      In my opinion, [K] has  been  receiving  the  appropriate
             treatment for her adjustment disorder.  Her  participation  in
             groups with other young cancer survivors and the  support  she
             receives from her  cancer  network,  family  and  friends  has
             played a vital role in  managing  her  mental  state.  I  have
             commented  on  this  further  in  this  report.  She  is  also
             receiving counselling from a community psychiatric nurse  with
             a focus on teaching her relaxation skills and mindfulness. The
             support she is receiving from Vista has been  central  to  her
             learning to cope with and adapt to her disability.


        18.4      Adjustment disorders are associated  with  high  risk  of
             suicide and  suicidal  behaviour,  substance  abuse,  and  the
             prolongation of other medical disorders or  interference  with
             their  treatment.  Adjustment  disorder  that   persists   may
             progress to become a more  severe  mental  disorder,  such  as
             major depressive disorder. As already  stated,  I  am  of  the
             opinion that this may be the case for [K]  I  would  therefore
             recommend more  intensive  treatment  for  her  depression  in
             addition to the support she is already receiving.


        18.5      Recommended treatment for Major Depressive Disorder  with
             moderate  or   severe   depression   is   a   combination   of
             antidepressant medication and Cognitive Behaviour  Therapy  or
             Interpersonal Therapy (NICE guidelines, 2010). [K] is  already
             taking a high dose of antidepressant medication.  In  addition
             to this I would recommend that she is referred  to  her  local
             psychology service for a course of CBT or IPT  addressing  her
             depressive symptoms and her panic attacks. I am of the opinion
             that she requires a more intensive psychological  intervention
             than she currently receives  from  her  community  psychiatric
             nurse in the Psycho-Oncology Service.


        18.6      [K] symptoms are  severe  and  are  unlikely  to  improve
             without the appropriate evidence-based psychological treatment
             and support. Without the appropriate treatment of symptoms are
             likely  to  interfere  with  her   social   and   occupational
             functioning for the foreseeable future.


        18.7       I  am  hopeful  that  with  the  appropriate  specialist
             treatment, [K]  will  make  clinically  significant  recovery.
             However, it is likely  that  she  will  remain  vulnerable  to
             deterioration if exposed to further stress also  will  require
             continued monitoring in such circumstances.


        19.  If [K] were to be told for certain that she had to  return  to
             Kenya would she suffer psychological consequences; and if  so,
             what consequences would she  suffer  -  in  particular  please
             comment on whether she would become  delusional  or  suicidal,
             will she harm herself, if so  how  seriously,  and  would  she
             succeed in killing herself.


        19.1      In my opinion, being told that she had to return to Kenya
             would have a  significant  and  detrimental  impact  on  [K]'s
             mental health. She is highly anxious and  fearful  about  this
             prospect and if this became a reality, her  anxiety  and  fear
             would increase dramatically.


        19.2      [K] has found it extremely difficult  to  adjust  to  her
             blindness and she is still in the process of learning to  cope
             and adapt to her disability. She lacks confidence and skill in
             managing all aspects of her daily life and requires  continued
             support and high levels of  practical  and  emotional  support
             from her mother, partner, social and professional network as I
             have outlined later.


        19.3      A factor which has been helpful in her recovery  is  that
             she returned to Leicester which  is  a  familiar  environment.
             This made it somewhat easier for her to adapt.  However,  this
             would be very different if she returned to Kenya as she  would
             have little familiarity with the environment which  is  likely
             to have changed in the 7 years since she has  been  away.  She
             told me that she would fit like she was having to start  again
             in a strange New World and in my view, this  is  a  reasonable
             perception. [K] lost her sight  in  the  UK  and  she  has  no
             experiences living as a blind person in Kenya.


        19.4       [K]  feels   frightened   and   unsafe   in   unfamiliar
             environments and it is likely that her fear and  anxiety  will
             overwhelm her and interfere with her capacity  to  adjust  and
             adapt to her life there. She told me that she  does  not  know
             how she would manage to negotiate her way around  the  country
             as a blind person.


        19.5      This will be further aggravated if  she  has  no  support
             service available. [K] believes that her  relatives  in  Kenya
             would reject her because she had cancer and is now blind.  She
             fears for her safety and believes that they would want to  get
             rid of her as she is perceived to be "cursed".


        19.6      Over the past 7 years [K]  aunt  has  lost  her  business
             twice and she is now convinced that this is  because  of  [K].
             She blames [K] for her misfortune and has told  her  that  she
             wants nothing to do with her and they  no  longer  speak.  Her
             aunt has maintained contact with her mother. She has told  her
             mother that she has been warned that there  would  be  further
             mishaps if she maintained contact with [K]. [K] believes  that
             this is the reason why her aunt has cut contact with  her  and
             she said that she no longer tries to communicate with her aunt
             any more. She has also not spoken to her  brother  since  2015
             and she has told me that he also believes that  she  has  been
             cursed. [K] is very hurt and sad that her brother has rejected
             her.


        19.7      She has no contact with her father and she believes  that
             he would not want anything to do with her. She is unsure if he
             is still living in Kenya. She feels angry with her father  who
             has never been there for her when she has needed him  and  she
             has no reason to believe that this will ever change.


        19.8      As a result [K] believes that she would be  isolated  and
             alone if she returned to Ken year. She does not know what  she
             would do or who she would ask for help and this makes her feel
             very scared and worried. She  fears  that  she  would  end  up
             begging on the street and she does not believe that anybody in
             Ken you would care about her or understand. She also  believes
             that she would face humiliation and  shame  in  the  community
             would think very badly of someone  who  has  gone  abroad  and
             returned destitute and alone. She believes that this  will  be
             perceived as confirmation that she is cursed.


        19.9      [K] also worries that she will not be able to access  the
             medical care and support she requires if  returned  and  fears
             that she may relapse. She is not  yet  in  remission  and  she
             worries  about  any  new  symptom  and  she  frequently  seeks
             reassurance from her Macmillan nurse. She has been  told  that
             she will be  given  priority  access  to  any  research  trial
             targeting the damage to her  optic  nerve  but  she  does  not
             believe this would be available to her in Kenya. She  told  me
             that she would have to pay for her medical care in  Kenya  and
             without any source of income, this would not be possible.  For
             these reasons, [K] anxiety  about  her  health  is  likely  to
             escalate if faced with the prospect of return. In addition any
             hope of a potential cure for  her  blindness  will  be  dashed
             which will increase her sense of hopelessness.


        19.10     I had no reason  to  doubt  that  [K]  fear  is  genuine,
             whether or not  it  is  objectively  well-founded.  Given  [K]
             vulnerability and her current mental health difficulties, I do
             not believe she will have the emotional resources to cope with
             the increased fear and anxiety and that her mental state  will
             further deteriorate. I note that this opinion is shared by her
             Senior Clinical Nurse Practitioner, Ms McDonald (letter  dated
             18 August 2016).


        19.11     [K] will  be  faced  with  the  prospect  of  losing  her
             extensive support system in the UK if she was told she had  to
             return. In my opinion, she would not be able to  cope  without
             this network as outlined later in this report. [K] told me how
             afraid she is of losing her relationship with her mother.  She
             had to deal with the sudden loss of her mother when she was  a
             child. I had the impression that this  was  very  painful  and
             difficult for her  and  at  the  time  and  left  her  feeling
             abandoned and alone. The reunion with her mother had  been  of
             major importance to her and despite many difficulties, she has
             worked very hard to rebuild her relationship with  her  mother
             and this is profoundly important to  her.  She  is  also  very
             close to her baby sister and told me that "she  is  everything
             to me".


        19.12     [K] relationship  with  her  partner  is  also  extremely
             important to her psychological well-being as outlined in  this
             report. They  are  in  the  process  of  getting  engaged  and
             planning a future together. Her relationship with her partner,
             family and friends make her feel safe and secure. If  she  was
             faced with the potential loss of these relationships, I am  in
             no doubt  that  [K]  this  loss  would  inevitably  reactivate
             previous losses and feelings of abandonment.


        19.13     [K] is very protective of her mother and she told  me  at
             several points how much she worries about her mother and  does
             not want to retraumatised her given  how  much  she  has  been
             through. She believes that  if  she  returned  to  Kenya,  her
             mother would suffer even further.  [K]  already  feels  guilty
             about being a burden to her mother and this guilt is likely to
             escalate if she faced return.


        19.14     In my opinion the threat of return will leave [K] feeling
             helpless, fearful and hopeless. There is an extensive body  of
             research literature on hopelessness (e.g. Beck et al.,  1975),
             which is found that hopeless thoughts have been identified  as
             the biggest risk factor in predicting  suicidal  behaviour  in
             individuals with symptoms of depression. Suicide risk is  also
             a significant risk of people with  adjustment  disorders.  [K]
             sense of hopelessness will be exasperated by her  belief  that
             she will  be  rejected  and  stigmatised  by  her  family  and
             community and the fear that she will face hardship because  of
             her blindness.


        19.15     [K] presents with depression in the severe range.  In  my
             view her depression and anxiety will increase if told she  has
             to return. She is not at current risk of suicide but this risk
             will significantly increase if her mental state  deteriorates.
             She is likely to  require  close  monitoring  and  psychiatric
             management of her mental state at all stages of  the  process.
             Crisis intervention and hospital  admission  may  need  to  be
             considered in the event of more severe breakdown or  increased
             suicide risk.


        20   Whether I believe the  current  relationships/support  network
             she  has  established  in  the  UK  are  important   for   the
             maintenance of her mental health at this current level.


        20.1       In  my  opinion  [K]   support   network   and   current
             relationships play a vital  role  in  maintaining  her  mental
             health  at  this  current  level.  This  includes  the   large
             professional network involved in  her  care  as  well  as  her
             network of friends and close  relationships  with  her  family
             (mother and sister) and her partner to whom she  is  about  to
             become engaged.


        20.2      [K] is receiving  support  from  her  cancer  team  which
             includes a doctors as well as the  Macmillan  Cancer  Support,
             Teenage Cancer Trust and CLIC Sargent  charity  for  childhood
             Cancer support. She is also  receiving  regular  psychological
             support in the Psycho-Oncology Service.  In  my  opinion  this
             professional network of support has  been  very  important  in
             helping [K] to deal with her illness and  subsequent  loss  of
             vision and the multiple challenges and anxieties around this.


        20.3      [K] attends a support group every month where  she  meets
             up with friends from the Teenage Cancer trust. She  said  that
             this is hugely helpful as she is among  people  who  know  and
             understand what she has been through. She said that she  feels
             understood by them and knows they will not judge her. At these
             meetings they play games and have fun. They have also been  on
             visits to places including Scotland, the Royal Albert Hall and
             Alton Towers. She said that they do something different  every
             month. This group provides her with a space  where  she  feels
             understood, supported and has fun.


        20.4      Her social worker helps with paperwork such as completing
             forms or letters. Her youth worker  from  the  teenage  Cancer
             trust helps access social and fun activities. Her  nurse  from
             Macmillan helps her with medical related issues. [K] said  she
             can call her whenever she  needs  to  for  advice  or  to  ask
             questions. She  attends  counselling  every  3  weeks  with  a
             community  psychiatric  nurse  which  has  helped   to   learn
             techniques to ground herself and manage her distress. [K] said
             that she finds it a relief to talk and to have a  confidential
             space in which you can talk about things which  she  does  not
             feel able to talk about her mother or her partner.


        20.5      [K] has also received intensive  support  from  Vista  to
             help  her  adjust  to  her  visual  impairment.  She  has  had
             significant difficulty adjusting to her visual impairment  and
             the support from Vista has played an essential role in helping
             her adjust  and  develop  her  confidence  to  cope  with  her
             blindness. She has  a  close  relationship  with  her  support
             worker, Fiona, who has been an  inspirational  role  model  to
             her. The supporters enable her to learn  to  manage  the  many
             challenges he faces in carrying out daily tasks  in  her  home
             and external environment (see paragraph  7.22).  This  support
             has decreased in intensity as [K]  has  become  more  able  to
             manage her disability. However, I am of the opinion, that  [K]
             is in need of continued support as she  still  feels  insecure
             and afraid in certain situations  including  being  in  a  new
             environment and environments with low light. She has  not  yet
             learned to cook  independently  without  burning  herself  and
             requires further support in this area.


        20.7      [K] has already had significant difficulty  adjusting  to
             her life threatening illness, intensive and invasive treatment
             and medical complications resulting in her loss of sight.  [K]
             adjustment difficulties  and  her  need  for  high  levels  of
             support his repeatedly noted in her medical records. She  fell
             ill at a point in her life when she was a young adult  in  the
             process of building a life and the future for herself. In  her
             words, her world crumbled when she fell ill and  the  loss  of
             her site was even more devastating.  She  has  been  diagnosed
             with depression and an adjustment disorder  as  a  result.  In
             light of this, this professional support network has been both
             necessary and helpful in managing  her  distress  without  her
             deteriorating even  further.  [K]  remains  very  anxious  and
             vulnerable in relation to her  health  and  blindness  and  is
             therefore in need of continued support until  she  is  certain
             that she is in remission and she has  fully  adjusted  to  her
             blindness.


        20.8      [K] mother and partner have also played  a  key  role  in
             helping her manage her day-to-day life.  Her  mother  is  very
             involved in her life and assists with her shopping,  cleaning,
             cooking and other household tasks.  [K]  would  be  unable  to
             manage without this practical support. Without this support, I
             do not believe that [K] would be able to live in her own flat.


        20.9      This independent living is psychologically very important
             to [K]. She struggles with being dependent  on  other  people.
             She worries that she is a burden on them and this  leaves  her
             feeling guilty and negative about herself. Her dependency also
             leaves her feeling vulnerable to being hurt or abandoned which
             is  understandable  given  the  losses  she  endured  in   her
             childhood. In my view, the fact that she can live on  her  own
             with this extra support from  her  mother  has  made  a  very,
             positive contribution to [K] well-being and sense  of  mastery
             and hope which are necessary for her recovery.


        20.10     In addition  to  the  practical  support,  the  emotional
             support she gets from her mother  is  equally  important.  [K]
             described her  mother  as  enormously  supportive  during  her
             illness and she talked about how safe she felt when her mother
             was with her in the hospital  when  she  was  critically  ill.
             Although their relationship has been difficult at times,  they
             have both worked hard at improving this and have become closer
             as a result. This relationship is  clearly  a  very  important
             source of emotional support  for  [K]  which  has  undoubtedly
             helped her cope.


        20.11     [K] partner is also central  to  her  mental  well-being.
             They have been together for 3 years and are  planning  to  get
             engaged. Despite [K] attempts to push her  partner  away  when
             she has felt scared and afraid of being a burden to  him  (see
             paragraph 8.6), he has stuck by her. In my view her  partner's
             commitment to her in the face of difficulty has helped her  to
             build trust and to feel safe. She feels that her  partner  and
             his family accept her for who she is. These factors  are  very
             important for [K] well-being in light of the rejection she has
             experienced from her family in Kenya and  the  abandonment  by
             her father and the sense of abandonment she will have felt  as
             a child when her mother had to flee Kenya.


        20.12     In addition to the above-mentioned  support,  [K]  has  a
             close group of friends who she has known since before she  was
             blind and with whom she feels safe. She feels  good  when  she
             has contact with them and in my opinion,  these  relationships
             provide a helpful sense of connection to the  person  she  was
             before she came blind and the space in which  you  can  safely
             have fun and feel normal.


        21.  [K] has instructed that if you were to return  to  Kenya,  she
             would have no family or  social  support  due  to  the  stigma
             associated with having had cancer/being blind. Please  comment
             on how this would impact on her mental state.


        21.1      As already outlined, one of [K] main worries about  being
             returned is the lack  of  support  there  due  to  the  stigma
             associated with having had cancer and being blind.  She  would
             also  learn  loose  a  large  and  well-developed  network  of
             professionals, family and friends of return.


        21.2      In my opinion this would have a profound  impact  on  her
             mental health. Social support has been  identified  as  a  key
             factor  in  the  recovery  from  depression   and   adjustment
             disorder. The harmful consequences of poor social support  and
             the  protective  effects  of  having  access  to  varied   and
             functional  social  networks  on  maintaining   physical   and
             psychological health has been well  documented  (Ozbay  et  al
             2007)


        21.3      [K] is likely to become  profoundly  depressed,  isolated
             and anxious if she  has  no  family  or  social  support  upon
             return. Removing her from  her  existing  networks  of  social
             support is  likely  to  overwhelm  her  emotionally  and  will
             invariably result in a worsening  of  her  symptoms.  This  is
             likely to impact on her ability to take the necessary steps to
             establish yourself in Kenya. It is also likely to be a barrier
             to her recovery and may  have  a  detrimental  impact  on  her
             physical health as well. In my view [K] will be  at  increased
             risk of suicide in the absence of social support.


        21.4      In summary, I am of the opinion that [K] is a  vulnerable
             young  woman  who  is  in  need  of  continued  emotional  and
             practical support in order to  manage  her  levels  of  mental
             distress and day-to-day life.


        22   Comment on whether I believe her mental state impacts  on  her
             ability to take advantage of services on offer. Whether in the
             light of my assessment about what would happen if you were  to
             be removed to Kenya  to  her  mental  health,  I  believe  her
             ability to access services there would be affected


        22.1      [K] is accessing a wide range of services  as  previously
             outlined. Much of this support was initiated when she was  ill
             with cancer. Her access to psychological support has been more
             recent. [K] told me that although this had been offered to her
             previously, she had not taken this up for  she  was  still  in
             denial about her blindness. As already stated [K] is still  in
             the process of adjusting to and  coming  to  terms  with  this
             disability. She struggles  with  feelings  of  bitterness  and
             anger about this. She is also conflicted about whether she  is
             cursed and has somehow caused this to happen.


        22.2      This conflict and confusion is likely to increase if  she
             is returned to Kenya where she may be perceived to  be  cursed
             on face rejection by her family. Increased feelings  of  shame
             and stigma due to her disability are likely to be a barrier to
             help her accessing help.


        22.3      [K] already has difficulty asking  for  help  from  other
             people and she does not like being dependent on  other  people
             for fear of being a burden to them or of being  let  down  and
             hurt. Over time she has become more able to trust her  partner
             and her mother and to accept their help and support.  However,
             although she feels that they accept and love  her,  she  still
             finds this difficult. She has established  good  relationships
             with the network of professionals involved in  her  care  over
             the years.


        22.4      In my view, she will find  it  very  difficult  accessing
             services with people who are completely  unknown  to  her  and
             with whom she has no previous history. As already  stated  her
             depression and anxiety symptoms  are  likely  to  increase  if
             returned. These symptoms will  also  have  an  impact  on  her
             motivation and capacity to initiate steps  and  seek  services
             and acquire the help she would require.


        22.5      In addition, her tiredness consequent to her illness  and
             treatment coupled with a lack of sleep will interfere with her
             capacity to take care of her needs and  access  services.  Her
             visual impairment will be another major barrier to  her  being
             able to seek help. [K] feels afraid and insecure  in  any  new
             environment and she is unlikely to manage finding her  way  to
             new places and services unsupported. She told me that she does
             not know where she would live, how she would start building  a
             life for herself and who she would turn to.


        22.6      [K] told me that she does not trust  the  authorities  in
             Kenya to help her. She said that they failed her mother before
             she does not trust that they will be able to keep  a  safe  as
             she is from a minority group.


        26.7      I am unable to comment on what conditions [K] would  face
             on return. However, I am of the opinion that her mental health
             problems will have a detrimental  impact  on  her  ability  to
             secure her needs and to access the medical  and  psychological
             care she requires. Given her current vulnerability and  mental
             health needs, I do not believe [K] will be able  to  take  the
             necessary steps to provide for her basic needs and  to  access
             necessary  services.  In  my  view,  this  would  render   her
             vulnerable  and  at  risk   of   abuse   and   an   associated
             deterioration in her mental state.


        23.  Please comment on [K] personal coping mechanisms


        23.1      [K] attends church regularly and her face is an important
             source of comfort and support to her.


        23.2      One of her key coping strategies is to keep herself  busy
             and following a well structured routine of  daily  activities.
             This appears to be strategy she has used from a young age. [K]
             has a very structured week which includes voluntary work in  a
             charity shop  and  a  community  organisation.  She  also  has
             scheduled times with her mother and her partner. [K] also  has
             regular contact with friends and her cancer network.


        23.3      [K] acknowledged that she tries hard to keep  herself  as
             busy as she can  as  this  helps  to  distract  her  from  her
             worries. In my opinion, if she did not have this structure and
             destruction, she would be overwhelmed by her anxiety  and  her
             depression would be exasperated.


        23.4      [K] also seeks reassurance from her cancer team  as  when
             and needed as a way of managing her health anxieties.


        23.5      Although [K] does seek support and reassurance  from  her
             mother and partner this makes a  significant  contribution  to
             her coping, this is not always  easy  for  her.  Her  fear  of
             dependents and of being hurt or let down can be a  barrier  to
             her accessing this support when she is feeling vulnerable.


        23.6      When [K] usual  coping  strategies  fail,  she  tends  to
             "zone" out or disassociate. Disassociation is a  lack  of  the
             normal integration of thoughts, feelings, and experiences into
             the stream of consciousness and memory. It is a reaction  both
             traumatic  events  as  well  as   high   levels   of   stress.
             Disassociation can  be  thought  of  as  both  a  neurological
             response to threat and psychological defence to  protect  from
             an overwhelming experience. Disassociation  places  people  at
             risk as they are less aware of their surroundings and [K] told
             me that on one occasion she was nearly hit by a car  when  she
             was in this state. The psychiatric nurse has been teaching her
             ways of grounding herself which she is able to use. I would be
             concerned if her tendency to  disassociate  increased  in  the
             face of increased stress and would recommend that  this  needs
             close monitoring.

