
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04531/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 November 2018                      |On 20 November 2018               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     W T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T. Ley, instructed by Tower Hamlets Law Centre
For the respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appeals the respondent's decision dated  28  April  2017
    to refuse a protection and human rights claim. The appellant fears that
    she will either be forced into an unwanted marriage by  her  family  or
    that she will be at risk of serious harm for having  refused  to  marry
    the person chosen by her father.

2.    The respondent accepted that the appellant's family  put  pressure  on
    her to marry the man chosen by her father.  The  appellant  obtained  a
    Forced Marriage Protection Order from an English  court.  The  decision
    letter states that "forced marriage threat and subsequent events"  were
    accepted. The respondent accepted that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine
    subjective fear on return but concluded: "for the reasons  given  below
    it is considered that your fear is not objectively well founded because
    internal relocation is available to you." The respondent concluded that
    she was  sufficiently  well  educated  and  had  other  family  support
    available. He concluded that it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant to move to another area of Pakistan.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Monson  dismissed  the  appeal  on  Refugee
    Convention grounds finding that there was insufficient evidence to show
    that her family members  intended  to  harm  her  if  she  returned  to
    Pakistan. However, he  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
    because  he  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  would   face   'very
    significant obstacles' to integration in Pakistan as a "psychologically
    vulnerable woman in an irregular situation"  who  had  been  ostracised
    from her family.

4.    Both parties sought to appeal the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  and
    were granted permission. The details of the First-tier Tribunal judge's
    findings are set out in more detail in  the  Upper  Tribunal's  initial
    error of law decision (annexed). The Upper Tribunal concluded that  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision relating to the Refugee Convention  appeal
    involved the making of an error on a point of law. However, the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision relating to the  Human  Rights  appeal  did  not
    involve the making  of  an  error  on  a  point  of  law.  The  Refugee
    Convention appeal was listed for a resumed hearing.

Decision and reasons

5.    It is not necessary for me to make detailed findings  in  relation  to
    the Refugee Convention appeal in light of the  concession  made  by  Mr
    Jarvis at the hearing. The decision  letter  accepted  the  appellant's
    account of events. The only reason given for refusing  the  application
    was the availability of  internal  relocation.  He  accepted  that  the
    appellant described an escalating situation  in  which  she  eventually
    became ostracised  from  her  family.  The  attitude  of  her  siblings
    changed. He noted what the Upper Tribunal said  in  the  error  of  law
    decision.  The  respondent  could  not  legitimately  argue  that   the
    appellant would not be at risk from her father if she returned  to  her
    home area. The findings made by the First-tier Tribunal judge  relating
    to 'very significant obstacles'  to  integration  for  the  purpose  of
    paragraph 276ADE altered the position in relation to  the  availability
    of internal relocation. He made clear  that  the  respondent's  general
    position is that the sole fact of being a lone woman is not  sufficient
    to show that internal relocation would be unduly harsh. However, on the
    findings made by the First-tier Tribunal and the facts of this case  he
    accepted that  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.

6.    I am satisfied that the concession was properly made on the  facts  of
    this case. The appellant gave a credible account of pressure put on her
    by her father to marry. The appellant initially  sought  to  avoid  her
    father but as the pressure mounted the situation  escalated.  When  she
    told her father that she did not want to marry the man of  his  choice,
    he began to make threats towards her. Eventually she became  ostracised
    from her family. The appellant's account is detailed and consistent and
    is supported by evidence. I am  satisfied  that  the  threat  of  force
    marriage is sufficiently serious to amount to persecution and that  the
    background evidence relating to Pakistan also supports her fear of  the
    possibility of 'honour' based  violence  as  a  result  of  her  having
    refused to comply with the wishes of her family. The reason  why  there
    is a real risk of serious harm is  because  she  is  a  woman  who  has
    breached social mores by refusing to comply with her  family's  wishes.
    There is a real risk of serious harm to the appellant in her home area.
    Although the test under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  immigration
    rules is one that relates to an  assessment  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights, the test is sufficiently stringent
    to  show  that  the  same  facts  would  render   internal   relocation
    'unreasonable' or 'unduly harsh' for  the  purpose  of  the  assessment
    under the Refugee Convention.

7.    For these reasons I conclude that the  appellant  has  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution for reasons  of  her  membership  of  a  particular
    social group. The decision breaches the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under the Refugee Convention.

DECISION

The Refugee Convention decision is remade. The appeal is ALLOWED.

The Human  Rights  appeal  was  ALLOWED  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
decision stands.


Signed   [pic]   Date 13 November 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


ANNEX
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04531/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 03 July 2018                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                     W T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                        Appellant/Respondent

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                        Respondent/Appellant


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues and the appellant is a  vulnerable  witness.
I find that it is appropriate to continue the  order.  Unless  and  until  a
tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No
report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  her  or
any member of her family. This direction applies both to the  appellant  and
to the respondent.

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T. Lay, instructed by Tower Hamlets Law Centre
For the respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The claimant appealed the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  dated  28
    April 2017 to refuse a protection and human rights claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson ("the judge")  dismissed  the  appeal
    on Refugee Convention grounds and allowed the appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

3.    Both parties have been granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The claimant, to challenge the decision to dismiss the appeal
    on Refugee Convention grounds. The Secretary of State, to challenge the
    decision to allow the appeal on human rights grounds. For the  sake  of
    convenience, I will refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier  Tribunal  although  technically  they  are  both  appellants  and
    respondents in the cross appeals to the Upper Tribunal.

4.    The judge outlined the  appellant's  account  [13-21].  The  appellant
    feared that she would be forced into marriage  by  her  family  if  she
    returned to Pakistan. The judge noted that the East London Family Court
    issued a Forced Marriage Protection Order on 10 October 2016 [21].  The
    judge noted that the respondent recognised that the appellants' account
    was "internally consistent, sufficiently detailed and was supported  by
    external evidence". The judge observed that  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter accepted: "forced marriage threat and subsequent  events"  [24].
    However, the respondent disputed that she would be at  risk  on  return
    because sufficient protection would be available in  Pakistan.  In  the
    alternative, she was educated and had  work  experience.  It  would  be
    reasonable to expect her to relocate to  another  area  away  from  her
    family [25-26].

5.    The extent of the concession made in the decision letter  relating  to
    "subsequent events" was somewhat unclear. The  judge  found  that  "the
    concession clearly extends as far as accepting that, prior  to  the  ex
    parte order, the Appellant's father had pressurised the Appellant  into
    marrying someone of his choice." [40]. However, he concluded that there
    were discrepancies in the appellant's account relating to the extent of
    the threats made by her father [41-51]. He concluded:

         "50.     The evidence in her  witness  statement  that  her  father
             began to make death threats against her prior to his visit  to
             the UK in  July  was  contradicted  by  the  Appellant's  oral
             evidence that her father was not made aware of her refusal  of
             the proposal until  August.  Her  account  that  her  siblings
             supported the father's proposal, and encouraging her to accept
             it, is contradicted by what she told  her  GP  in  in  October
             2016.  It  is  significant  that  in  her  oral  evidence  the
             Appellant said that she felt she could not trust the  siblings
             who had supported her in the past, but she did  not  give  any
             indication that this fear was well-founded. She has  also  not
             produced any exchanges with her siblings to show that the fear
             is well-founded.


         51.      Having assessed the  evidence  in  the  round,  I  am  not
             persuaded that the Appellant's father  sought  to  coerce  the
             Appellant into marriage through  making  threats  against  her
             life or person if she did not obey him (with the exception  of
             the oblique  threat  at  B63,  which  the  appellant  did  not
             apparently perceived as a threat directed towards her  at  the
             time - given what she told the police  in  October  2016);  or
             that, after the end of the disclosed exchanges -  which  cease
             in mid-September - he communicated  directly  or  through  the
             Appellant's siblings any threats to force her into marriage if
             she came back to Pakistan, or a threat to harm her in Pakistan
             for dishonouring him. I consider that if such threats had been
             made or intimated, the  Appellant  would  have  been  able  to
             produce documentary evidence of this, just as she was able  to
             produce the evidence of "chat room" exchanges  in  August  and
             September."

6.    The judge went on to give reasons for rejecting the appellant's  claim
    that she would be at risk because her father  had  filed  a  false  FIR
    against her alleging that she was complicit in a robbery, primarily  on
    the ground that it would be easy for  her  to  refute  the  allegations
    because she could prove that she was in the UK at the time [60-63]. For
    these reasons the judge concluded that the appellant  did  not  have  a
    well-founded fear of persecution if she returned to Pakistan.

7.    The judge went on to assess the case on human rights grounds:

         "65.     However, I accept that the Appellant is terrified of going
             back to Pakistan, and there  is  compelling  evidence  that  a
             psychologically vulnerable woman in an irregular situation, as
             she would be - being completely ostracised by  her  family  in
             Pakistan and having  no  male  protector  -  would  face  very
             significant obstacles to reintegrating into life in  Pakistan,
             wherever she went. Although her sister-in-law is  an  ally,  I
             accept that it  would  not  be  a  realistic  option  for  the
             appellant to return to reside with her  sister-in-law  in  the
             family home in Gujarat, as  her  sister-in-law  could  not  go
             against the wishes of her father.  In  the  2016  Home  Office
             country guidance at 7.5.1 a  representative  of  the  HRCP  is
             quoted as saying in 2013 that it was "next to impossible"  for
             a single woman to [live] alone in Pakistan due  to  prejudices
             against women and economic dependence.  Accordingly,  I  allow
             the appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds  by  reference  to
             Rule 276ADE(vi)."

The Refugee Convention appeal

8.    The claimant appeals the First-tier Tribunal decision relating to  the
    Refugee Convention appeal on the following grounds:

      i) Irrational findings - The First-tier Tribunal findings relating  to
         risk on return were irrational in  light  the  concession  and  the
         background evidence showing that it was at least reasonably  likely
         that the appellant's fear of forced marriage or retribution by  her
         father for refusing to marry was well-founded. The report  made  to
         the police in October 2016 clearly indicated that she was reporting
         threats made by her father.


     ii) Failure to give adequate reasons - The First-tier  Tribunal  failed
         to  give  adequate  reasons  to  explain  what   the   "fundamental
         discrepancy" was in the nature of the threats made by  her  father.
         In requiring the appellant to produce documentary evidence to  show
         that he continued to make threats, the judge failed  to  take  into
         account  the  appellant's   oral   evidence   that   threats   were
         communicated to her in telephone conversations.


    iii) Failure to give appropriate weight to expert evidence - The  First-
         tier Tribunal failed to  place  sufficient  weight  on  the  expert
         report of Dr Uzma Moeen, who concluded  that  her  fears  were  not
         speculative. The First-tier Tribunal also failed to  give  adequate
         weight to  the  medical  evidence,  which  was  supportive  of  the
         appellant's claim to have been threatened.


     iv) Mistake of fact / misapprehension of the evidence - The finding  at
         [50] misunderstood the evidence  given  by  the  appellant  in  her
         witness statement.

The Human Rights appeal

9.    The Secretary  of  State  seeks  to  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision relating to the human rights appeal on the  sole  ground  that
    the judge erred in failing to take into  account  the  public  interest
    considerations  contained  in  section   117B   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002") when deciding the  appeal
    under Article 8.

Decision and reasons

The Refugee Convention appeal

10.   Although some of the judge's findings relating to  the  likelihood  of
    risk on return were open to him to make, I find that there is merit  in
    the claimant's submission that the judge failed to  take  into  account
    evidence that was material to a proper assessment of risk on return.

11.   The respondent accepted the claimant's account of  the  pressure  that
    her father put on her to marry although the judge quite rightly pointed
    out that the extent of the concession relating to  "subsequent  events"
    was somewhat unclear. The First-tier Tribunal findings make clear  that
    the concession went as  far  as  to  accept  that,  before  the  Forced
    Marriage Protection Order, the claimant's father  had  pressurised  her
    into marrying someone of his choice.

12.   The order made by the East London  Family  Court  was  relevant  to  a
    proper assessment of the likelihood of forced marriage and/or a risk of
    serious harm, but the import of this decision was  not  given  adequate
    consideration by the First-tier Tribunal. On 07 November 2016 the court
    found that there was evidence to show that the claimant's parents  "may
    have used or threatened violence against the person being protected  or
    otherwise in connection with the matters being dealt with by the  order
    and that there is a risk of significant harm to a person,  attributable
    to conduct of the respondents if the power of arrest is not attached to
    the  provisions  immediately."  The  order  went  on  to  prohibit  the
    claimant's parents from (i) forcing her into marriage;  (ii)  using  or
    threatening violence; or (iii) intimidating or harassing the  claimant.



13.   The police  reports  outlined  mixed  reports  of  her  father  making
    'threats' against her, but at one point stating that "no actual threats
    of violence have been made" (22/10/16).

14.   Given the terms of the order it seems unlikely that her  father  would
    risk making direct threats against her in  writing.  No  findings  were
    made as to whether, having accepted the credibility of the core element
    of her account, the appellant's evidence that she was threatened on the
    telephone was capable of belief.

15.   There is merit to the argument that the  judge  failed  adequately  to
    place his findings in the context of the background and expert evidence
    relating to forced marriage and  'honour'  violence  against  women  in
    Pakistan. The expert report was considered but rejected in brief  terms
    because the judge was "not persuaded that there is a real risk  of  the
    Appellant on return to Pakistan being targeted by her father, or by her
    cousin's family, or by any other male members of the family."[56].  The
    expert report should have formed part  of  the  overall  assessment  of
    whether the claimant's account of the threats made by  her  father  was
    likely to be credible.

16.   However, given that it was accepted that the appellant  faced  a  risk
    of force marriage sufficient to justify the making of a Force  Marriage
    Protection Order, no consideration was given to the principles outlined
    in Article 4(4) of the Qualification Directive:

         "The fact that an applicant has already been subject to persecution
         or serious harm or to direct threats of such  persecution  or  such
         harm, is a serious indication of the applicant's well-founded  fear
         of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm, unless there
         are good reasons to consider that such persecution or serious  harm
         will not be repeated."

17.   The judge's findings appeared to focus on whether  the  appellant  was
    at risk of physical harm from male members of  her  family  for  having
    refused to marry the person chosen by her father. No consideration  was
    given to whether the risk of  forced  marriage,  even  absent  physical
    violence, was  sufficient  to  amount  to  a  gender-specific  form  of
    persecution (Article 9(2)(f) Qualification Directive) if  she  returned
    to Pakistan. A court in the UK found that there was sufficient risk  of
    forced marriage to justify making an order to protect her from  serious
    harm. The First-tier Tribunal failed to  consider  whether  there  were
    good reasons to consider that the threat of forced marriage  would  not
    be repeated. In focussing on discrepancies as to  whether  the  threats
    made by the claimant's father extended to threats of physical  violence
    and/or death threats, the First-tier Tribunal failed to  make  findings
    on a material matter, which was whether there continued to be a risk of
    forced marriage in Pakistan in the absence of the kind  of  restraining
    orders that had been put in place in the UK.

18.   I give due weight to the fact that the judge heard  and  assessed  the
    evidence of the claimant, but given  the  concession  relating  to  the
    Force Marriage Protection Order,  and  the  importance  of  the  issues
    involved in a protection claim, I conclude that the  findings  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal were lacking in some important respects. It  is
    necessary to set aside that aspect of the decision for findings  to  be
    made on those issues.

19.   For the reasons given above, I conclude that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision relating to the Refugee Convention appeal involved the  making
    of an error on a point of law. It is normally appropriate for the Upper
    Tribunal to remake the decision even if it involves making some further
    findings of fact. In this case it  is  not  appropriate  to  remit  the
    Refugee Convention appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing because the judge's  findings  relating  to  the  human  rights
    appeal are sustainable and need to be preserved (see below).

The Human Rights appeal

20.   I indicated that the hearing that there was no error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision relating to Article 8.  The  Secretary  of
    State's grounds of appeal do not particularise  any  challenge  to  the
    judge's findings relating to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration
    rules. The judge's findings were within a range of reasonable responses
    to the evidence relating to the conditions for lone women  in  Pakistan
    and were generally consistent with the principles outlined by the Court
    of Appeal in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 in so far as  a  similar
    test was considered in the context of a deportation appeal.

21.   GEN.1.1 of Appendix FM of the immigration rules states that the  rules
    reflect the Secretary of State's position as to where  a  fair  balance
    should be stuck in assessing  private  and  family  life  issues  under
    Article 8. GEN.1.1 specifically  states  that  the  rules  reflect  the
    public interest considerations contained in Part 5A of the NIAA 2002.

22.   Section 117A of the NIAA 2002 states that  Part  5A  applies  where  a
    court or tribunal is required to determine whether a decision  breaches
    a person's right to respect for private and family life  under  Article
    8. Section 117A(3) makes clear  that  the  'public  interest  question'
    reflected in the factors outlined in section 117B "means  the  question
    of whether an interference with a person's right to respect for private
    and family life is justified under Article 8(2)".

23.   The  immigration  rules  are  said  to  reflect  the  public  interest
    considerations set out in Part 5A of the NIAA 2002. The only  stage  at
    which the Tribunal might need to consider  the  traditional  Strasbourg
    approach balancing the individual's  rights  under  Article  8(1)  with
    public interest considerations under Article 8(2)  would  be  when  the
    tribunal moves on to an assessment of Article 8 outside the rules.

24.   In this case the judge gave sustainable reasons, which have  not  been
    impugned or appealed, to say why the appellant  met  the  private  life
    requirement contained in paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  immigration
    rules. The rules are said to reflect the Secretary of State's  position
    as to where a fair balance should  be  struck  and  are  also  said  to
    reflect the public interest consideration outlined in Part  5A  of  the
    NIAA 2002. Having  found  that  the  appellant  met  the  private  life
    requirements of the immigration rules it  was  not  necessary  for  the
    judge to go on to consider Article 8 outside the rules, at which  point
    express findings might need to be made with reference to  section  117B
    NIAA 2002. The judge's failure to expressly consider section  117B  was
    not material to a proper determination of the human rights appeal.

25.   For these  reasons  I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    relating to the human rights appeal did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law. The decision in respect of  the  human  rights
    appeal shall stand.

DIRECTIONS

26.   The appellant's representative shall confirm the number  of  witnesses
    (if any) to be called at the resumed hearing and whether  they  require
    the assistance of an interpreter by 21 September 2018 at the latest.

27.   Permission  is  given  to  file  up  to  date  evidence.  Any  further
    documents relied upon in  support  of  the  Refugee  Convention  appeal
    should be filed at least 7 days before the next hearing.

DECISION

The Refugee Convention appeal

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision will be remade at a resumed hearing

The Human Rights appeal

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The decision in respect of the human rights appeal shall stand


Signed   [pic]   Date 03 September 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

