
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04261/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 October 2017                            |On 02 November 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                    [M a]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gayle, a Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, a Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The facts of this case are that the appellant came  to  the  UK  as
         long ago as 2007 as a student.  He is a citizen of Pakistan who was
         born on [ ] 1985.  His last period of leave expired in 2015, but he
         subsequently applied for leave to remain in the UK  on  grounds  he
         was a refugee  under  the  Refugee  Convention  by  virtue  of  his
         membership of a particular social group. Alternatively, he  claimed
         that his protected human rights would be infringed and/or  that  he
         was entitled to humanitarian protection in the UK.


      2. The respondent refused the application and he subsequently appealed
         it to Immigration Judge Oliver (the Immigration Judge)  sitting  at
         Hatton Cross on 2 June 2017.  Judge Oliver dismissed the asylum and
         human rights appeal and found that the appellant  did  not  qualify
         for humanitarian protection  within  the  UK.  He  found  that  the
         appellant would suffer no more than discrimination he were returned
         to Pakistan.


      3. The appellant appealed to the upper tribunal following the grant of
         permission to appeal By Upper Tribunal Judge  Canavan  given  on  7
         September 2017. Judge Canavan found it  to  be  arguable  that  the
         First-tier Tribunal had not considered adequately  the  appellant's
         sexual identity and in particular the fact that there  appeared  to
         be a credible risk that the appellant's sexual identity  would  put
         his safety at risk if he were to be forcibly returned to  Pakistan.




      4. The respondent's initial position was  that  she  objected  to  the
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal and she submitted a Rule  24  response
         on 18  September  2017.  Stated  there  that  the  appellant  could
         discretely conduct his sexual preferences within  Pakistan  without
         risk of persecution


      5. Realistically, before me, Mr Mills  to  save  time,  has  helpfully
         indicated that in his view he cannot sustain the  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal. I was invited by both  parties  to  remit  the
         matter to the First-tier Tribunal because  of  the  errors  of  law
         identified by Judge  Canavan  which  it  was  accepted  effectively
         infected the hold decision, which could not be allowed to remain.


      6. Both parties agree that none of the findings of fact of the  First-
         tier Tribunal can be preserved and they both agree that within  the
         Presidential  Guidance,  and  paragraph  7  of   the   Presidential
         Guidance, the effect of the Immigration Judges  failure  adequately
         to consider the  appellant's  sexuality  and  the  risk  on  return
         deprived him of a proper opportunity to put his  case.  The  nature
         and extent of the findings of fact were such that it would have  to
         be remade afresh without considering any of the  existing  findings
         having regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2 of the Tribunal
         Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Accordingly,  it   was
         appropriate in both of their views to remit the matter to the First-
         tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Notice of Decision

    7.   I have acceded to that agreed position and I  make  the  direction
         that the matter is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
         hearing which is to be conducted by any judge other than First-tier
         Tribunal  Judge  Oliver.   I  have  indicated  on  the  form  which
         accompanies the file the approximate time estimate  and  number  of
         witnesses, but I direct that the First-tier Tribunal should,  after
         transfer, issue any further case  management  directions  that  are
         appropriate and give the parties an opportunity to revise the  time
         estimate upwards or downwards, or indeed the number of witnesses as
         appropriate.

    8.   An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal  and  I
         continue that direction.






Signed                                  Date 2 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
