
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: PA/04891/2017


                            the immigration Acts


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On 9 February 2018                   |On 2 March 2018                      |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


                                   Between

|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |                                                  |             |
|           |Master Admadzai Safi                              |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the respondent:    Ms B McGovern, of Kesar & Co Solicitors.



                           Decision and Directions


 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wright who, in a  decision
    promulgated on 4 December 2017 following a hearing on 9 November  2017,
    allowed the appeal of  Admadzai  Safi  (hereafter  the  "claimant"),  a
    national of Afghanistan, against a decision of the respondent of 12 May
    2017 to refuse his asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
    claims.

 2. The decision letter disputes the claimant's age. The claimant  said  he
    was born on 7 September 2000 but Kent County Council's Social  Services
    had assessed him to be an adult, with a date of birth  of  7  September
    1998.  The  decision  letter  also  disputes  the  credibility  of  the
    claimant's account of  the  factual  basis  of  his  asylum  claim.  In
    addition, the Secretary of State refused the Article 8 claim.

 3. In the section of the judge's decision entitled: "Notice of  decision",
    the judge said that the appeal was allowed on human  rights  (para  62)
    and that it was allowed on asylum grounds (para 63). He did  not  state
    his decision on the humanitarian protection claim in  this  section  of
    his decision although at para 59 of his  decision,  he  said  that  the
    claim for humanitarian protection succeeds.

 4. An issue which arises in this  appeal  is  whether  the  judge  made  a
    mistake in allowing the appeal on asylum grounds at para 63 because, in
    the Secretary of State's submission, this is inconsistent with the fact
    that, at para 56, the judge rejected  the  claimant's  version  of  the
    circumstances surrounding his departure  from  Afghanistan  as  he  had
    found that account incredible.

 5. It is the claimant's case that the judge did  not  make  a  mistake  in
    allowing the appeal on asylum grounds at para 63.

 6. If I were to conclude that the judge  had  made  a  mistake,  the  only
    option available to the Upper Tribunal  to  rectify  any  such  mistake
    would be for it to set aside  the  judge's  decision  and  re-make  the
    decision on the appeal: Katsonga ("slip rule";  FtT's  general  powers)
    [2016] UKUT 228 (IAC). This  is  because  the  First-tier  Tribunal  no
    longer has power  to  correct  accidental  slips  and  omissions  as  a
    consequence of which it would not be open  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    refer the judge's decision back to the judge for  him  to  correct  any
    mistake.

Basis of asylum claim and the refusal

 7. In summary, the claimant's asylum claim was based on his  fear  of  the
    Taliban. He said that his father was a high ranking  commander  working
    for the Afghan government. In particular, he was involved  in  fighting
    against the Taliban. In around May 2015, his mother was  informed  that
    his father had been killed by the Taliban. The  Taliban  then  came  to
    look for the claimant on two occasions. As a result, the claimant  left
    Afghanistan with the help of an agent.

The judge's decision

 8. The judge accepted the  claimant's  evidence  of  his  age.  As  stated
    earlier, he rejected the factual basis of the claimant's asylum  claim.
    He dealt with the claimant's health concerns at para 57 and noted  that
    "there were ongoing issues" in relation to the fact that the claimant's
    right kidney had been removed and that he had "mental  health  issues".
    At para 58, he began to deal with the humanitarian protection claim and
    the  guidance  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AA  (unattended  children)
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC). At para 59, he said:  "...  the
    [claimant's] health, age  and  vulnerabilities  amount  to  exceptional
    circumstances and it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  him  to  return  to
    Afghanistan .. The country  guidance  in  AA  should  be  followed  and
    accordingly, the claim for humanitarian protection succeeds."  At  para
    60, the judge said, in relation to Article 8,  that  the  decision  was
    disproportionate.

 9. The judge's reasons for his findings are set out at para 47 onwards  of
    his decision, which read:

         "Findings

         47.  The burden of proof on the [claimant] is a low one, that of  a
             reasonable degree of likelihood or a real risk of there  being
             a breach, either under the Refugee  Convention  or  the  Human
             Rights Convention if he were to return to Afghanistan.

         48.  The point which the Secretary of State made in submissions was
             a good one; why when the [claimant] claimed asylum did he  say
             the reason was his fear of war and fighting; but  he  did  not
             refer to his father's death or the threat he feels he is under
             from the  Taliban.  Unfortunately,  this  point  was  made  in
             submissions and the [claimant] was not challenged upon  it  in
             cross-examination by the Secretary of State.

         49.  The Secretary of State did not produce any evidence further to
             its contention in respect of the [claimant's] age;  it  relies
             on  the  Kent  County  Council's  assessment.  There  was   no
             explanation as to why the date of birth of  7th  of  September
             was decided upon, save that it means, if that date  and  month
             are correct and the year is 1998, as the [claimant] arrived in
             the UK on 8/9/2015 it was  determined  he  was  aged  17  upon
             arrival as he would have had his '17th' birthday the  previous
             day.

         50.  It was put to the [claimant] that  Kent  Social  Services  had
             deemed his year of birth to be 1998 and he maintained that  he
             was born later, is aged 17 and had been 14 year  [sic]  and  9
             months old when he left Afghanistan. He had no documents which
             could confirm his age or date of birth, but he said he  relied
             upon what his mother had told him regarding his age.

         51.  Whilst considering on the one hand the lack  of  documentation
             could lead to the conclusion that the [claimant] was  avoiding
             confirming his age or date of birth, on the other hand, it  is
             conceivable that due to the  circumstances  of  his  departure
             from Afghanistan, it was not possible for  him  to  bring  any
             documentation with him.  Even  if  the  Secretary  of  State's
             assessment is correct, he is still a young man, if not classed
             for the purposes of the legislation as a child.

         52,  The Tribunal is not satisfied that the Secretary of State  has
             discharged the burden of disputing the [claimant's] age and it
             has simply accepted Kent  County  Council's  assessment.  That
             assessment is clearly disputed. The Secretary of  State  makes
             much of the [claimant's] inconsistencies, yet in  the  arrival
             interview on 8/9/2015 he said  he  was  15  years  old.  In  a
             statement dated 17/2/2016 he stated  he  believed  he  was  15
             years old and  there  are  other  records  of  the  [claimant]
             maintaining his year of birth was 2000.

         53.  In respect of the inconsistencies which the Secretary of State
             identified,  the  Tribunal  agrees   with   the   [claimant's]
             submissions  and  finds  that  inconsistencies  do  not  alone
             indicate a lack  of  credibility.  Furthermore,  the  Tribunal
             accepts the [claimant's] explanations (that he was  estimating
             the number of body guards, there was a reason behind  what  he
             said about the number of visits from the  bodyguards  and  the
             period of time before he left home was simply an error).

         54.  That said, the  Tribunal  does  not  accept  the  [claimant's]
             explanation regarding the circumstances as to how he  came  to
             leave Afghanistan. It was not plausible that the Taliban would
             kill his father,  a  high  ranking  government  official  with
             numerous body guards, would then  come  looking  for  him  and
             simply go away. As [the Secretary of  State's  representative]
             said, it would be expected that  a  family  in  that  position
             would seek or expect the father's employer to  come  to  their
             assistance. It may be that if the assistance was not provided,
             then other options  would  be  considered.  It  would  not  be
             expected  that  the  family  would  immediately   remove   the
             [claimant], a young boy aged 14, on the very  first  occasion.
             Or alternatively, if the [claimant] was at risk following  his
             father's death, why other pre-emptive steps would not be taken
             to protect him as a first option.

         55.  Furthermore, the Tribunal does not accept that  a  family  who
             went to such lengths to remove the [claimant] from harm's way,
             would not ask him to attempt  to  contact  them  once  he  was
             somewhere safe. It may be that the [claimant] is not  able  to
             contact them, but it is not accepted he would not be asked  to
             do so.

         56.  The Tribunal makes allowances for the [claimant's] age, health
             and the fact that  any  inconsistencies  in  the  [claimant's]
             story  are  not  fatal.  The  [claimant's]  version   of   the
             circumstances surrounding him leaving Afghanistan it [sic]  is
             however rejected for the reason that it is  not  found  to  be
             credible.

         57.  In respect of  the  [claimant's]  health,  there  were  health
             concerns when he arrived in the UK. He has since had his right
             kidney removed and there are ongoing  issues  with  that.  The
             latest evidence being a referral for an ultrasound scan on his
             abdomen and renal tract. The [claimant] also has mental health
             issues.  He  is  prescribed  strong  painkillers   and   anti-
             depressants. The [claimant's] mental health  was  assessed  on
             4/7/2017 and it was agreed he would benefit from psychology or
             counselling, but it was not beneficial to start  psychological
             intervention if there was a possibility he may be removed.  If
             he is granted leave to remain it was agreed he  could  be  re-
             referred.

         58.  The [claimant] submits  he  should  be  afforded  humanitarian
             protection, that AA should be followed and  the  Secretary  of
             State has not discharged the burden to show that  the  country
             guidance in AA should not be followed. That  is  accepted.  As
             per AA, unattached children returned to Afghanistan (depending
             upon the location) are vulnerable.  Taking  into  account  the
             [claimant's]  best  interests  in  determining  a  claim   for
             humanitarian  protection,  consideration  is  given   to   his
             vulnerabilities and lack of family support. The  Secretary  of
             State submitted there was evidence of the [claimant] being  in
             contact with his family; that was not the case however.  There
             was at most a suspicion by a social worker that the [claimant]
             had absconded in order to contact his family; but no evidence.
             In view of the fact that  the  Red  Cross  has  suspended  its
             family contact service in Afghanistan, the [claimant]  is  not
             able to use this service to contact his family.

         59.   The  Tribunal  finds  the  [claimant's]   health,   age   and
             vulnerabilities amount to  exceptional  circumstances  and  it
             would be unduly harsh for him to return  to  Afghanistan.  The
             country guidance in AA should be followed and accordingly, the
             claim for humanitarian protection succeeds.

         60.  In respect of Article 8,  the  [claimant]  has  established  a
             private life in terms of his education and medical  needs.  It
             would be a disproportionate interference with that  life  were
             he to be removed from the UK.

         61.  For these reasons, the appeal is allowed.

         Notice of Decision

         62.  The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

         63.  The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds."

The grounds

10. There are five grounds, as follows:

    (i)  (Ground 1) There was no reasoning to support the judge's decision,
         at para 63, to allow the appeal on asylum grounds. The findings  of
         fact at paras 54, 55 and 56 strongly suggest  that  this  was  most
         likely a typographical error.

    (ii) (Ground 2) The judge erred in his approach to  the  assessment  of
         the claimant's age, in that:

         (a)  the judge said at para 52 that he was not satisfied  that  the
             Secretary of State had discharged the burden of disputing  the
             claimant's age whereas the burden was  upon  the  claimant  to
             establish his age.

         (b)  The only evidence of his age that the claimant had was his own
             assertion, whereas the Secretary  of  State  relied  upon  the
             assessment of Kent County Council's Social Services  who,  the
             grounds contend, are professionals in the field. There was  no
             evidence that the age assessment of Kent  County  Council  had
             been formally challenged in  judicial  review  proceedings,  a
             fact which was itself telling given that Kent County Council's
             decision on the claimant's age impacted on the support that he
             received from the council.

    (iii)    (Ground 3) The judge's reasoning as to the claimant's  contact
         with his family was inadequate and unclear. Whilst the judge  said,
         at para 55, that he did not accept that the claimant was not  asked
         to contact his family on arrival and, at para 58 that there was, at
         most, a suspicion by a  social  worker  that  the  reason  for  the
         claimant's disappearance for two days was that he had attempted  to
         contact friends, family or the agent, he had erred by ignoring  the
         fact that social services had also reported that the  claimant  had
         asked for access to Facebook in order to contact  his  cousin.  The
         grounds therefore contend that the judge failed to make a  balanced
         assessment of the evidence.

    (iv) (Ground 4) The assessment of  the  claimant's  case  under  AA  is
         inadequate. There should have been a  detailed  assessment  of  the
         claimant's circumstances on return and the impact  of  his  medical
         issues.

    (v)  (Ground 5) No reasons were given for the judge's finding that  the
         decision on the claimant's Article 8 claim was disproportionate.

Submissions

11. In relation to ground 1 and in response  to  a  question  from  me,  Ms
    McGovern submitted that the claimant's case on ground  1  is  that  the
    judge allowed his appeal on asylum grounds on the ground that he  is  a
    member of a particular social group, the particular social group  being
    unattended children, in reliance upon AA.

12. Ms Ahmad submitted that this inference could not be properly drawn,  as
    the judge failed to make any findings as to whether the claimant was  a
    member of a particular social group and whether he  would  be  at  real
    risk of persecution by reason of his membership of a particular  social
    group.

13. Ms Ahmad submitted that para 59 of the judge's decision strengthens the
    Secretary of State's case, that para 62 allowing the appeal  on  asylum
    grounds, was a mistake on the part of the judge. This  is  because  the
    judge said at para 59 that the humanitarian protection  claim  succeeds
    but failed to deal with humanitarian protection  in  the  part  of  his
    decision entitled: "Notice of decision".

14. I asked the parties to address me on the question whether, if the judge
    had intended to allow the appeal on asylum grounds, it would have  been
    open to him  to  allow  the  appeal  also  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds. The parties were referred to  para  339C  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. In Ms McGovern's submission, para  339C  did  not  preclude  the
    judge  from  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  on  both   asylum   and
    humanitarian protection grounds because the issue in a refugee claim is
    whether the individual has a well-founded fear of  persecution  whereas
    the issue in a humanitarian protection claim is whether the  individual
    is at real risk of suffering  serious  harm.  She  submitted  that  the
    threshold was different.

15.  In  relation  to  ground  2,  Ms  Ahmad  submitted  that  the  judge's
    consideration of the claimant's age was flawed.  Firstly,  he  did  not
    appreciate that Kent County Council's Social Services  have  experience
    and skills in assessing age. They had decided that the claimant was  an
    adult. The claimant did not challenge that decision.  The  decision  of
    Kent County Council on the  claimant's  age  was  relied  upon  at  the
    hearing  before  the  judge.  Ms  Ahmad  accepted  that  the  full  age
    assessment report of Kent County  Council's  Social  Services  was  not
    submitted to the judge.

16. Secondly, Ms Ahmad submitted that the judge erred, in that,  he  failed
    to take into account relevant evidence. A "Case Note Report" from  Kent
    County Council was submitted. The Case  Note  Report  stated  that  the
    claimant had asked social services for access to a computer in order to
    go on to Facebook and make contact with his cousin so that  his  cousin
    could inform his mother that he was in the United  Kingdom.  The  judge
    failed to take this evidence into account.

17. Thirdly, the judge erred in placing upon the  Secretary  of  State  the
    burden of disproving the claimant's age, whereas the  burden  of  proof
    was upon the claimant to establish his age.

18. In relation to ground 3, Ms Ahmad referred me  to  the  fact  that  the
    judge said at para 55 that he did not accept that the claimant's family
    would not have asked him to attempt to contact them. At  para  58,  the
    judge said that at most, there was a suspicion by a social worker  that
    the claimant had absconded for two days in order to contact his family.
    However,  Ms  Ahmad  submitted  that  para  58  concerned  the  judge's
    assessment of the guidance in  AA.  It  did  not  concern  the  judge's
    assessment of credibility. There was therefore nothing to show that the
    judge took into account the fact that the claimant  had  absconded  for
    two days in his assessment of  the  claimant's  credibility.  In  other
    words, there were two occasions which gave rise to concerns on the part
    of Kent County Council that the claimant had tried or wished to contact
    his family, whereas the judge only  took  into  account  one  of  those
    events.

19. In relation to ground 4, Ms Ahmad submitted that the judge's assessment
    of humanitarian  protection  was  inadequate.  Firstly,  there  are  no
    findings in relation to the claimant's health at paras 58 or  59.  Even
    para 57, where the judge considered the  claimant's  "health  concerns"
    and "mental health issues", there were no  findings.  For  example,  he
    made no findings as to the claimant's condition, no findings as to  the
    treatment he receives and the treatment he requires  and  whether  such
    treatment would be available  in  Afghanistan.  Secondly,  the  judge's
    reference to  lack of family support in para 58 does not sit well  with
    his reasoning at paragraph 55, where he said that he  did  not  believe
    that the claimant's family would not have asked him to contact them.

20. Thirdly, the judge states at para  58,  that  unattended  children  are
    vulnerable, whereas AA states at judicial head-note (2) that  they  may
    be exposed to risk of serious harm. AA makes it clear that  whether  or
    not an unattended child is at real risk of serious harm is  a  question
    of fact. Ms Ahmad submitted that the judge simply  concluded  that  the
    claimant was at  real  risk  of  serious  harm.  There  was  no  proper
    assessment under the guidance in AA at para 58 or at para 57.

21. In relation to ground 5, Ms Ahmad submitted that the judge did not give
    any  reasons  at  all  for  his   finding   that   the   decision   was
    disproportionate. A proper assessment  of  Article  8  necessitated  an
    assessment of the Article 8 claim under the Immigration Rules  followed
    by an assessment outside the Rules.  It  was  necessary  to  take  into
    account  the  public  interest  considerations   in   s.117B   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

22. Ms McGovern relied on her Reply. She submitted that the judge did  give
    reasons for allowing the asylum claim. He applied AA and decided  that,
    pursuant to AA, the claimant's asylum claim succeeded as  well  as  his
    humanitarian protection claim. Ms McGovern submitted that AA does state
    that unattached children are vulnerable but that whether  or  not  they
    will be exposed  to  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  depends  on  the
    circumstances. The Secretary of State had  accepted  before  the  judge
    that AA continued to apply, as para 58 of the judge's decision shows.

23. In referring to the claimant's vulnerabilities at para  58,  the  judge
    was referring to the claimant's age, his medical condition, in that, he
    had had a kidney removed and had "ongoing issues" in that  regard,  his
    mental health condition, and the lack of family support.  AA  concerned
    refugee protection. At para 59, the  judge  in  effect  said  that  the
    claimant was a refugee and also qualified for humanitarian  protection.
    She submitted that para 339C concerned the grant by  the  Secretary  of
    State of leave. It did not preclude a judge from allowing an appeal  on
    both asylum grounds and on humanitarian protection grounds.

24. Ms McGovern submitted that it was not the case that the judge's "Notice
    of Decision" fails to deal with the humanitarian protection claim.  She
    submitted that, in allowing the appeal on human rights grounds at  para
    62, the judge meant "Article 3, Article 8 and humanitarian protection".



25. In relation to ground 2, Ms McGovern submitted that, as  the  Secretary
    of State had asserted that the  claimant  was  born  in  1998  and  the
    claimant asserted that he was born in 2000, it was for the Secretary of
    State to establish the former  as  a  fact  and  for  the  claimant  to
    establish the latter as a fact. She submitted that  the  judge  decided
    that the Secretary of State had  not  established  the  fact  that  she
    asserted. Accordingly, the judge did not err in law.

26. Ms McGovern relied upon para 5 of her reply. The  judge's  findings  on
    the age issue were well reasoned and did not involve any error of  law.
    The age assessment report from Kent County Council was not  before  the
    judge. The judge was therefore unable to consider the age assessment by
    Kent County Council. For example, whether it was undertaken by  persons
    who were qualified to do  so  and  whether  it  was  Merton  compliant.
    Accordingly, she submitted that the judge had correctly stated that the
    Secretary of State  had  not  discharged  her  burden  of  proving  her
    assertion that the claimant was 18 years old. The judge had  considered
    whether the claimant had  established  his  case  and  found  that  his
    evidence about his age had been consistent. He accepted the  claimant's
    explanation as to why there was no documentary evidence  regarding  his
    age. The judge had correctly set out at para  47  that  the  burden  of
    proof was on the claimant. At para 49, he referred to the fact that the
    Secretary of State had not produced the age assessment report  by  Kent
    County Council. There was no explanation for the Secretary  of  State's
    asserted date of birth. At para 50, he noted that it  was  put  to  the
    claimant that Kent County Council's Social Services had assessed him to
    have been born in 1998. At para 52,  he  reviewed  the  evidence  as  a
    whole.  He took into account the claimant's oral evidence.

27. In relation to ground 3, Ms McGovern relied upon para 9 of  her  Reply.
    The judge heard submissions on the  fact  that  Kent  County  Council's
    Social Services had contended that the claimant had requested access to
    Facebook. The claimant denied that this  event  had  happened.  It  was
    submitted on the claimant's behalf that it  was  highly  unlikely  that
    this conversation had taken place due to the complexity of English that
    it would have required.  Ms McGovern asked me to infer that  the  judge
    had considered this evidence by reason of the fact that it was referred
    to at paras 23 and 33.  In any event, she submitted that there  was  no
    actual evidence that the claimant had made contact with his family  via
    Facebook. She submitted that, at best, this evidence only  amounted  to
    evidence of an attempt by the claimant to make contact with his  family
    in Afghanistan.

28. In relation to  the  social  workers'  belief  that  the  claimant  had
    disappeared for two days in order to contact his family,  the  claimant
    had explained that he had not intentionally run  away.  The  judge  was
    entitled to find that the social worker's belief amounted  to  no  more
    than speculation.

29. In relation to ground 4, Ms  McGovern  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    considered and applied AA, i.e. whether the claimant was  a  child  and
    whether he had contact with his family.  She submitted that  the  judge
    found that the claimant was a child and that he had no contact with his
    family in Afghanistan.

30. Ms McGovern submitted that the judge's rejection of claimant's  account
    concerning his father and the risk to him  from  the  Taliban  did  not
    affect the assessment of the risk to the claimant as  an  unaccompanied
    child.

31. In relation to the  judge's  findings  on  the  claimant's  health,  Ms
    McGovern took me through the medical evidence at pages 6 to 29  of  the
    claimant's bundle. Page 6 shows that he had a scan on 2 November  2017.
    There are medical notes on page 8 which refer  to  the  claimant  being
    prescribed medication. Ms McGovern accepted that the documents did  not
    provide  any  diagnosis  or  prognosis  but  she  submitted  that   was
    sufficient evidence before the judge  for  him  to  conclude  that  the
    claimant was prescribed strong painkillers. She accepted that the judge
    did not consider  whether  the  medication  was  available  to  him  in
    Afghanistan. However, she submitted that it was not necessary  for  the
    judge to consider the availability of medication in Afghanistan because
    the case was based on vulnerability of the claimant  as  an  unattended
    child and not a human rights claim based on his medical condition.

32. In relation to ground 5, Ms McGovern relied upon  paras  11-13  of  her
    reply. She submitted that I should consider  para  60  of  the  judge's
    decision in light of the fact that the  judge  had  accepted  that  the
    claimant was a child, that he had  ongoing  health  issues  and  mental
    health issues and that he did not  have  contact  with  his  family  in
    Afghanistan. She submitted that  the  judge's  assessment  at  para  59
    related not only to humanitarian protection but also Articles 3  and  8
    of  the  ECHR,  which  was  further  supported  by  the  fact  that  he
    specifically referred to "exceptional circumstances" at para 59.

33. In response, Ms Ahmad submitted that  the  judge  did  not  assess  the
    medical evidence at all, at para  57  or  at  para  58.  There  was  no
    assessment and no reasons. Para 60 refers to  the  claimant's  "medical
    needs" but the judge did not explain what "medical needs" the  claimant
    had.

34. Ms Ahmad asked me to note that para 25 of the  judge's  decision  shows
    that the Secretary of State's representative had specifically said that
    there was no up-to-date medical evidence. This issue had therefore been
    raised before the judge.

35. Ms Ahmad submitted that Ms McGovern was asking me  to  infer  that  the
    judge had made the Article 8 proportionality  assessment  at  para  59.
    She submitted that this could not be correct because para 59  only  set
    out the judge's bare conclusions. There was no assessment of  the  fact
    that he speaks the language and had lived in Afghanistan from birth. It
    was not enough to simply say that the claim  succeeds  because  of  the
    claimant's "vulnerabilities" and lack of family support.

Assessment

36. The first question is whether the judge made a mistake when he said  at
    para 63 that the appeal was allowed on asylum grounds.

37. There are potentially two reasons why it may be thought that the  judge
    made a mistake at para 63 and that he in fact intended to  dismiss  the
    appeal on asylum grounds, as follows:

    (i)  Firstly, the existence of para 339C of the Immigration  Rules,  if
         (contrary to Ms McGovern's submission) this precludes a judge  from
         allowing an appeal on humanitarian protection grounds if a claimant
         was a refugee.

    (ii) Secondly,  the  Secretary  of  State  contends  that  the  judge's
         decision  at  para  63  to  allow  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds
         contradicts para 56  where  he  rejected  the  credibility  of  the
         claimant's account of the reasons why he left Afghanistan  and  why
         he would be at  real  risk  of  persecution  from  the  Taliban  if
         returned to Afghanistan.

38. In relation to (i), I do not accept Ms McGovern's submission that  para
    339C of the Immigration Rules does not preclude a judge  from  allowing
    an appeal on both asylum grounds and humanitarian  protection  grounds.
    The relevant part of paragraph 339C reads:

         "339C. A person will be  granted  humanitarian  protection  in  the
         United Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:

         (i)  ...;

         (ii) they do not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation 2 of
             The Refugee or Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
             (Qualification) Regulations 2006;..."

39. Ms McGovern submitted that the wording of para  339C  shows  that  para
    339C is only concerned with the grant of  leave  by  the  Secretary  of
    State. In other words, if a judge  allows  an  appeal  on  both  asylum
    grounds and humanitarian protection grounds, which  in  her  submission
    judges are entitled to do, it would be open to the Secretary  of  State
    not to grant humanitarian protection if the individual is a refugee.

40. I reject this submission. It makes no sense, given that  the  Secretary
    of State is obliged to implement the decision of a judge if  an  appeal
    against her decision is ultimately successful. A decision by a judge to
    allow an appeal on both  asylum  grounds  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds simply cannot be implemented by the Secretary of State in  view
    of the clear terms of para 339C.

41. Furthermore, Ms McGovern's submission ignores the definition of "person
    eligible for humanitarian protection" under regulation 2 of the Refugee
    or  Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection   (Qualification)
    Regulations 2006. This defines  a  "person  eligible  for  humanitarian
    protection" as "a person who is eligible for a  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection under the immigration rules".  Given  the  wording  of  para
    339C, a person who is a refugee is therefore,  by  definition,  not  "a
    person who is eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection under the
    immigration rules".  It follows that a person who is a refugee is  not,
    by definition, eligible for humanitarian protection.

42. Accordingly, in my judgment, para 339C read together with regulation  2
    of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 does preclude judges from allowing  an
    appeal on both asylum grounds and humanitarian protection grounds.

43. This does not mean that the judge did not intend to allow the appeal on
    both asylum grounds and humanitarian  protection  grounds.  If  he  did
    intend to allow the appeal on  both  asylum  grounds  and  humanitarian
    protection grounds, he was wrong to do so, for the reasons given above.
    If he did not intend to allow the appeal on  both  asylum  grounds  and
    humanitarian protection grounds, i.e. if para 63 was simply  a  mistake
    and there were no other material errors of law, it would be  sufficient
    for me to  set  aside  para  63  and  substitute  it  with  a  decision
    dismissing the appeal on asylum grounds.

44. I turn to consider whether the judge intended to allow  the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds, i.e. I  turn  to  consider  the  Secretary  of  State's
    submission summarised at my para 37 (ii) above.

45. Ms McGovern submitted that the judge allowed the appeal on  the  ground
    that the claimant is  a  member  of  a  particular  social  group,  the
    particular social group being unattended children in  reliance  on  AA.
    However, the difficulty with this submission is not only  that  it  was
    not argued before the judge  that  the  claimant  was  a  member  of  a
    particular social group, but also that  the  judge  did  not  make  any
    finding to the effect that the claimant would be  at  real  risk  as  a
    member of a particular social group. Ms McGovern's submission that  the
    judge decided to allow the appeal on  asylum  grounds  because  he  had
    found that the claimant was a member of a particular social group,  the
    social group in question being unattended children, would  require  the
    Upper Tribunal to read into the judge's decision the entirety  of  this
    reasoning, reasoning which is not only entirely absent from the judge's
    decision but reasoning which could not have been in his mind given that
    it had not been the subject of submissions before him.

46. In my judgment, the inference which Ms McGovern submits I  should  draw
    from the decision, to the effect that the judge had allowed  claimant's
    on asylum grounds because he had found that the claimant is a member of
    a  particular  social  group,  is  wholly  unwarranted  and  would   be
    tantamount to my inferring reasoning and findings that were simply  not
    intended by the judge.

47. Taking this into  account,  together  with  the  fact  that  the  judge
    rejected  the  credibility  of  the  claimant's   account   about   the
    circumstances which led to his departure from Afghanistan and that  the
    claimant's asylum claim was based on his alleged fear  of  the  Taliban
    for reasons which were found incredible by the judge, I have  concluded
    that the judge did not intend to allow the appeal on asylum grounds and
    that para 63 was a mistake. He intended to dismiss the appeal on asylum
    grounds.

48. I agree with Ms Ahmad that the fact that the judge  did  not  deal,  in
    terms, with the humanitarian protection claim, in the  section  of  his
    decision  under  the  heading:  "Notice  of  decision"   supports   the
    conclusion that he made a mistake at  para  63.  This  is  because  his
    failure to deal with the humanitarian protection ground in this section
    of his decision is plainly a mistake, given his conclusion at  para  59
    that  the  claim  for  humanitarian  protection  succeeds.  I  have  no
    hesitation in rejecting Ms McGovern's submission that  para  62,  where
    the judge said: "The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds"  should
    be read as: "The appeal is allowed  under  Article  3,  Article  8  and
    humanitarian protection". It does violence to the judge's  language  at
    para 62 to include "humanitarian protection" when para 62  only  refers
    to human rights.

49. Ground 1 is therefore established. However, as will  be  seen  from  my
    reasoning below, this is not the only error. Ground 1 therefore  cannot
    be dealt with simply by setting aside para 63 of the  judge's  decision
    and subsisting it with a  decision  dismissing  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.

50. I turn to ground  2  which  concerns  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    evidence as to the claimant's age.

51. There are two aspects to ground 2, as set out at my para 10  above.  Ms
    Ahmad submitted that the judge materially erred in law at  para  52  of
    his decision  when  he  said  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    discharged the burden of disputing the claimant's age. In this  regard,
    Ms McGovern submitted that, given the principle in civil courts that he
    who asserts must prove, it was for the claimant to establish  that  his
    age was as claimed by him and for the Secretary of State  to  establish
    that the claimant's age was as claimed by her. She submitted  that  the
    judge was correct in this regard and that he had  correctly  stated  at
    para 47 that the burden was on the claimant to  establish  his  claimed
    age and at para 52 that  the  burden  was  on  Secretary  of  State  to
    establish the age she contended. Ms McGovern submitted that  the  judge
    did  not  err  in  reaching  his  conclusion  that  the  claimant   had
    established the age he claimed.

52. However, the fact is that Ms McGovern is simply wrong in asserting that
    the principle that he who asserts must prove applies  in  asylum  cases
    where age is disputed. The  mere  fact  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    disputes an individual's evidence of  his/her  age  and/or  advances  a
    different date of birth does not detract from the fact that the  burden
    remains on the claimant to establish his or her age. This is  so  well-
    established that it is  unnecessary,  in  my  view,  to  refer  to  any
    authority.

53. Whilst it is correct that para 47 of the judge's  decision  shows  that
    the judge was aware that the burden of proof was on the claimant, it is
    clear from the wording of para 47 that he was referring to  the  burden
    of establishing the likelihood of there being a breach of  the  Refugee
    Convention or the ECHR if the claimant is returned to  Afghanistan.  In
    any event, even if the judge's self-direction as to the burden of proof
    at para 47 extended to the disputed age issue, para 47 is impossible to
    reconcile with para 52 which incorrectly states that  it  was  for  the
    Secretary of State "to discharge the burden of disputing the claimant's
    age".

54. I am also satisfied that the judge's error in placing on the  Secretary
    of State the burden of proof on the disputed age issue is fatal to  his
    finding on the age issue, irrespective of the quality of  the  evidence
    as to age. This is because there are some  errors  which  are  of  such
    magnitude that they are, ipso facto, fatal. A misdirection  as  to  the
    burden of proof on a disputed material issue of fact is such an  error.
    However, even if I am wrong about this,  I  am  nevertheless  satisfied
    that the error is material. Although the judge's reasoning  shows  that
    he accepted the claimant's evidence about his age, he may have taken  a
    different view if he had not incorrectly placed  the  burden  of  proof
    upon the Secretary of State, especially when ground 3  (which  is  also
    established, for the reasons given below) is taken into account.

55. Accordingly, not only is ground 2 established,  the  judge's  error  in
    placing a burden on the Secretary of State to  dispute  the  claimant's
    age was material to his decision to allow the appeal on asylum  grounds
    (if he intended to allow it on asylum grounds) as well as his  decision
    to allow the appeal on humanitarian protection  grounds  and  on  human
    rights grounds. The finding that the claimant was the age  he  claimed,
    i.e. that he was still a child at the date of the hearing, was  plainly
    material to both grounds as the judge decided that he was an unattended
    child and came within the guidance in AA.

56. I turn to grounds 3, 4 and 5.

57. In relation to ground 3, it is clear that, in his assessment at para 48
    onwards of credibility, the judge did not mention  in  terms  that  the
    Secretary of State's representative had relied upon the fact  that  the
    Kent County Council's Social Services had said that  the  claimant  had
    requested the use of a computer in order to access Facebook so that  he
    could get in a touch with a cousin.

58. Ms McGovern asked me to infer, from paras 23  and  33  of  the  judge's
    decision, that the judge  had  assessed  the  evidence.  I  reject  the
    submission that paras 23 and 33 show that the judge had  assessed  this
    evidence. Para 23 of the judge's decision merely records the submission
    by the Secretary of  State's  representative  that  evidence  had  been
    produced at the hearing that showed that the  claimant  had  maintained
    contact with his family and  para  33  merely  records  the  claimant's
    evidence that he  did  not  have  the  conversation  with  Kent  County
    Council's Social Services which they said had taken place when he  said
    he wanted to use a computer to contact his family.

59. It was incumbent upon the judge to consider this  evidence  and  decide
    whether the conversation had taken place and, if it did, the  relevance
    of this evidence to the  claimant's  evidence  that  he  did  not  have
    contact with his family. On the face of it,  there  is  no  reason  for
    social workers to falsify this evidence whereas the claimant  has  much
    to gain by denying that the conversation took place. If the  judge  had
    accepted that the conversation had taken place,  this  was  capable  of
    being material not only to the credibility of the  claimant's  evidence
    that he did not have contact with his family in  Afghanistan  but  also
    his credibility generally, including the credibility of his evidence of
    his claimed date of birth.

60. Ground 3 is therefore established. I am satisfied that,  taken  on  its
    own, ground 3 is itself material not only to  the  credibility  of  the
    claimant's evidence that he was not  in  contact  with  his  family  in
    Afghanistan but also the credibility of his evidence about his  claimed
    date of birth. Thus,  ground  3  is  itself  material  to  the  judge's
    decision to allow the appeal on asylum grounds (if he intended to allow
    it) as well as  his  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds and on human rights grounds.

61. In relation to ground 4, I have already said above that grounds 2 and 3
    are  material  to  the  judge's  decision  to  allow  the   appeal   on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

62. However, the reality is that the judge also materially erred in law  in
    his assessment at paras 57-59. It was  specifically  submitted  to  the
    judge by the Secretary of State's representative and  which  the  judge
    recorded at para 25 of his  decision,  that  there  was  no  up-to-date
    medical evidence. Ms McGovern did  not  resile  from  this  before  me.
    Although she took me through the medical evidence that was  before  the
    judge, she accepted that there was no diagnosis or prognosis. The  most
    recent evidence in relation to the situation concerning the removal  of
    his right kidney was that there had been a referral for  an  ultrasound
    scan, as the judge said at para 57.  Although  the  judge  referred  to
    there being "ongoing issues" in  relation  to  the  claimant's  kidney,
    there was no explanation what those  "ongoing  issues"  were,  nor  was
    there any evidence. All that could be said is that  there  had  been  a
    recent scan, on 2 November 2017.

63. I agree with Ms Ahmad that, whilst the judge referred at para 57 to the
    claimant having "health concerns" and "mental  health  issues"  and  at
    para 58 to the claimant having "medical needs", he made no findings  as
    to what he found were the claimant's "health concerns", "mental  health
    issues" and "medical needs". One is left to draw such inferences  about
    the claimant's condition as one is able to draw from the fact that,  as
    at the date of the hearing, the claimant  had  been  prescribed  strong
    painkillers and anti-depressants. However, the fact that  the  claimant
    had been prescribed strong painkillers and anti-depressants  tells  one
    nothing of any material significance about the situation concerning the
    claimant's remaining kidney. Yet, it is clear that the judge took  into
    account, in the claimant's favour, the fact that he had  some  "ongoing
    issues with that".

64. In addition, the judge's finding at para 58 that the claimant  did  not
    have family support, cannot stand, given  the  material  error  of  law
    established by ground 3.

65. Ground 4 is therefore also established.

66. I can deal with ground 5 briefly. It is clear that the  judge  made  no
    assessment at all of Article 8. He simply stated  his  conclusion  that
    the claimant had established "private life in terms  of  his  education
    and medical needs" and that the decision would be  a  "disproportionate
    interference with that life".  Ground 5 is therefore also established.

67. It only remains for me to deal with  Ms  McGovern's  submission,  which
    does not neatly fit into any particular ground,  that  the  judge  also
    allowed the appeal under Article 3 and that  para  62  of  the  judge's
    decision includes a decision to allow the appeal under Article 3.

68. If this is a reference  to  a  claim  under  Article  3  based  on  the
    applicant's medical condition, I do not accept  that  the  judge  dealt
    with an Article 3 claim based on the claimant's medical condition. Para
    27 of  the  judge's  decision  shows  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative submitted before the judge that the  Articles  2  and  3
    claims stand or fall with the asylum claim. There  is  nothing  in  the
    judge's summary at paras 29-46 of the submissions advanced  before  him
    on the claimant's behalf that shows that the claimant's  representative
    did not agree with the Secretary of State's submission  to  the  effect
    that there was no independent Article 3 claim. Para 45 shows  that  the
    claimant's medical condition was relied upon in relation to guidance in
    AA. There was therefore no reason for the judge to consider  Article  3
    in relation to the claimant's medical condition.

69. Furthermore, any  assessment  of  an  Article  3  claim  based  on  the
    claimant's medical condition would have  necessitated  some  indication
    that the judge was aware of the relevant applicable threshold for  such
    claims and an assessment of  the  background  material  concerning  the
    availability of painkillers and anti-depressants in Afghanistan.  There
    is no such indication and no such assessment in the judge's decision.

70. I therefore reject Ms McGovern's submission that  the  judge  had  also
    allowed the appeal under Article 3  based  on  the  claimant's  medical
    condition.

71. For all of the above reasons, I set aside the decision of Judge  Wright
    in its  entirety.  For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  this  includes  his
    assessment of the claimant's credibility. None of  his  assessment  and
    findings shall stand.

72. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   (the   "Practice
    Statements") recognises that it may  not  be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

73. In my judgment this case falls within para 7.2 (b). In addition,  given
    that the claimant won his appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    having regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo) &  Others
    [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I am of the view that a remittal to the First-tier
    Tribunal is the right course of action.

74. At the time of my writing this decision, it  is  of  course  not  known
    whether the claimant will succeed in his appeal before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the next occasion. Given that  he  succeeded  before  Judge
    Wright and in view of my decision to set aside Judge Wright's  decision
    and remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  on
    all issues, I decided to set out the parties' submissions before me  in
    full, at paras 11-35 above.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wright involved the  making
of errors on points of law such that  his  decision  is  set  aside  in  its
entirety. This case is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
hearing on the merits on all issues by a  judge  other  than  Judge  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Wright.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  Date: 25 February 2018
