
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04942/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 October 2018                             |On 24 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  ABDUL [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tettey
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Abdul [H], claims to have been born on 1  January  1998.
    He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Resident Judge Zucker)  against
    a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  refusing  him  international
    protection.  The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision delivered orally on
    17 November 2017, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are, in essence, four grounds of appeal.  Mr Tettey, who appeared
    for the appellant, did not, in his oral submissions, pursue  the  first
    two grounds of appeal.  The challenge to Judge Zucker's decision solely
    on the basis that he gave an ex tempore, judgment in court is,  by  any
    reckoning, wholly unfounded.  There was nothing to  prevent  the  judge
    from giving such a judgment and the appellant cannot  conceivably  have
    been disadvantaged.  Secondly, the appellant  asserts  that  the  judge
    prevented the representative of the appellant from taking notes  during
    the hearing.  Judge Appleyard, who granted permission, indicated that a
    witness statement would be  expected  in  support  of  this  ground  of
    appeal.  No such statement has been produced.   However,  I  have  read
    Judge Zucker's own note on the grounds  of  appeal  which  is  dated  2
    August 2018.  Mr Tettey does not  challenge  Judge  Zucker's  statement
    that he told supporters of the  appellant  at  the  hearing  that  they
    should not take notes but that  he  did  not  prevent  the  appellant's
    representative from taking notes.

 3. Thirdly, the appellant asserts that the judge failed to  give  adequate
    reasons for finding that the  appellant,  who  is  still  a  young  man
    whatever his date of birth, could safely return to Kabul.   In  respect
    of this ground, I was  assisted  by  Mr  McVeety,  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer who appeared for the Secretary of State  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  He told me that the Secretary of State took  the  view
    that this ground had  been  made  out.   Judge  Zucker,  following  his
    comprehensive rejection of the appellant's credibility, stated at  [16]
    that he was "not satisfied the  appellant  did  not  have  the  support
    sufficient to give him protection necessary were he to be  returned  to
    Kabul and I am not satisfied notwithstanding the background material to
    which I was taken by Mr Muksud  ...  that  the  appellant  is  entitled
    without more to humanitarian protection".  Both parties agree that this
    analysis, notwithstanding the rejection of the appellant's credibility,
    is lacking in both depth and detail. I  am  persuaded  that  the  Judge
    needed to provide a more cogent analysis; as  it  stands,  the  judge's
    conclusion is more assertion than explanation. Accordingly, I set aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. I have considered whether it is appropriate to set aside or retain  the
    findings on credibility made by Judge Zucker.  The credibility  of  the
    appellant will have to be looked at again in the context of whether  it
    is safe for the appellant to return to Kabul.  I have concluded that it
    is appropriate to set aside the decision in its entirety, including the
    findings on credibility.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was delivered  orally  on
    17 November 2017 is set aside.  None of  the  findings  of  fact  shall
    stand.  The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Resident
    Judge Zucker) for that Tribunal to re-make the decision.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 19 November 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 December 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

