
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04856/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd November 2017                   |On 13th November 2017                |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                     I S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford (instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co,
                  Solicitors)
For the Respondent:  Mr P Nath (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
      permission, in relation to a Decision and Reasons  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Raymond) promulgated on  3rd  May  2017  by  which  he
      dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the refusal of his protection
      claim.

   2. The Appellant, born on [ ] 1989 is a citizen of Afghanistan.

   3. He grew up in Laghman province with his parents,  three  brothers  and
      two sisters. The family were deeply religious and his grandfather  was
      a preacher. The Appellant attended school and also a Madrassa. At  age
      12 the Appellant was sent to stay with an uncle in Pakistan who was  a
      religious scholar.  The Appellant flourished in his religious  studies
      such that by the time he finished high school and college at age 21 he
      had memorised the whole Koran and was issued with  a  certificate.  He
      was then employed in a religious school as a teacher of 9 to  15-year-
      olds between July 2010 and November  2011.  He  would  also  lead  the
      prayers at the village mosque.

   4. The Appellant then said he wished for a change and applied to study in
      the UK. He made a student visa application  in  Abu  Dhabi  which  was
      granted on 22nd January 2012. At that time he was living in Pakistan.

   5. The Appellant studied Business Management at Queensbury College in the
      UK.

   6. In the UK he adopted a western style of dress. He shaved his beard and
      ceased wearing a religious hat. He came to realise the sort  of  Islam
      he had followed in Afghanistan, very orthodox and strict  as  required
      by the Taliban was not the only way to follow Islam.

   7. In 2014 he returned to his family in Afghanistan  for  a  holiday.  At
      that  time  there  was  increasing  violence  and  a  lack  of  safety
      associated with the Taliban. Whilst  there  he  undertook  a  two-hour
      drive from his village to Jalalabad to have dinner with a  friend  and
      stayed overnight.

   8. His claim was that when he returned home he was  told  by  his  mother
      that in his absence four members of the Taliban had come to the  house
      to interrogate him. They had asked his father why the  Appellant  left
      Afghanistan when he was a  religious  teacher  who  should  have  been
      helping the Taliban with Jihad. They beat up his father with  the  end
      of a Kalashnikov and said they would come back for the Appellant.  The
      Appellant's father was injured and hospitalised with a broken bone  in
      his back. Three days later the family moved to Jalalabad.

   9. The Appellant returned to the UK on 26th April 2014.  On  18th  August
      2014 Queensbury College's sponsorship  licence  was  revoked  and  the
      Appellant's visa curtailed. On 30th January 2015 the Appellant made  a
      family life/Article 8 application which was refused on 1st May 2015.

  10. The Appellant says that he did not claim  asylum  immediately  on  his
      return to the UK because he had a visa. Believing that he  could  only
      claim asylum if he  was  in  the  UK  illegally,  he  arranged  to  be
      trafficked out of the UK so that he could return the same way and make
      an asylum claim. However, he was apprehended trying to  leave  the  UK
      and claimed asylum then.

  11. His claim for asylum is based on the fact that as a previous religious
      scholar who has been a religious teacher and who had the  approval  of
      the Taliban, he would be at risk on return for having left to study in
      a western country, ceasing to be a religious teacher and having become
      westernised. He relied on the attack on his the family  home  and  his
      father as evidence of the Taliban's displeasure with him.

  12. In his appeal before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant relied upon
      various statements and his oral evidence. There  were  documents  from
      Afghanistan which the Appellant relied upon to  confirm  his  father's
      injuries and that the family had moved to Jalalabad. Those  documents,
      the Appellant claimed, were brought to him by a friend in the  UK  who
      travelled to Afghanistan. That friend did not give evidence before the
      First-tier Tribunal.

  13. The Judge found the Appellant's claim to be incredible  and  dismissed
      the appeal in a lengthy judgment running to 18 pages.

  14. The Appellant sought and was granted permission to  appeal  by  First-
      tier  Tribunal  who  found  it  arguable  that  the  Judge  may   have
      misunderstood the medical evidence relating to the Appellant's  father
      and the background evidence regarding freedom of  movement  which  may
      render questionable some of the findings of fact.

  15. There are seven grounds of appeal.

  16. The first refers to the Judge's findings that it was not credible that
      the Appellant would have undertaken a two-hour  journey  to  Jalalabad
      from Laghman when it was his case that his demeanour  and  westernised
      appearance put him at risk. It is asserted that conclusion is based on
      a misinterpretation of the background evidence and country guidance as
      well as being Wednesbury unreasonable in the  absence  of  alternative
      methods of travel.

  17. I find that ground is not made out. The Judge noted that the Appellant
      had chosen to return to  Afghanistan  for  a  holiday  at  a  time  of
      increasing violence and lack of safety. His evidence  was  that  there
      were Taliban soldiers everywhere. They were at checkpoints  and  often
      interrogated individuals as to why they did not have a beard. If  they
      found a person to be in possession of any documents which showed  they
      worked with the government they would capture and torture that person.
      He said there was no peace  in  Afghanistan;  "everywhere  you  go  is
      Taliban". Against that  background,  which  was  the  Appellant's  own
      evidence, the Judge found it not credible  that  he  would  choose  to
      travel  for  two  hours  to  Jalalabad  for  a  purely  social  visit.
      Furthermore, I note he did so without difficulty in  both  directions.
      The Judge was entitled to make that finding  on  the  evidence  before
      him.

  18. The second ground asserts that the Judge erred  in  referring  to  the
      Appellant's father having serious injuries to the spine as a result of
      the assault on 19th April 2014 and his  adverse  credibility  findings
      that in light of his father having been severely injured he would have
      been unable to move his family three days later.

  19. As the Judge  made  clear.  the  medical  evidence  was  not  terribly
      helpful. There was an undated letter from the elders  of  the  village
      confirming that the Appellant's  father  had  been  beaten  during  an
      attack by the Taliban which broke his back and  as  a  result  he  was
      admitted to hospital. There was a  further  undated  letter  from  the
      administrator at the hospital confirming that the  Appellant's  father
      was admitted for treatment of "backbone breakage" and after reasonable
      treatment was prescribed full rest. Further details were not given.

  20. The Judge was entitled to find on the basis of that evidence  that  it
      was not credible that the Appellant's father,  three  days  after  the
      injury was incurred would have been in a position to move  the  entire
      family to Jalalabad, a distance of two hours. I find  that  ground  is
      not made out.

  21. The third ground asserts unfairness amounting to an error  of  law  in
      the Judge making findings on matters not relied on by the Secretary of
      State or put to the Appellant  at  the  hearing.  The  Judge  noted  a
      contradiction in the evidence of the Appellant that he was  not  known
      when he moved to Jalalabad with his family in 2014 which  seem  to  be
      contradicted a certificate issued in October 2002 indicating  that  he
      was from Nangahar. It is difficult to follow the Judge's reasoning  in
      that respect. However the point  does  not  help  the  Appellant.  The
      argument that was made before me  was  that  his  family  is  safe  in
      Jalalabad because the Appellant is not with them.  They  would  be  at
      risk, as would the Appellant, if he was with them. That  only  can  be
      based on the Appellant being known in Jalalabad. That being  the  case
      there is a contradiction between that and the  Appellant's  claims  to
      not be known in Jalalabad and the Judge  was  entitled  to  make  such
      finding.

  22. This also reveals another difficulty with the Appellant's evidence. He
      claims his family are safe because he is not with  them.  However,  he
      also claimed that his family was attacked when he  was  not  there  in
      April 2014.

  23. Another assertion made in that ground relates to the Judge's disbelief
      of the Appellant's claim that he believed that  he  could  only  claim
      asylum if he was in the  UK  illegally.  The  Judge  noted  he  is  an
      educated man. He had had legal advice over  student  applications  and
      other applications that he made and so it was  not  credible  that  he
      would believe that. That finding was properly open to the Judge on the
      evidence.

  24. The fourth ground challenges the Judge's conclusion  that  there  were
      two strands to the Appellant's claim. The Judge said that on one  hand
      the Appellant claimed to have had a shifting of his religious  beliefs
      while still in Afghanistan and the other strand  was  that  he  became
      interested in a less restrictive form of Islam and adopted  a  western
      way of life once in the UK. It was said before me that the Appellant's
      argument was that the shift had taken place once he was in the UK when
      he adopted a westernised approach to dress and Islam generally and  it
      was that which on his return would attract adverse attention. He  says
      he did not attract the adverse attention of the Taliban prior  to  his
      leaving in the first place.

  25. I do not find that ground made out  either.  It  was  the  Appellant's
      evidence that he comes from a deeply religious family. He himself  was
      a religious scholar, teacher and preacher. However, in Afghanistan  he
      made the decision to cease that way of life and  come  to  the  UK  to
      study  an  entirely  different  subject.  Given  his  claim  that   in
      Afghanistan his behaviour and religion was in accordance with what was
      expected by the Taliban; then he must have known when  in  Afghanistan
      that the decision he was  taking  would  bring  him  potentially  into
      conflict with the Taliban. He must therefore have had a culture  shift
      in his outlook prior to leaving Afghanistan. The Judge was entitled to
      form that view.

  26. It is also true that once in the  UK  the  Appellant's  attitudes  and
      behaviour changed further, particularly regarding a  less  restrictive
      form of Islam and altering his mode of dress and behaviour.

  27.  The  fifth  ground  criticises  the  Judge's  conclusions  that   the
      Appellant's explanation as to why his family  are  safe  in  Jalalabad
      lacks credibility. For the same reason I found  earlier,  I  find  the
      Judge did not err in this respect either. As I have already  indicated
      his claim is that his family is safe because  he  is  not  with  them.
      However, he claims on the one hand also to have been in Jalalabad with
      his family without problems in 2014 but  also  that  his  family  were
      attacked when he was not there in his home area in 2014. It is correct
      to say therefore that the Appellant's explanation as to why his family
      is safe is contradictory and conflicting.

  28. The sixth ground criticises the Judge's treatment of  the  documentary
      evidence arguing that he did not look at it in the round at  the  same
      time as the other evidence in  accordance  with  Tanveer  Ahmed.  That
      ground is also not made out. The Judge has explained why  he  attached
      little weight to the various documents. Letters were undated and  gave
      unclear information. Photographs were blurred and could have  been  of
      anybody. Furthermore, the Judge was concerned that the documents  were
      brought the UK by a  friend  of  the  Appellants,  who  did  not  give
      evidence,  and  who  had  apparently  travelled  back  to  Afghanistan
      voluntarily once he had been granted refugee status on  the  basis  of
      risk on return.

  29. Finally the grounds argue that the Judge erred in  finding  that  with
      the support of relatives in Kabul the Appellant could relocate  safely
      when it was the Appellant's evidence that his family were also  deeply
      religious and supporters of the Taliban who therefore would not  offer
      him support. However, as the Judge pointed out in  various  places  in
      the Judgement the Appellant is a highly educated young man. He  is  28
      years of age and does not  need  family  support  in  Kabul.  In  that
      respect the Judge referred once more to his friend who  had  travelled
      in safety to and from Afghanistan.

  30. Overall therefore I find that  this  this  Judge  has  carried  out  a
      careful,  detailed  assessment  of  the   Appellant's   claims.    For
      sustainable reasons that are properly based on the evidence  he  found
      the Appellant's claims to be  incredible.  Even  if  at  risk  of  the
      Taliban in his home area the Appellant could safely relocate to Kabul.
      In truth, the grounds are  simply  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
      conclusions and an attempt to re-argue the case.

  31. For all of the above reasons I find  there  to  be  no  error  of  law
      material to the outcome in the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning and for
      that reason the appeal to the Upper Tribunal falls to be dismissed.

 Decision

 The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

  The first-tier Tribunal having made an anonymity direction I  direct  that
is continued

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date 8th November 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

