
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04319/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Oral determination given following hearing|                                 |
|On 28 November 2016                       |On 30 December 2016              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                               Sardarwali [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Ti, Solicitor instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors (Bromley)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Afghanistan who was born in
    September 2002.  He is therefore now 14 years old.  He  claimed  asylum
    in this country claiming to have a well-founded fear of persecution  in
    Afghanistan on  the  basis  of  his  imputed  political  opinion.   His
    application was refused by the respondent and he appealed against  that
    decision.  His  appeal  was  heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andonian at Taylor House  on  9  September  2016  and  dismissed  in  a
    decision promulgated on 6 October 2016.   Essentially  the  judge  made
    adverse credibility findings and then stated that for  this  reason  he
    did not have a well-founded fear of persecution  in  Afghanistan.   The
    judge also very briefly considered whether or not he  was  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection and said not although his reasons for this were
    given in one short paragraph at paragraph 16.

 2. The appellant seeks to appeal against this decision and has been  given
    permission so to do by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on  28  October
    2016.  The appellant sought to rely on thirteen grounds of  appeal  the
    first eleven of which challenges various  of  the  findings  which  the
    judge made.  The twelfth and thirteenth make the case  first  that  the
    judge had failed to give any or any proper consideration to whether  or
    not the appellant now would be at risk of serious harm and exploitation
    if returned to Kabul, relying on the case of AA  (unattended  children)
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 and secondly that it is  not  apparent
    from the  decision  that  the  judge  gave  any  consideration  to  the
    provisions of Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009 which require him to  have  regard  to  the  appellant's  best
    interests as  a  primary  consideration.   Permission  was  granted  on
    grounds 12 and 13 but not on the first  eleven  grounds  because  Judge
    Andrews  considered  that  these  did  not  amount  to  more   than   a
    disagreement with the judge's findings which had been open  to  him  on
    the evidence before him.

 3. Within a matter of days after receiving Judge Andrew's decision on  the
    application for permission to appeal the appellant sought to renew  the
    application to the Upper Tribunal  with  regard  to  the  first  eleven
    grounds but  regrettably  that  application  was  not  put  before  the
    Tribunal until very shortly before this hearing in consequence of which
    I directed that it could be considered orally at the hearing.  However,
    in view of the decision which I take with regard to the appeal I do not
    need to consider  these  grounds.   It  is  trite  law  and  Mr  Tarlow
    representing the respondent at this hearing does not seek  to  persuade
    me otherwise that the judge needed to  consider  the  position  of  the
    appellant at the date of the hearing.  The  fact  that  the  respondent
    would not in fact remove him to Afghanistan until he was an adult  does
    not relieve the Tribunal of the necessity of considering what  risk  he
    would be at at the date of the hearing were he then to be removed.   In
    order to do that  the  judge  needed  to  consider  properly  what  the
    position of this appellant as an unaccompanied 14 year old minor  would
    be were he now to be returned to Kabul.  He would  also  need  to  have
    regard to the provisions of Section 55.  In my judgment the  judge  has
    not shown in his decision that he gave adequate consideration to either
    of these factors and for this reason the decision must be set aside and
    re-made.

 4. I consider that it would be unrealistic to bind a new judge considering
    this appeal with such findings of fact as the judge made because  at  a
    new hearing a new judge will be considering  the  evidence  afresh  and
    realistically ought to  make  his  own  findings  with  regard  to  the
    evidence he or she hears.  Accordingly,  because  a  fresh  hearing  is
    needed, it is appropriate having regard to  the  Presidential  guidance
    which has been given to remit this case back to the First-tier Tribunal
    for hearing afresh before any judge other than Judge Andonian.  I  make
    this decision because essentially there has to be a re-hearing  of  the
    evidence and in the circumstances remittal is the appropriate course.

Decision

The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Andonian   dismissing   the
appellant's appeal is set aside and the  appeal  will  be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House to be re-heard before any  judge
other than Judge Andonian.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                     Date: 22 December 2016
