
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04637/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2018                           |On 26 January 2018            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                 clinton [v]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Iqbal of counsel, instructed by Marsh &
Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

ANY EVIDENCE OF SUR PLACE ACTIVITY
WHAT IS HIS CASE IN THE LIGHT OF RECENT COUNTRY GUIDANCE?

1.   The Appellant was born on [ ] 1972, is a  national  of  Sri  Lanka.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 25 August 2008 and applied for  asylum
    on 27 August 2008. His  application  was  refused  and  his  subsequent
    appeal was dismissed on 14 June 2011 by the First-tier Tribunal and  by
    the Upper Tribunal on 19 October 2011.

2.   He made a fresh claim in November 2011 but this was also refused on  27
    April 2017.  The Appellant appealed and his  appeal  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver in a decision promulgated on  14  July
    2017.

3.   The Appellant appealed against this decision  and  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Page granted him permission to appeal on 13 October 2017.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   Both counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    made oral submissions and I have  referred  to  the  content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   In preparation for the appeal hearing, the Appellant's  solicitors  had
    submitted a report by Dr. Lawrence, a consultant psychiatrist based  at
    the Harley Street Medical Express Clinic.  In his report, Dr.  Lawrence
    correctly referred himself to  the  duties  of  a  medical  expert  and
    provided a summary CV. First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver  did  not  find
    that his qualifications and expertise detracted from this ability as an
    expert.  His report was also detailed and gave a  full  explanation  of
    his methodology and conclusions.

6.   He concluded that the Appellant was suffering from depression,  anxiety
    and post-traumatic stress  disorder.  He  also  considered  alternative
    triggers for these conditions and in a reasoned  explanation  concluded
    that the Appellant's account of detention and mistreatment in Sri Lanka
    were the cause of his PTSD.

7.   Dr. Lawrence also found that the Appellant was  now  not  fit  to  give
    evidence at the appeal hearing and face cross-examination. He explained
    that the  Appellant  did  not  have  the  capacity  to  understand  the
    proceedings and noted that he had not been able to give a clear  verbal
    account of his experiences even in a  quiet  safe  room  where  he  was
    encouraged to talk and given plenty of time. It was his view  that  any
    questioning would re-stimulate his trauma and  psychomotor  retardation
    and that the numbness following traumatic  experiences  and  depression
    both interfere with cognitive function and are associated with slow and
    hesitant answers and poor memory.

8.   There had been no psychiatric evidence before Immigration  Judge  Moore
    at the previous unsuccessful appeal hearing in 2011  and  the  evidence
    provided by Dr. Lawrence was capable to casting doubt  on  the  adverse
    credibility findings made in 2011. However,  in  paragraph  23  of  his
    decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver failed to give the necessary
    weight to Dr. Lawrence's evidence  by  substituting  his  own  findings
    about the Appellant's mental state of  health.  ).  In  particular,  he
    concluded from his own observations,  which  were  not  underpinned  by
    medical training or experience, that the Appellant would have been able
    to give evidence with proper safeguards. He  did  not  say  what  these
    safeguards were or how he was able from  observation  alone  to  deduce
    that the Appellant was following the proceedings. In addition, the fact
    that he was looking at the judge did not mean that he  was  necessarily
    comprehending what was being said. This amounted to an error of law  in
    the light of the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in  JL  (medical  reports-
    credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC).

9.   The Appellant also relied on a witness statement, dated  9  June  2017,
    but the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not refer to  this  statement  in
    any detail or consider whether its contents were capable of challenging
    the validity of the findings made by Immigration Judge Moore.

10.  In his witness statement, the  Appellant  stated  that  in  the  letter
    written by his mother, dated 23 May 2017, she said  that  the  CID  had
    visited the family home and asked about  a  protest  he  attended.  The
    letter stated that "unknown people have came and asking about  you  and
    your brother. They have told that you have participated in  the  recent
    protest against them". This  was  new  evidence  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge should  have  addressed  as  it  related  to  sur  place
    activities and could have engaged current country guidance. However, he
    did not. He simply that "if the reasoning given  in  the  determination
    for dismissing the appellant's mother's letter dated December 2011 were
    sound it applied equally  to  her  later  latter  dated  23  May  2017.
    However, in the refusal letter, dated 1 December 2011,  it  had  simply
    been noted that his mother had said that she was living  at  an  aunt's
    house because  of  fear  of  the  people  who  were  asking  about  the
    Appellant.  There was no reference to any sur place activity.

11.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge also failed  to  refer  to  or  make  any
    findings in relation to the photographs at page 192 of the  Appellant's
    Bundle, which also went to the existence of sur place activities.

12.  The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that the new evidence  was
    not sufficiently strong to justify his appeal being allowed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Oliver.  However, the decision  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is not sustainable because he failed to address the  new
    material in any particularity or give a reasoned response to it.

13.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver did  err
    in law in his decision.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-
    tier Tribunal Judges Oliver and Moore for a de novo hearing.


Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 18 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
