
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04188/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 September 2019                 |On 25 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                     m M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Patel, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson &
                    Canter
                    (Dale House)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

1.   This is the appeal brought by the Appellant  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Devlin dismissing her  appeal  against
    the decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  6  April  2019  refusing  her
    protection and human rights claim. Notwithstanding there  is  agreement
    between the parties as to the outcome of this appeal, it is  necessary,
    due to the length and complexity of the  judge's  decision,  that  this
    present decision also be rather detailed.

2.   The  Appellant  is  a  national  of  Iran  and  had  previously  sought
    protection on the grounds of her conversion  to  the  Christian  faith,
    resulting in a decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Herwald
    dated 30 January 2017 in which Judge Herwald had not found credible the
    Appellant's claim to be a genuine convert to Christianity.

3.   On or around 9 November 2017, i.e. only  around  9  months  later,  the
    Appellant made  further  representations  to  the  Secretary  of  State
    raising a fresh asylum claim.

4.   The Appellant is a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of  Latter  Day
    Saints.  Both in her appeals before Judge  Herwald  and  in  her  fresh
    claim representations she sought to rely  upon  certain  evidence  from
    members of the congregation of her church attesting to their views that
    the Appellant was a genuine member of their church and  was  a  genuine
    convert to Christianity.

5.   It is important to note that the  Appellant  has  a  daughter  born  in
    approximately 2009 and was 9 years old at the date of the appeal before
    Judge Devlin.  The  evidence  within  the  further  representations  of
    November 2017 asserted that not only the  Appellant  but  her  daughter
    were members of the church.

6.   The Respondent's decision in relation to the fresh claim  was  dated  6
    April 2019 and rejects that the Appellant  was  a  genuine  convert  to
    Christianity and found that  no  risk  of  harm  would  result  to  the
    Appellant or her daughter upon return.  The Appellant appealed  against
    that decision, the appeal coming before Judge Devlin on 12  June  2019.
    The Appellant herself gave oral evidence before the judge, as  did  two
    members of the church.  There  were  a  number  of  other  letters  and
    witness statements provided by other members of the congregation  which
    expressed their opinions that in their view the Appellant was a genuine
    member of the church.

7.   The Appellant also relied  upon  certain  evidence  from  her  Facebook
    account in which it was said that she had posted  various  quotes  from
    the Bible publicly and it was argued that that content  was  likely  to
    have become known to the Iranian authorities and would result in a real
    risk of serious harm to her on return.

8.   The judge considered the Appellant's appeal in  a  very  long  decision
    spanning some 397 paragraphs.  The initial part of the judge's decision
    considered a number of paragraphs of the Appellant's witness  statement
    in which the Appellant sought to demonstrate that the findings of Judge
    Herwald  had  been  incorrect.   Judge  Devlin  found,  examining   the
    Appellant's evidence in that regard in some detail, that the  Appellant
    had not demonstrated that there was anything incorrect in the  findings
    which had been made by Judge Herwald in 2017.

9.   The judge thereafter proceeds to consider:  the  various  letters  from
    the church members (at [138] onwards), certain letters from three  non-
    Christian acquaintances of the Appellant who  gave  evidence  that  the
    Appellant had actively encouraged  them  to  attend  the  church  (i.e.
    evidence of  her  proselytising)  albeit  that  they  had  respectfully
    declined her invitation (at [193]); the relevance and effect of baptism
    certificates for both the Appellant and her daughter ([200] to  [214]);
    and the relevance and effect of the Appellant's Facebook  posts  ([215]
    to [234]). The judge made certain further findings as to  the  evidence
    of the two live witnesses who had attended the hearing to give evidence
    in support of the Appellant's appeal and gave summary findings at [255]
    onwards in the decision.

10.  The judge found as follows at [277]:

         "277.    Looking at everything in  the  round,  and  bearing  these
              considerations in mind, I find that the positive pull exerted
              by the new documentary and oral evidence, although admittedly
              significant, is insufficient to  effectively  counteract  the
              negative  pull  exerted  by  Judge  Herwald's  decision;  the
              unfounded claims made by the Appellant at paragraphs 7 to  17
              of her statement, in respect of that decision; her failure to
              make any meaningful attempt  to  address  the  other  adverse
              credibility findings made by Judge  Herwald;  and,  her  poor
              presentation as a witness before me.

         278. I therefore find I cannot be  satisfied,  even  to  the  lower
              standard of proof, that the Appellant is a genuine  Christian
              convert."

11.  The judge  considered  the  potential  risk  of  serious  harm  to  the
    Appellant at the  point  of  return,  and  referred  at  [280]  to  the
    authority of HB (Kurds) Iran (illegal exit: failed  asylum  seeker)  CG
    [2018] UKUT 430.  The judge also noted  at  [283]  the  nature  of  the
    Appellant's Facebook postings.  The judge drew  a  distinction  between
    the heightened attention that would be likely  to  be  given  to  Kurds
    suspected of anti-Government political postings on Facebook on the  one
    hand, and the posting of  Christian  tracts  (which  were  not  overtly
    critical of the Iranian government) on the other and  held  that  there
    was no adequate evidence to demonstrate that  a  person  simply  having
    references to the  Bible  on  their  Facebook  page  would  necessarily
    attract any adverse attention at the point of return.

12.  The judge considered the position  of  the  Appellant's  daughter,  and
    noted as follows as to how potential harm to the daughter might  amount
    harm to the Appellant herself:

         "306.    I accept that, if a child is likely  to  be  subjected  to
              serious harm on return, the anguish of a parent in witnessing
              the pain or suffering to which that child may be exposed  may
              amount to serious harm".

    (Indeed, I note that the  proposition  that  the  suffering  of  family
    members may amount to serious harm for a relative is supported  in  the
    following cases:  Katrinak v Secretary of  State  for  Home  Department
    [2001] EWCA Civ 832:

         "21. ... It is easier to persecute a husband whose  wife  has  been
         kicked in a racial attack whilst visibly pregnant  than  one  whose
         family has not had this  experience.  What  to  others  may  be  an
         unbelievable threat may induce terror in such a man."

    and CA v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2004]  EWCA  Civ
1165:

         "It seems to me obvious simply as a matter of humanity that  for  a
         mother to witness the collapse of her newborn  child's  health  and
         perhaps its death may be a kind of suffering far greater than might
         arise by the mother's confronting the self-same fate herself."

    The judge then made certain findings in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    daughter's attendance at the church, noting at [321] that the Appellant
    had produced her daughter's baptism certificate; at [322] that  various
    letters  from  the  church  members  make  mention  of  the  daughter's
    engagement with the church;  at  [329]  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    daughter had been baptised, albeit that the judge stated  that  he  had
    reservations about the significance of that consideration (referring to
    an earlier passage in his decision where he  queried  what  instruction
    the Appellant herself might have had prior to her baptism).   At  [331]
    the judge held as follows:

         "331.    None of the members of the Church  who  provided  evidence
              appear to have any doubt that she  is  a  genuine  Christian.
              Drawing upon my common sense and my ability  as  a  practical
              and informed person, I consider it to be  wholly  implausible
              that a child aged between 6 and 9 years would have been  able
              to engage in the pretence of being a Christian,  or  to  have
              pulled the wool over the eyes of her  fellow  Church  members
              for around three years.

         332. In all the circumstances, I see no reason to  doubt  that  the
              Appellant's daughter self-identifies as a Christian, or  that
              - insofar as the expression has any meaning as applied to a 9
              year old child - she is a genuine Christian convert.  Nor  do
              I see any reason to doubt that she has had a very significant
              amount of engagement with the Church and its  members  during
              her time here."

13.  However, the judge held at [333] that there was  no  adequate  evidence
    that the Appellant's daughter would be at real risk of serious harm  at
    the point of return to Iran, but turned at [334]  onwards  to  consider
    the position of the daughter after return.  At [335] the judge held  as
    follows:

         "335.    The difficulty I have is that I know very little about the
              Appellant's daughter as the individual - other than  what  is
              contained in the two statements  (from  the  daughter).   The
              evidence gives little indication as  to  the  importance  she
              attaches to openly practising her  religion.   I  have  noted
              that she is 9 years of age.  I have no means of assessing her
              level of maturity.   I  do  not  know  whether  she  has  the
              maturity to comprehend and assess  the  implications  of  the
              options open to her.  It may be that she has only  a  limited
              knowledge or understanding of the  realities  of  life  as  a
              Christian in Iran.

         336. For these reasons, it is difficult for me  to  arrive  at  any
              concluded view as to whether the Appellant's  daughter  would
              choose to live openly as a Christian  in  Iran,  or,  if  she
              chose to live discreetly, why she would choose to do so.   In
              the absence of any clear indication as to her character,  her
              commitment to her faith, or what  sort  of  influence  social
              pressures are likely to have on her behaviour, I do  not  see
              how I can reach such a view.

         ...

         338. For these reasons, I find I cannot be satisfied, even  to  the
              lower standard of proof, that the Appellant's daughter  would
              be subjected to serious  harm  after  return  to  Iran.   The
              corollary of this finding is that I cannot be satisfied  that
              the anguish that the Appellant might suffer in witnessing the
              difficulties to which her daughter  might  be  exposed  as  a
              Christian convert would be such as to engage Article 3."

14.  At [344] the judge considers in the alternative the Appellant's  appeal
    on human rights grounds.  The judge considers at [345] the  Appellant's
    rights under Article 8 ECHR and notes at paragraph 346 as follows:

         "346.    In R (SG  &  Ors)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
              Department [2015] 1 WLR 1449 (in fact this is  a  misquote  -
              the proper citation for that case is R (SG & Ors) v Secretary
              of State for the Department of Work and Pensions [2015]  UKSC
              16), Lord Carnwath JSC described  the  UN  Committee  on  the
              Rights of Children, General comment  No.  14  (2013)  on  the
              right of a child to have his or her best interests taken as a
              primary consideration (Art. 3, para. 1), 29 May 2013, as 'the
              most  authoritative  guidance  now   available'.    I   shall
              therefore direct myself in accordance with that guidance.

         347. General Comment No. 14 lists the elements  to  be  taken  into
              account in assessing the best interests of  the  child.   The
              first is the views of the child."

15.  The judge thereafter summarises  what  the  views  of  the  Appellant's
    daughter were insofar as  could  be  ascertained  from  her  two  short
    witness statements.  These were, at [349]:

    (i)  [she likes] being a Christian [and does not] really remember being
         a Muslim;

    (ii) "Going to church is a big part of [her] life and  [she]  would  be
         very sad if [she] could not go to Church"; and

    (iii)    "[she wants] to be able to continue to go to Church".

    The judge saw no reason to doubt  that  that  summary  represented  the
    Appellant's daughter's real views.

16.  The judge then made the following observations at [354]:

         "354.    It is true that I have found ... that the  evidence  gives
              very little  indication  of  the  level  of  the  Appellant's
              daughter's commitment to her faith,  or  the  importance  she
              attaches to openly practising her religion.  Nevertheless, in
              the light of her age and the evidence of her engagement  with
              the church, I see no reason to  doubt  that  the  Appellant's
              daughter's Christianity forms an  important  element  of  her
              nascent identity.

         355. Although I recognise that she has  only  been  in  the  United
              Kingdom for three years, I recall that she entered  when  she
              was aged 6.  I am bound to acknowledge  the  desirability  of
              continuity in a child's upbringing and to the child's ethnic,
              religious, cultural and linguistic background -  particularly
              since return to Iran  might  well  result  in  subjection  to
              traditions   and   practices   that   are   incompatible   or
              inconsistent with the right to preservation  of  identity  in
              Article 8 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child."

    The judge also found as follows:

         "365.    Standing the evidence of engagement with the church, I see
              no reason to doubt the Appellant's daughter's claim that 'she
              has lots of friends at church', or that those friends play  a
              significant role in her life.

         366. In an ordinary case, and in the absence  of  evidence  to  the
              contrary, I would be inclined to find that any  relationships
              formed by a child, between the ages of 6 and 9  years,  could
              be replicated in the country of return.  However, this is not
              an ordinary case, and I do not consider that any such finding
              is properly open to me.  The reason that I say this  is  that
              the friendships to which the Appellant's daughter refers  are
              friendships formed in the context of membership of the Church
              of Jesus Christ  of  Latter  Day  Saints  and  engagement  in
              worship.  This, as it seems to me, is a significant aspect of
              those friendships and of their importance  to  the  Appellant
              (query whether the judge there meant  the  daughter).   Given
              the position of Christians in Iran, I am not  satisfied  that
              such friendships could be easily replicated there."

17.  At [371] the judge sets out paragraph 73 of the  UN  Committee  on  the
    Rights of Children, General comment No. 14:

         "73. Assessment of the child's best  interests  must  also  include
         consideration of the child's safety, that  is,  the  right  of  the
         child to  protection  against  all  forms  of  physical  or  mental
         violence, injury  or  abuse  (art.  19),  sexual  harassment,  peer
         pressure, bullying, degrading treatment, etc."

    and held as follows at [372]:

         "It is true  that  I  cannot  be  satisfied  that  the  Appellant's
         daughter would seek  to  exercise  her  religion  openly  in  Iran.
         Nevertheless, I consider there to be a reasonably likelihood  (sic)
         that the fact of her conversion, baptism and  religious  activities
         in the United Kingdom, will come to light.  It must  be  remembered
         that the Appellant's daughter is a 9 year  old  child.   I  do  not
         consider it is realistic to expect her to conceal these matters, or
         to exercise  the  degree  of  discretion  as  might  reasonably  be
         expected from the average adult."

18.  Further, at [377] the judge holds as follows:

         "377.    Adopting the precautionary principle, I consider that,  if
              the Appellant's daughter ... becomes known, and  she  adheres
              to her religion, there is more than a mere risk that she will
              be  subjected  to  discrimination,  abuse,   peer   pressure,
              bullying, degrading treatment, and that her life chances will
              be significantly affected -  there  must  is  (sic  -  be)  a
              positive likelihood that this will happen.

         378. I  acknowledge  that,  as  paragraph  2.4.2.  of  the  Country
              Information and Policy Note puts it:

              '2.4.2  In general, the  level  of  discrimination  faced  by
                    Christians born into the religion, who are not  actively
                    evangelising, is not sufficiently serious in its  nature
                    and frequency as to amount  to  persecution  or  serious
                    harm.'

         379. Indeed, I have found that I am not satisfied that there  is  a
              real risk the Appellant's  daughter  would  be  subjected  to
              persecution or serious harm on account of her Christianity on
              return to Iran.  However, I  remind  myself  that  I  am  not
              concerned here with whether the Appellant's daughter will  be
              subjected to such treatment.  I am concerned instead with the
              best interests of the child, and for  that  purpose,  whether
              removal of  the  child  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  be
              compatible with the  obligations  in  Article  3(2)  (of  the
              Convention of the Rights of the Child) to  ensure  the  child
              such protection and care as is necessary for his or her well-
              being.

         380. I also remind myself that - although I am not  satisfied  that
              the Appellant's daughter would be subjected to persecution or
              ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 on return to Iran  -  the
              threshold for serious harm may be very much less for a 9 year
              old female than it is for an ordinary adult.   The  corollary
              of this is that very much  less  may  be  needed  by  way  of
              discrimination to amount to serious harm for a child.

         381. In all the circumstances, I find that I am satisfied that  the
              Appellant's daughter's safety - understood in the broad sense
              in which it is used in paragraph 73 of  General  Comment  No.
              14, and adopting the precautionary principle - is  likely  to
              be significantly compromised by return to Iran if,  as  seems
              likely, her  conversion,  baptism  and  Christian  activities
              become known and/or she seeks  to  adhere  to  her  Christian
              faith."

19.  The judge concludes in his assessment of what is in the best  interests
    of the daughter in the following way:

         "384.    However, I bear in mind that  education  is  predominantly
              Islamic in Iran, and that, insofar as opportunities exist for
              a  Christian  or  secular  education,  that   might   further
              compromise the Appellant's  daughter's  right  to  safety  as
              previously defined.

         385. I now come to look at everything in the round.  When I  do,  I
              have little hesitation in finding that it  would  be  in  the
              best interests of the Appellant's daughter to remain  in  the
              United Kingdom.  Indeed, I find that  it  would  be  strongly
              so."

20.  The judge then turned at [387] onwards to consider  the  considerations
    under Part 5A of NIAA 2002, Section  117B  in  particular.   The  judge
    noted at [389] that the Appellant did not speak English; at [390]  that
    she was not economically self-sufficient and that their  private  lives
    in the UK had been developed at a time when their status was  unlawful.
    However the judge directed himself in law at [393] in relation  to  the
    case of Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  1
    WLR 5536 in which the Supreme Court held that there  was  a  degree  of
    flexibility about the weight that may be attached  to  a  private  life
    even if developed at a time when the status was precarious or unlawful.
     The judge concluded at [394] in relation to  the  Appellant's  private
    life as follows:

         "394.    So far as I am aware, there are no special features in the
              Appellant's private life that would  justify  displacing  the
              generalised normative guidance in Section 117B(4) of the 2002
              Act.  It follows that her private life is entitled to  little
              weight.

         395. I take a  different  view  with  regards  to  the  Appellant's
              daughter.  I consider that it can properly be said that there
              are  particularly  strong   features   of   the   Appellant's
              daughter's private life.  That is  because  she  was  brought
              there as a 6 year old child.  She had little or no say in the
              matter.  Although she has only been here for  three  years  -
              much less than the period required  to  become  a  qualifying
              child for  the  purposes  of  Section  117B(6)  -  and  I  am
              satisfied that she has put down significant roots here,  that
              could  not  be  easily  replicated   in   Iran.    In   those
              circumstances, in my opinion, it is appropriate  to  override
              the generalised normative guidance in Section 117B(5) and  to
              (give) full weight to the  Appellant's  (daughter's)  private
              life, even though it was established at a time when  she  was
              here unlawfully."

21.  The judge in the concluding paragraph, [396], determined  that  he  had
    found that it was strongly in the Appellant's daughter's best interests
    to remain with the Appellant in the United Kingdom and that her private
    life should be given full weight.  "In the end I consider the matter to
    be finely balanced, however  I  find  that  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant and her daughter's Article 8  claims  are  strong  enough  to
    outweigh the public interest in their removal.   It  follows  that  the
    Respondent's decision is not (sic - the inclusion of 'not' is clearly a
    slip) disproportionate and that the  Razgar  question  5  falls  to  be
    answered in the Appellant's favour."  The appeal was thus dismissed  on
    protection grounds and allowed on human rights grounds.

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

22.  It is to be noted that there is no appeal  brought  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary  of  State  against  the  judge's   decision   allowing   the
    Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.  The Appellant herself  has
    however sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the  judge's  decision
    dismissing  the  appeal  on  protection  grounds.   Those  grounds  are
    contained in an application dated 18 July 2019 which  argued  that  the
    judge erred in law, in summary, in:

    (i)  erring in his approach to the status  of  the  decision  of  Judge
         Herwald allegedly treating that decision as a  starting  point  and
         also the end point of the judge's deliberations (grounds paragraphs
         11 and 12);

    (ii) failing to give proper consideration to evidence from  the  church
         members as to  the  genuineness  of  the  Appellant's  Christianity
         (grounds paragraphs 13 to 14);

    (iii)    erring in his assessment of the weight and significance of the
         Appellant's evidence on Facebook relating to  her  Christian  faith
         (grounds paragraphs 15 to 16);

    (iv) erring in allowing the Appellant's appeal under Article 8, on  the
         basis that it was irrational to have  found  that  the  Appellant's
         daughter would suffer harm as set out in  [377]  to  [381]  of  the
         judge's decision, but finding that such  harm  did  not  amount  to
         serious harm under the Refugee Convention and  additionally  erring
         in failing to allow the Appellant's own appeal on the basis that it
         ought to have been recognised that  the  Appellant's  daughter  was
         likely to suffer serious harm.

23.  Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Scott-Baker in a decision dated  14  August  2019.   Little  merit  was
    thought to be found within the ground relating  to  the  weight  to  be
    attached to evidence from the  members  of  the  congregation,  but  at
    paragraph 5 of the  decision  granting  permission,  Judge  Scott-Baker
    thought there was merit in the grounds relating to the judge's approach
    to the harm that might be experienced by the Appellant's daughter.

    Discussion

24.  I have heard submissions from the parties today.  Although there is  no
    Rule  24  response  from  the  Respondent  in  this  matter,  there  is
    agreement.  It has been necessary for me to set this matter out in some
    detail because it is important to recognise the  exact  nature  of  the
    agreement.  It is part of Ms Patel's case that the judge erred  in  law
    in finding that the Appellant's daughter would  experience  significant
    compromise to her safety, contrary to her rights under  the  Convention
    of the Rights of the Child, as understood by reference to paragraph  73
    of the General Comment No.  14  of  the  United  Nations,  whilst  also
    finding that the daughter would not be at real  risk  of  serious  harm
    under the Refugee Convention or Article 3 ECHR.

25.  Insofar as the Appellant thereby advances a  proposition  there  is  no
    distinction capable of being drawn in law between (i) a  finding  under
    Article 8 ECHR that it is a child's best interests to remain in the  UK
    because her safety, as defined under paragraph 73 of  General   Comment
    number 14, will be significantly compromised, and (ii) a  finding  that
    the child would be at risk of serious harm under the refugee Convention
    and/or article 3 ECHR, I do not find that the Appellant's  argument  is
    made out.  There may well be a distinction to be drawn between the  two
    assessments of harm under different international instruments. However,
    it is not necessary for me to make  a  determination  of  exactly  what
    distinction there may be between those two tests in this  appeal.  That
    is because I find, and Mr McVeety agrees, that the judge has materially
    erred in law in making the findings that he  did  in  relation  to  the
    specific level of harm that would be faced by the Appellant's daughter,
    and in finding that such harm did  not  in  fact  reach  the  level  of
    serious harm for the purposes of the Refugee Convention and  Article  3
    ECHR.

26.  In relation to the level of harm that the judge found would  be  likely
    to persist for the daughter, the passage  at  [377]  is  of  particular
    relevance, wherein the judge finds that it was likely that she would be
    subjected to discrimination, abuse, peer pressure, bullying,  degrading
    treatment and that her life chances would be significantly affected.

27.  Article 3 ECHR prohibits the infliction  of  torture,  and  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment or punishment.  Thus, on the judge's  own  findings
    at [377], which are not disputed by the Respondent,  I  find  that  the
    level of harm which has been accepted as existing for  the  Appellant's
    daughter satisfies the Article 3 threshold.  There can be no doubt that
    that harm would be for reason of the daughter's religion.

28.  I am also aware that at [380] the judge directed himself on  the  basis
    that the threshold for serious harm may be very much less for a 9  year
    old female child than it is for an ordinary adult, but does not seek to
    justify by any further reasoning why the degrading treatment  which  he
    has found would persist for the daughter would not  amount  to  serious
    harm  for  the  purposes  of  the  Refugee  Convention  or  Article  3,
    particularly with regard to her minority.  I  find  that  although  the
    Appellant's daughter is not a party to this appeal, her removal to Iran
    would result in her being persecuted for a Refugee  Convention  reason;
    religion.

29.  The consequences for the present appeal, where  the  Appellant  is  the
    sole appellant,  can  be  deduced  by  reference  to  the  judge's  own
    direction in law set out at [306] of the decision, in which he observed
    that where a child is likely to be subjected to serious harm on return,
    the anguish of a parent witnessing the pain or suffering to which  that
    child may be exposed may itself amount to serious harm.  I have already
    confirmed that that it is a proposition supported by authority.  It  is
    agreed between the parties, and I find that it is appropriate for  such
    agreement to be made,  that  the  present  Appellant  would  experience
    serious harm herself by reason of  experiencing  the  serious  harm  to
    which her daughter would be subjected.

30.  It is necessary to consider  briefly  whether  the  serious  harm  that
    would befall the Appellant herself would engage only Article 3 of ECHR,
    or might represent serious harm for a Refugee Convention reason.  It is
    also agreed between the parties that the serious  harm  that  would  be
    experienced by the Appellant would be for a reason of her membership of
    a particular social group: the family of  her  daughter  (Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v. K and Fornah [2006] UKHL 46).

31.  It is therefore not necessary for me to  adjudicate  upon  the  balance
    grounds (i)- (iii) as summarised at [22] above. Had I been required  to
    adjudicate upon them, I would have found they lacked merit, but  it  is
    not necessary for me to say anything more about them.

    Notice of Decision

    For the above reasons I find that the  judge's  decision  involved  the
    making of a material error of law.

    I set aside the judge's decision dismissing the Appellant's  appeal  on
    Refugee grounds.

    I allow the Appellant's appeal on Refugee grounds

    The judge's decision  allowing  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
    (Article 8 ECHR) stands.


Signed   Date: 23.9.19
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 23.9.19
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

