
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04620/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 September 2020 via Skype       |On 05 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     KO
                          anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Mohzan, Consultant Solicitor instructed by French
& Co
For the respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is  made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. The appellant has appealed, with permission granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Neville, against a  decision  of  FTT  Judge
         Hawden-Beal sent on 27 September  2019,  in  which  his  appeal  on
         international protection grounds was dismissed.

      2. The appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, claims that he is at  risk
         of persecution  from  the  Taliban  for  reasons  relating  to  the
         American employment of his father and uncle.  The FTT accepted that
         the appellant's family members were employed as security guards  at
         the American Kandahar air  base  and  received  threatening  'night
         letters' from the Taliban for reasons relating to  this,  which  in
         turn forced the family to relocate from their home area  to  Kabul.
         The FTT then applied the  country  guidance  at  the  time  to  the
         appellant's situation in Kabul and concluded that he  could  safely
         and reasonably relocate there, where he would not  be  at  risk  of
         Article 15(c) harm.


      3. In grounds prepared by Mr Sobowale of Counsel, the appellant relied
         upon one ground of appeal: in applying the country guidance  in  AS
         (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118  (23  March  2018)
         regarding Article 15(c) risk, the FTT erred in law  by  failing  to
         engage with the Court of Appeal's ('CA') remittal of that  case  to
         the Upper Tribunal ('UT') - see AS Afghanistan v SSHD  [2019]  EWCA
         Civ 873 (24 June 2019).  The CA set aside the 2018 CG  decision  on
         the basis that the conclusion that the percentage risk of  being  a
         casualty from a security incident was 0.01% was not reasonably open
         to the Upper Tribunal ('UT') on the  evidence  before  it.  The  CA
         found that the case would need to be remitted to the  UT  in  order
         for it to reconsider the decision on the reasonableness of Kabul as
         an internal relocation alternative on  the  basis  of  the  correct
         figure regarding risk of death or injury from  security  incidents.
         This was the only error of law identified by the CA.

      4. At the beginning of  the  hearing  before  me  the  representatives
         clarified that  they  relied  upon  skeleton  arguments  served  in
         accordance with directions.

      5. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Mohzan accepted there  was  only
         one ground of appeal - the FTT erred in law in applying the 2018 CG
         case when there was  an  issue  that  the  CA  considered  required
         further consideration before the findings on Article 15(c) could be
         relied upon.  Mr  Mohzan  acknowledged  that  the  real  issue  was
         whether this error was a material one in the light of AS (Safety of
         Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT 130 (IAC) (28 April 2020).     I
         asked Mr Mohzam to explain in what way the guidance in the 2020  CG
         case was materially different to that in the 2018 CG  case  in  the
         context of this appellant's circumstances.  He was entirely  unable
         to identify any material difference.  Instead he pointed  out  that
         the FTT erred in failing to apply principles  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  v
         SSHD [2020] UKSC 17 to the appellant's health  condition.   When  I
         pointed out that this did not form any part of the pleaded  grounds
         or an application to amend the grounds, Mr Mohzam accepted this and
         said that he did not wish to make any further submissions.

      6. After hearing from Mr Mohzam I indicated to Mr Tam that I  did  not
         need to hear from him because I was satisfied that the FTT did  not
         make a material error of law.

      7. As Mr Mohzam conceded, the 2020 CG case did not amend the  guidance
         on Art 15(c) risk  or  the  matters  to  be  relevant  to  internal
         relocation in any material  manner,  relevant  to  the  appellant's
         circumstances.  It follows  that  the  failure  to  note  the  CA's
         decision  made  no  material  difference.   The  FTT   would   have
         inevitably reached the same  conclusions  (see  [39]  and  [40]  in
         particular) given the appellant's circumstances.  As pointed out in
         the respondent's skeleton argument the headnote and guidance in the
         2020 CG case are not materially  different  to  the  2018  CG  case
         applied by the FTT.  Having found that the appellant would be  able
         to benefit from family support in Kabul, the FTT would be bound  to
         find that the appellant as a relatively healthy young man would  be
         able to reasonably and safely relocate to Kabul.

      8. The FTT also addressed the appellant's medical  condition  at  [39]
         and was entitled to find that the  appellant's  hepatitis  did  not
         require treatment, medication or monitoring.  Given this unappealed
         factual finding, the failure to  apply  AM  is  not  material.   AM
         emphasises that a high threshold is still required  for  Article  3
         medical cases.  The evidence in this case comes nowhere near  this.
         In any event this did not form part of the grounds  of  appeal  and
         there was no application to amend the grounds.   If  there  was,  I
         would have refused it.  The underlying submission is hopeless given
         the FTT's finding of fact regarding the appellant's hepatitis.

Decision

    19.  The FTT decision did not involve the making of a material error of
         law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:  UTJ Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated: 29 September 2020

