
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04941/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd February 2018                         |On  28th March 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                  Khin [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel, Greater Manchester Immigration
Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Burma (Myanmar) born on [  ]  1959.   The
    Appellant left Burma on 30th October 2015 with  the  assistance  of  an
    agent who helped  the  Appellant  get  onto  a  plane  by  bribing  the
    immigration authorities.  She left on her own passport.  She  flew  via
    Bangkok to London.  She claimed asylum on 3rd December 2015.

 2. The Appellant's claim for asylum was based upon a fear that if returned
    to  Burma  (Myanmar)  she  would   face   mistreatment   due   to   her
    religion/ethnicity as a Rohingyan Muslim.  That application was refused
    by Notice of Refusal dated 7th May 2016.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Alis sitting  at  Manchester  on  9th  May  2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated  on  17th  May  2017  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 4. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on 23rd  May  2017.
    On  5th  September  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro  refused
    permission to appeal.

 5. Renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  19th
    September 2017.  On 4th October 2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam
    granted permission to appeal.  Granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge
    McWilliam noted that the Appellant was a Rohingya from Myanmar and that
    the judge found that simply being a Royingya had not been viewed by the
    Tribunal as being a reason  to  be  recognised  as  a  refugee  and  he
    considered the case in accordance with TS [2013]  UKUT  281  which  was
    concerned with political opposition.  He did not attach weight  to  the
    evidence by BROUK  which  he  concluded  was  not  independent.   Judge
    McWilliam considered that whilst it was  not  clear  from  the  grounds
    whether the background evidence referred to in the grounds  was  before
    the judge, it was arguable that TS is not concerned with the issues  in
    this case and the rejection of the evidence from BROUK, which  was  the
    most up-to-date evidence relied on by both parties, was irrational.

 6. On 31st October 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  Those grounds  contended  that  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal failed to refer to evidence not before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and as such the judge could not be criticised for failing to take  this
    into account and no error arises from the decision.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Brown.  Mr Brown is very  familiar  with  this  matter.   He
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and he is  the  author  of  the
    Grounds  of  Appeal.   The  Respondent  appears  by  her  Home   Office
    Presenting Office, Mr Diwnycz.

Submissions/Discussions

 8. Mr Brown starts by taking  me  to  the  evidence  and  the  Appellant's
    version of events, namely that her historical account was based on  her
    claim that she had hidden her  Royingyan  identity;  been  targeted  on
    account of her and her husband's Royingyan ethnicity and that following
    her house being raised by the authorities in October 2015 she had fled.
     He points out that the judge was satisfied on the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant was  a  Royingyan  from  Myanmar  and  gave  his  reasons  at
    paragraphs 53 to 55 of his decision.  He submits however that the judge
    had made no clear findings on the evidence whether  the  Appellant  had
    obtained a false ID card, which described her as a Burmese Muslim,  and
    thereafter obtained a passport from this false ID.

 9. He submits that the judge's treatment of the  background  evidence  was
    insufficient and that the matter of practicality, bearing in  mind  the
    current climate of the Royingya in Myanmar, that in itself is an error.
     He submits that anyone who protests as being a Royingya  would  be  at
    risk on return.  He takes me to the witness statement of Mr Khin who is
    the president of the  Burmese  Royingya  Organisation  UK  (BROUK)  and
    submits that the consideration of Mr Khin's evidence by  the  judge  is
    inadequate and that the judge has dismissed his evidence on the grounds
    of "partiality".  He submits that this was wrong  as  the  witness  had
    openly accepted in his evidence that the aim of  the  organisation,  of
    which he was president was to highlight the plight of the  Royingya  in
    the international arena and he confirmed that he had provided  evidence
    and had supported other asylum claims, whose appeals had been  allowed.
    He submits that the judge had failed to provide  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the evidence of Mr Khin.  Further, he submits that the  judge
    had failed to engage with the objective evidence set out at  tab  2  of
    the Appellant's bundle and in particular referred  me  therein  to  the
    failure of the judge to adequately give due and proper consideration of
    the US Department of State Report on Human Rights  Practices  in  Burma
    dated 12th April 2016.  He submits that the evidence at  the  time  and
    certainly since thereafter, is that merely being a Royingya would  mean
    that an application for asylum would  lead  to  the  application  being
    successful pointing out that so far 650,000 have had to flee  to  avoid
    crimes against humanity.  He takes me to the 2016 report.

10. He submits that it having been accepted by the judge that the Appellant
    was a Royingyan and should not be expected  to  conceal  her  identity,
    that  he  had  not  properly  considered  whether  by  reasons  of  her
    activities in the UK there was a real risk  of  her  identity  becoming
    known and a further real risk that her false use of the ID  card  would
    become known at the point of return.  He notes that the judge has  made
    specific reference to the guidance in TS namely that:

         "A person who has a profile of voicing opposition  to  the  Burmese
         government in the United Kingdom can expect to  be  monitored  upon
         return  by  the  Burmese  authorities.   The  intensity   of   that
         monitoring will in general depend upon  the  extent  of  opposition
         activity abroad."

11. He submits that the Appellant has shown a history of voicing opposition
    against the  Burmese  regime  in  the  many  demonstrations  and  BROUK
    meetings in the UK which was corroborated by the evidence of  Mr  Khin.
    The judge's dismissal of this evidence being mere support is, Mr  Brown
    submits, wrong in law as you do not have  to  be  a  leader  merely  to
    become someone who has a profile of voicing  opposition.   Further,  he
    makes considerable reference to issues of country  guidance  submitting
    that the judge has not properly engaged  with  the  material  that  was
    before him in assessing whether  he  should  depart  from  the  current
    country guidance in TS.

12. Mr Diwnycz in response is most helpful in his approach.   He  indicates
    that on a practical basis matters have moved on considerably since this
    matter came before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  that  the  tragic
    developments for the Royingya in Myanmar is not contested  and  accepts
    that even at the date of hearing there was a substantial cloud over the
    Royingya.  He does however point out that there were two matters  which
    may well have influenced the judge's decision, which he does not  press
    strongly against so far as Mr Brown's appeal is concerned.  Firstly  he
    notes that there was no Home Office Presenting Officer  present  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and secondly that there was no request made  by
    the Appellant for an adjournment.  His belief is that there would  have
    been considerable assistance given to the judge in  the  approach  that
    the Secretary of  State  takes  to  such  a  case  had  a  Home  Office
    representative been present.  He does not seek to press me further.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

15. This is  a  well-constructed  decision  from  a  very  experienced  and
    reliable First-tier Tribunal Judge.  However, as Mr Diwnycz points  out
    the "steer" that would have come from the Secretary of State  having  a
    Home Office Presenting Officer present was  not  available  before  the
    judge.  Whilst I have to look at the position as it was when the matter
    came before the First-tier Tribunal Judge it is conceded by Mr  Diwnycz
    that even at that time their  plight  was  desperate  in  Myanmar.   He
    concedes that it is even worse today.

16. The position of the First-tier Tribunal Judge was clearly not helped by
    the failure of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  provide  a  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.  However, I am prepared to accept  the  submissions
    made by Mr Brown that there are errors of law in the decision and  that
    they are material.  I accept that the judge appears  to  have  rejected
    the core  of  the  Appellant's  claims  at  paragraphs  60  to  64  and
    thereafter gone on to consider the evidence  of  Mr  Khin  in  reaching
    those, conclusions rather than considering the evidence in  the  round.
    Further, there are inadequacies in the consideration of  the  objective
    evidence, in particular the failure to consider three reports on  human
    rights abuse dating between April and October 2016 which were  referred
    to in the objective evidence.

17. Whilst it is understandable how the judge came to his conclusions, I am
    just about satisfied that there are errors of law that are material and
    consequently I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    proceed to remake it.

Remaking of the Decision

18. Mr Diwnycz advises that if I find that there is a material error of law
    he will not press me further on this matter.  It is accepted  that  the
    plight of the Rohingya in  Myanmar  constitutes  a  major  humanitarian
    crisis.  There is no up-to-date country  guidance  or  indeed  guidance
    from the Secretary of State as to the approach to be adopted.  This  is
    however a woman who fled  the  country  nearly  three  years  ago,  has
    developed a profile due to her sur place activities  and  who  would  I
    find consequently be at risk on return.  In such circumstances I remake
    the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  originally  contained
    material errors of law and the decision is set  aside.   I  proceed  to
    remake the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal.

20. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 26 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none his made.


Signed                              Date 26 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
