
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04963/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 May 2018                    |On 14 May 2018                       |
|                                 |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          BRENDA UETUESAPI KASUVIRE
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Nicholson (counsel) instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration


DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Alty, promulgated on  2  October  2017
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on asylum and article 3 ECHR grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 8 February 1984 and is a national  of  Namibia.
The appellant entered the UK as a visitor on 12 May 2006. On 1 May 2016  the
appellant claimed asylum. On 11 May 2017 the Secretary of State refused  the
Appellant's protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Alty  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision on asylum and article  3  ECHR  grounds.  Grounds  of  appeal  were
lodged and on 20 November 2017  Judge  Grimmet  gave  permission  to  appeal
stating

    "It is arguable that the Judge made an error of fact which  may  amount
    to an error of law in the light  of  the  evidence  of  the  presenting
    officers note of the hearing."

The Hearing

5. Before the hearing started, I told parties' representatives that  I  have
the record of proceedings taken by the Judge, and that  the  Judge's  record
of  proceedings  coincided  with  the  appellant's   counsel's   record   of
proceedings,  reproduced  in  the  24  response.  I  allowed   the   parties
representatives 15 minutes to read the record of  proceedings  and  consider
their position.

6. (a) For the appellant, Ms Petterson moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  She
took me to [36] and [37] of the decision. She  told  me  that  even  if  the
appellant's credibility was accepted, the determinative issue  was  internal
relocation. At [36] and [37] the Judge  finds  that  the  appellant  has  no
family support, even though there was evidence of support from  two  sisters
in the UK. She told me that the Judge's decision is based  on  an  error  of
fact because the Judge believed that the capital of Namibia,  Windhoek,  has
a population of only 9000 when, in fact, it has a population  of  more  than
300,000.

(b) Ms Petterson told me that the Judge specifically finds  that  the  risks
to the appellant comes from family members. She told me that the  background
information indicates that the Judge's  findings  in  relation  to  internal
relocation  is  unsafe  and  that  the  appellant  can  safely  relocate  to
Windhoek. She urged me to set the decision aside.

7. (a) Mr Nicholson, for the respondent, relied on the rule 24 response.  He
told me that the Judge's error about the size of Windhoek is immaterial.  He
told me that the Judge's findings are entirely in  line  with  the  guidance
given in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC  31,  which  is  the
correct consideration - the size of the town that  the  appellant  might  be
forced to go to just does not matter.

(b) Mr Nicholson took me to the appendix of the application  for  permission
to appeal. That is reflects  the  minutes  of  the  presenting  officer  who
appeared before the First-tier Tribunal. He told me that the second half  of
the minute clearly coincides with the  Judge's  record  of  proceedings  and
with Mr Nicholson's own notes  from  the  First-tier  hearing.  He  took  me
through the Judge's decision and told me that the decision does not  contain
a material error of law. He urged me to dismiss the  appeal  and  allow  the
decision to stand.

Analysis

8. The first ground of appeal focuses on [30] of  the  decision.  There  the
Judge records a concession from the Home Office presenting officer that  the
appellant gave credible evidence at  the  hearing.  The  Judge's  record  of
proceedings indicates that that is what the  presenting  officer  said.  The
Home Office presenting officer  before  the  First-tier  prepared  a  minute
recording his submissions. Part of his minute says

    "Appellant largely consistent evidence and IJ was  clearly  sympathetic
    towards her. She was credible and clearly highly emotional."

9. The  first  ground  of  appeal  is  inconsistent  with  the  Home  Office
presenting officer's minute. As a challenge to what the Judge says  at  [30]
it is without support and is inconsistent with the  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer's minute, the  Judge's  record  of  proceedings  and  Mr  Nicholson'
notes. In any event, ground one cannot succeed because  the  Judge  did  not
take the concession at face value. The Judge carried out his own  assessment
of  the  appellant's  credibility.  At  [32]  the  Judge  found   that   the
appellant's evidence consistent, coherent & plausible.  At  [33]  the  Judge
made his findings of fact and did not rely on a concession,  before  turning
to sufficiency of protection at [34].

10. The Judge made clear, evidence based, findings of fact between [30]  and
[33]. Those findings of fact are neither dependent upon  nor  influenced  by
any  concession  that   might   have   been   made   by   the   respondent's
representative. Even if there was an ambiguity in what was said by the  Home
Office presenting officer before the  First-tier,  the  potential  ambiguity
did not distract the Judge from making his findings. There is  no  substance
in the first ground of appeal.

11. The grounds of appeal next focus on the last sentence  of  [33]  of  the
decision. The grounds amount to nothing more than a disagreement  the  facts
as the Judge found them to be. At [33] the Judge makes a clear finding  that
the appellant had been beaten by her father & sexually abused by her  uncle.
The Judge made those findings  because  he  found  the  appellant  to  be  a
credible witness and he found that what the appellant says is  supported  by
background materials. The findings at  [33]  are  findings  which  are  well
within the range of findings available to the Judge.

12. The third part of the grounds of appeal  relates  to  the  treatment  of
internal relocation. The Judge clearly got the size  of  Windhoek  wrong  at
[36], but that is not all that the Judge  took  into  account  in  assessing
internal relocation. The Judge found the appellant  to  be  a  credible  and
reliable witness. The Judge accepts the appellant's evidence that it was  in
Windhoek that she was sexually abused by her uncle. It is  the  respondent's
position that the appellant should return to Windhoek. The Judge finds  that
if the appellant returns there, she will find herself within  reach  of  her
past persecutor.

13. Paragraph 339K of the immigration rules says

    'The fact that a person has already  been  subject  to  persecution  or
    serious harm, or to direct threats of such persecution  or  such  harm,
    will be regarded as a serious indication of the  person's  well-founded
    fear of persecution or real risk  of  suffering  serious  harm,  unless
    there are good reasons to consider that  such  persecution  or  serious
    harm will not be repeated.'

14. The  Judge's  findings  in  relation  to  internal  relocation  continue
throughout [37], [38] and [39]. The Judge correctly takes guidance  from  HJ
(Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31. There  is  no  flaw  in  the
Judge's assessment of internal relocation despite the apparent  belief  that
Windhoek is a village, when in fact it is a city.

15.  In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that the  Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  Judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him.

16. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law.

CONCLUSION

17. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

18. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date 8 May 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


