
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04587/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31 October 2018                      |On 09 January 2019                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Faheema [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Azmi, counsel, instructed by French & Company


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant a national of Iraq date of birth 6 January  1990  appealed
    against the Respondent's decision  dated  2  May  2017  to  refuse  her
    protection claim.

3.   Her appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge A J Parker who  on  14
    December 2017 allowed her appeal on  asylum  grounds  and  allowed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds, presumably Article 3 ECHR.

4.   The Secretary of State's grounds on which permission was granted on  11
    January 2018 was a mixture of points essentially reducing themselves to
    a key issue namely the absence of cogent, adequate  and  clear  reasons
    for the decisions made.  Mr Azmi quite rightly has little he can say to
    defend the decision other than to say well even if there is an  absence
    of clear and full reasons as might be expected  at  least  there  is  a
    decision and at least the decision has some reasoned basis for it.

5.   It is trite  law  that  the  parties  to  litigation  are  entitled  to
    sufficient and adequate reasons and the  failure  to  provide  them  is
    clearly an error of law.  The next question will be whether  the  error
    of law is material to the outcome of the appeal.  I find,  having  read
    the decision a number of times, that the format the Judge has used  for
    setting out some of the findings was simply not acceptable in terms  of
    its sufficiency.   It  is  not  enough  to  recite  an  argument  or  a
    submission made and simply to state "I agree  for  the  reasons  stated
    therein".   That  is  not  an  explanation  of  the  reasons  even   if
    effectively there may be agreement with some of the  submissions  being
    made.

6.   Similarly, the Judge was strikingly unclear  about  the  basis  of  the
    Refugee Convention reason he found and the  basis  on  which  he  could
    conclude there was the real risk of  Article  3  ECHR  proscribed  ill-
    treatment.  The Judge simply did not address the fact that the Claimant
    was in possession of a valid passport issued by authorities in Iraq and
    there was no clear evidence as to whether she did or  did  not  have  a
    CSID document.

7.   Whether or not she does have a  CSID  I  do  not  know  but  the  Judge
    misunderstood that in fact within Baghdad it was possible, even if  her
    home area were one where there was significant risk for her, to  get  a
    CSID safely whilst in Baghdad.  More importantly perhaps the Judge also
    seemed to have by reference to the case law ignored the known fact that
    by the date of the hearing the position of safety and the  presence  of
    ISIL in  Mosul  (Ninieveh)  was  no  longer  as  originally  pertained.
    Therefore, the whole basis of risk, as he was  assessing  it,  for  her
    seeking to go back to the IKR simply did not have  the  foundations  of
    fact which he thought or perhaps how it was put to him.

8.   In the circumstances I was  fully  satisfied  that  the  issue  of  her
    safety, the return to the IKR, her ability to acquire a  CSID,  if  she
    does not have one already, and the issues of her  political  activities
    which have been rejected as a basis of risk, demonstrate to me that the
    assessment the Judge made of risk on return to her simply cannot stand.



9.   It is also clear that she was raising the issue of her being of  Yazidi
    faith/ethnicity and that that posed a risk.  It is sad to say that  the
    Judge never really expresses a view one way or another  on  that  issue
    and never particularises on what Convention reason the Appellant may be
    or face the real likelihood of risk on return to Iraq.

10.  For these reasons, I am fully  satisfied  that  the  Original  Tribunal
    failed to give adequate and sufficient reasons for  the  decision.   In
    the light of the submissions made it seems to me most unfortunate  that
    this will have to be remade but it seemed  to  me  inevitable  that  it
    should be done in the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with the law.

DECISION

11.  The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.

DIRECTIONS

(1)  The matter should be remade in the First-tier Tribunal in Birmingham.

(2)  Time estimate two hours.

3)   Arabic Iraq interpreter required.

(4)  Any additional evidence to be served on  the  Respondent  and  IAC  not
    later than ten working days before further hearing.

(5)  Not to be listed before Judges A J Parker or E S Martins.

(6)  The issues are Asylum, Article 3 ECHR and Humanitarian Protection.

(7)  No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 12 December 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey






