
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/04777/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 April 2019                       |On 14 May 2019                       |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                   m d a n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Tanzania born on  25th  June  1978.   The
    Appellant had made application for asylum  claiming  to  have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution on the basis of his political opinion.  The
    Secretary of State refused that application by Notice of Refusal  dated
    26th March 2018.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Bristow sitting at Birmingham on 14th  May  2018.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated  on  1st  June  2018  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 12th June 2018 the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 10th July  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nightingale
    granted permission to  appeal.   Judge  Nightingale  noticed  that  the
    grounds argued that  the  judge  erred  by  considering  the  screening
    interview but by  failing  to  take  into  account  the  statement  the
    Appellant had submitted at that time which raised sexual  and  physical
    abuse.  It was also argued that the judge had erred in failing to  make
    any finding with regard to the four letters which had led him  to  make
    his claim for asylum.  Consequently it was contended that the judge had
    failed to consider all the relevant evidence.

 4. Judge Nightingale considered that it was arguable that  the  judge  had
    erred in giving undue weight to the failure of the Appellant to mention
    sexual and physical abuse during his screening interview  and  that  it
    was arguable that the  judge  had  fallen  into  error  in  failing  to
    appreciate that the witness statements supplied at  the  interview  did
    raise the abuse he claimed to have  suffered.   Further  he  considered
    that it was arguable that whilst considering the letters referred to in
    the Grounds of Appeal (at paragraph 58(d)) the judge erred  in  failing
    to make a finding with regard to the reliability or otherwise of  those
    letters.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant does not appear.  I  do  note
    however that the Appellant lives in Coventry.  The Appellant is  acting
    in person.  He appeared in person before the First-tier Tribunal and he
    personally is the author of the Grounds of Appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State appears by her  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr  Avery.   I
    further note that the First-tier Tribunal Judge granted  the  Appellant
    anonymity and no application is made to vary that  order  and  none  is
    made.  I am substantially assisted  in  this  matter  by  the  approach
    adopted by Mr Avery.  Mr Avery advises that he concedes that there is a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
     He points out that the  Appellant  had  provided  a  detailed  witness
    statement with regard to his ill-treatment  and  that  the  failure  to
    consider it must, in the view of the Secretary of State,  substantially
    undermine the assessment of credibility made by the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge.  In such circumstances even though the Appellant fails to attend
    he advises that the correct approach is for the matter to  be  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Findings on Error of Law

 6. Having heard the submissions of Mr Avery and considered the decision of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  the  witness  statement  of  the
    Appellant I agree with the comments made by Mr Avery that  the  failure
    to consider the witness statement of the Appellant  and  in  particular
    the details made therein with regard to  the  findings  on  credibility
    substantially undermine the decision.  A finding  on  credibility  will
    involve  consideration  of  the  facts  and  the  plausibility  of  the
    Appellant's version of  events.   Such  evidence  is  normally  readily
    available within the evidence produced.  In  this  instance  the  judge
    appears to have missed part of  that  evidence  or  indeed  if  he  has
    considered it he has unfortunately failed to make specific reference to
    it.

 7. In such circumstances I am satisfied that there is a material error  of
    law and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  is  unsafe.   I
    make this finding despite the fact that the  Appellant  has  failed  to
    personally attend.  He will of course on the basis that I now remit the
    matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal  need  to  ensure  that  he  is
    present at the further hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  contains  material  error  of
law and is set aside.  Directions are given hereinafter  for  the  rehearing
of this matter.

 1) On finding that there is a material error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge the decision of the judge is  set  aside  and
    the matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Birmingham
    for rehearing on the first available date 28 days hence with an ELH  of
    three hours.


 2) None of the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.


 3) That the hearing is to be before any judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    other than Immigration Judge Bristow.


 4) That there be leave to either party to file  and  serve  an  up-to-date
    bundle of subjective and/or objective evidence upon which  they  intend
    to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.


 5) That a Swahili interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant   anonymity.    No
application is made to vary that order and none is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 11 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 11 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris













