
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |Appeal Number: PA/04605/2019     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |                                 |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 December 2020               | On 14 January 2021              |
|                                 |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                                ED (NIGERIA)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Parkin, instructed by Rashid & Rashid Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsley, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 4 March 2020, a panel of the Upper Tribunal comprising UTJ Kopieczek
    and UTJ Norton-Taylor issued a decision in  which  it  found  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  in  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal on human rights grounds.  It was ordered that  the  decision  on
    the appellant's human  rights  claim  would  be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  This decision follows a further hearing on 7 December  2020,
    convened for the purpose of remaking the decision on the appeal.




Background

 2. The appellant is a Nigerian national who was born in 1985.   She  first
    came to the UK when she was between 5 and 7 years old.  She lived  with
    her father and his then partner.  After about two years, the  appellant
    returned to Nigeria with her grandmother.  She lived with her uncle but
    she left his house in around 2004 or 2005.   She  lived  independently,
    working as a hairdresser.


 3. Whilst still in Nigeria, the appellant entered into a relationship with
    a man, "O".  She was sexually assaulted by O and another man, "S".  She
    was afraid of them and in due course she made arrangements  through  an
    agent to come to the United Kingdom.  She was unable  to  pay  for  the
    agent's services, however, and reluctantly agreed to have sex with  him
    in lieu of payment.


 4. On entering the UK, the appellant went to  live  once  again  with  her
    father, in Borehamwood.  Her father had a partner and  two  sons.   She
    lived with  them  and  did  household  chores.   The  appellant  had  a
    relationship with a man called Ola  but  that  relationship  eventually
    broke down in around 2012.  She left her father's house in 2012 as  she
    was not happy there.


 5. The appellant then entered into a relationship with a man, "VM".  He is
    a British citizen of a similar age to the appellant, and a  plumber  by
    trade.  On 15 August 2016, the appellant and  VM  were  interviewed  by
    Home Office officials, who concluded  that  the  relationship  was  not
    genuine.  The appellant claimed asylum, stating  amongst  other  things
    that O and S were involved in a cult and that she was in fear  of  them
    and their associates upon return to Nigeria.  On 30 September 2016  the
    appellant and VM married at the Register Office in Maidstone.


 6. The appellant was referred to the Competent Authority via the  National
    Referral  Mechanism.   It  was  initially  accepted  that  there   were
    reasonable grounds to conclude that  the  appellant  was  a  victim  of
    trafficking but subsequently, on 15 October 2018,  the  CA  decided  on
    conclusive grounds that she was not.


 7. The respondent refused the appellant's application on 9 May 2019.   The
    majority of the refusal letter is concerned with the protection  claim.
    The respondent did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  been  in  a
    relationship with O, or that O and S were  involved  in  a  cult.   She
    concluded that the appellant could relocate within Nigeria to avoid any
    threat from them,  which  would  in  any  event  be  addressed  by  the
    authorities in Nigeria.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appeal to the FtT was heard by Judge Abdar on 16 July 2019.  In his
    reserved decision, he accepted the facts I have summarised at  [3]  and
    [4] above. He concluded, however,  that  the  appellant  had  been  the
    victim of a 'horrendous, opportunistic criminal offence' by the two men
    in Nigeria and that there was no risk arising from  the  events  of  10
    years before.  Although he accepted what the appellant had been through
    in Nigeria, he did not accept that she was a victim of trafficking.


 9. The judge then turned to Article 8 ECHR at [40] of  his  decision.   He
    accepted  that  the  appellant  was  in  a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with VM and that  the  concerns  expressed  following  the
    marriage interview were ill-founded.  Whilst the judge noted  that  the
    appellant's evidence was on occasion inconsistent with that  which  was
    given by VM, he held on balance that the relationship  was  as  claimed
    and that they had entered into a genuine marriage on 30 September 2016.




10. The judge did not accept that the appellant met  the  requirements  for
    entry clearance under the Immigration Rules and found that 'this is not
    a Chikwamba type case': [57].  That conclusion was reached because VM's
    tax return, which appeared to show an income of more than �18,600,  was
    incomplete.  The judge also held  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles  to  the  appellant's  relationship  with  VM  continuing  in
    Nigeria, and  did  not  accept  in  particular  that  her  seeking  IVF
    treatment from the NHS amounted to  any  such  difficulty:  [62].   The
    remainder of the decision concerned paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration
    Rules and what must be said to  be  a  fairly  cursory  examination  of
    Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

11. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin,
    sitting as a judge of the FtT.  Whilst she considered the remainder  of
    the findings to be unimpeachable, she considered it arguable  that  the
    judge had fallen into error in  failing  to  consider  the  nature  and
    extent  of  VM's  relationship  with  his  children  from  a   previous
    relationship and the effect of any such relationship on the  assessment
    of Article 8 ECHR.


12. In its decision, the Upper Tribunal noted that there were other grounds
    of appeal, in particular relating to the protection claim, but that UTJ
    Martin had been correct to refuse permission on those grounds.  It then
    recorded, at [18], that Mr Jarvis (who represented  the  respondent  at
    that hearing) accepted that the judge had fallen into error in  failing
    to take account of the situation of VM's three children, then aged  12,
    10 and 7.  The panel agreed, noting that  VM's  relationship  with  the
    children was 'plainly relevant' to the assessment of whether there were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  in  Nigeria.   The
    panel went on to reject the submission made  by  Mr  Jarvis  that  this
    error was not material, and to order that there  should  be  a  further
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal, at which the focus would be on  VM's
    relationship with his children and the impact of any such  relationship
    on the questions posed by the Immigration Rules, at EX1 of Appendix  FM
    in particular, and by Article 8 ECHR more generally.


13. The Upper Tribunal noted, at [20] of its decision, that the evidence in
    support of there being a relationship between VM and his  children  was
    'very sparse' but concluded that there was  sufficient  to  have  meant
    that this was an issue which was properly before the FtT.


14. At the start of the resumed hearing, I asked Mr Parkin to  confirm  the
    material I should have.  In addition to the decisions of  the  FtT  and
    the UT, he said that I should have two appellant's bundles,  the  first
    of 135 pages, the second of 36.  There was also a skeleton argument (19
    May 2020) and separate witness statements which had been  made  by  the
    appellant and the sponsor on 13 June 2019.   I  confirmed  that  I  had
    these bundles, as well as the original respondent's bundle  before  the
    FtT.


15. Mr Parkin indicated that he intended to  call  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor.  They were both  in  his  instructing  solicitor's  office  in
    Merton.  The appellant was in a room  with  a  solicitor  named  Nilesh
    Rupwate, who confirmed that no one else was present  in  the  room  and
    that this would remain the case whilst the appellant gave evidence.  Mr
    Rupwate indicated that he would remain whilst the  appellant  gave  her
    evidence so as to ensure that the Skype link remained in place  and  to
    ensure the integrity of the evidence.  Mr Lindsay was content with  the
    appellant (and then the sponsor) giving evidence in this way.


16. I then heard oral evidence from the  appellant  and  the  sponsor,  who
    adopted the statements they had made  before  the  FtT  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  They were asked no further questions by Mr Parkin  but  they
    were cross-examined extensively by Mr Lindsay.  I  do  not  propose  to
    rehearse their evidence in this decision but will refer to  it  insofar
    as it is necessary to do so to explain my findings of fact.

Submissions

17. Mr Lindsay submitted that I should consider first  whether  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  in  Nigeria,  such
    that EX1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules was satisfied.  In the
    event that it was, that conclusion was determinative of the appeal,  in
    accordance with TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109.  In the event  that
    it was not, the enquiry should progress  to  consider  Article  8  more
    broadly, and it was  accepted  by  the  respondent  that  there  was  a
    category of case which could succeed on that basis notwithstanding  the
    absence of insurmountable obstacles: R (Chen) v SSHD  [2015]  UKUT  189
    (IAC); [2015] Imm AR 867.


18. The primary focus of the case had moved on since  the  refusal  letter,
    which was concerned principally with protection.  It  was  accepted  by
    the respondent that various  parts  of  the  FtT's  findings  had  been
    preserved, and properly so.  Those findings had been summarised at  [3]
    of Mr Jarvis's skeleton argument and there was  no  attempt  to  depart
    from that acceptance.


19. The appellant's  evidence  had  been  unsatisfactory  in  a  number  of
    respects.   The  most  recent  statement  was  dated  June  2020.   The
    appellant and the sponsor had  been  inconsistent  on  highly  relevant
    matters in their evidence.   The  extent  of  their  contact  with  the
    sponsor's children and the appellant's current IVF treatment were areas
    on which there had not been consistency.   Those  inconsistencies  were
    important because there was so little other  evidence  of  the  sponsor
    being in contact with his children.  It was to  be  recalled  that  the
    burden was on the appellant to establish her  claim  and  she  had  not
    discharged that burden.


20. Even taking the evidence at its highest, however, it did not  establish
    that there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor living together in Nigeria.  It  was  clear  from  Lal  v  SSHD
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1925; [2020] 1 WLR 858 that the focus had to be on  the
    circumstances which would obtain in Nigeria.  The  children  live  with
    their mother and it had been accepted by the sponsor that they would be
    adequately cared for in the event that he left the UK.   The  threshold
    in EX2 was to be borne in mind and there was no evidence to  show  that
    there would be very  serious  hardship  if  the  sponsor  relocated  to
    Nigeria.  He could work in Nigeria, even though he might earn less than
    in the UK.  Visits with the children would still be possible.


21. Mr Parkin having confirmed that  there  would  be  no  submission  that
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules applied, Mr Lindsay moved  on
    to Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.  In relation to Chikwamba  v  SSHD
    [2008] 1 WLR 1420, he submitted that it  was  not  certain  that  entry
    clearance would be granted because  the  FtT  had  concluded  that  the
    Financial Requirements of the Rules were not met.  In any event,  there
    were proper reasons to expect the appellant to make an entry  clearance
    application.  She had entered unlawfully and had  remained  in  the  UK
    without leave for many years.  The law had,  in  any  event,  moved  on
    since the decision in Chikwamba, as explained in Mr  Jarvis's  skeleton
    argument.  In the event that the appellant returned to Nigeria to  make
    an application for entry  clearance,  there  would  be  a  time-limited
    interference  with  her  family  life.   Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  did  not  militate  against  that
    course as it was not  established  that  her  removal  would  have  any
    adverse impact on the best interests of the  children.   The  appellant
    clearly has some family support in Nigeria and there was no reason  why
    she could not work.


22. Mr Parkin submitted that there was little between the  parties  on  the
    law.  He agreed with Mr Lindsay that the focus  under  the  Immigration
    Rules should be on  whether  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing in Nigeria.   The  structure  of  the  exception
    necessarily implied that the existence  of  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship between the sponsor and his children  would  give
    rise to an insurmountable obstacle to the  appellant  and  the  sponsor
    continuing their relationship in Nigeria.  Whether or not that was  the
    case, it would necessarily  give  rise  to  very  serious  hardship  to
    separate a father from his children.  Mr  Lindsay  had  submitted  that
    there were problems with the credibility of the account  given  by  the
    appellant and the sponsor but their accounts were  broadly  in  accord.
    They had both stated that they had last seen the children at the end of
    November and there was no real basis for thinking that the relationship
    between the sponsor and his children was  not  a  real  and  subsisting
    relationship.  The parties agreed that  the  satisfaction  of  EX1  was
    determinative of the appeal.


23. As for Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules, it was at  least  likely  that
    the appellant would be granted entry clearance in the  event  that  she
    applied for it.  What had been said by Lord Reed in R (Agyarko) v  SSHD
    [2017] UKSC 11; [2017] 1 WLR 823 about Chikwamba had been  obiter.   It
    was also relevant to recall that the appellant had been accepted by the
    FtT to have been through terrible experiences in Nigeria.  This was, on
    any proper view, a strong  Article  8  claim  in  which  children  were
    involved.  There was no criminality.   Younas  [2020]  UKUT  129  (IAC)
    showed that s117B factors were to be brought into account and there was
    no difficulty  here  with  either  finance  or  English  Language.   In
    considering whether the appellant should apply for entry clearance, the
    delays caused by the pandemic were also to be borne in mind.  To expect
    her to do so would be disproportionate.


24. I indicated at 1.20pm that my decision was reserved.  Mr  Lindsay  then
    sought to reply to Mr Parkin's submissions, however, and  I  sought  to
    ascertain the basis on which he wished to do so.  He submitted that  Mr
    Parkin had gone behind an earlier concession (that the  Upper  Tribunal
    should not consider the  prospects  of  success  of  a  putative  entry
    clearance application) and that he should not be permitted  to  do  so.
    He invited me to hold the appellant to the acceptance in  the  skeleton
    argument written by previous counsel, Mr Moriarty.


25. Mr Parkin submitted that he was under a duty to represent the appellant
    to the best of his ability and to put  the  submissions  he  considered
    appropriate.  He had merely endeavoured to respond to  the  submissions
    made initially by Mr Lindsay.


26. I did then indicate that my decision was reserved.


Analysis

27. I can state my conclusion in this appeal very shortly.  I  accept  that
    the sponsor has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his  three
    children, who are currently aged 14, 12 and  9.   I  consider  that  he
    would experience very serious hardship as a result  of  his  separation
    from those children in the event  that  he  attempted  to  relocate  to
    Nigeria.  I therefore find as a fact that paragraph EX1(b) of  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules applies, and that the appeal  falls  to  be
    allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds without more: TZ  (Pakistan)  refers.
    My reasons for reaching those conclusions are as follows.


28. Mr Lindsay was entirely correct, with respect, to highlight the various
    difficulties with the evidence in this  case.   The  first  appellant's
    bundle contains very little evidence which bears on the existence of  a
    relationship between the sponsor and his children.   There  are  a  few
    photographs of the appellant and the sponsor with three  little  girls.
    I was not taken to those photographs in evidence.  There was no attempt
    to identify the children in the photographs or to state when and  where
    the photographs, which are unlabelled and undated, were taken.

29. In the statements which were made by the appellant and the  sponsor  on
    13 May 2020, it is said that they both play 'a huge part' in the girl's
    upbringing.  It is suggested that the children spent every weekend with
    the appellant and the sponsor prior to the lockdown and that they  also
    picked the sponsor's youngest daughter up from school regularly.  Since
    the lockdown, it had not been possible to see the children but they had
    been making plans to do so.  The sponsor stated that he was  supporting
    the children financially and that this support, and  his  contact  with
    them, would cease in the event that he relocated to Nigeria.  There are
    some further photos at the end of this short bundle.

30. There are also what are said to be messages between the  appellant  and
    the mother of the sponsor's children, however, and Mr Lindsay asked  no
    questions and made no submissions about those messages.  Those messages
    (which appear to be via Whatsapp)  appear  to  contain  warm  exchanges
    between  the  two  women,  referring  to  the  children  and   to   the
    arrangements between the adults for their collection and return  before
    and after visits.  I note that the sponsor's  ex-partner  is  named  as
    '[K]'s mum' in the appellant's mobile phone, that being an abbreviation
    of the sponsor's younger daughter's name.  I note also that  there  are
    various  messages  between  the  sponsor's  oldest  daughter  and   the
    appellant, also in warm and familiar tones, referring to  a  wish  that
    'isolation' was over so that they could be reunited.  Again, Mr Lindsay
    asked no questions about these messages and made no  submissions  about
    them.  I attach some weight  to  these  messages  and  to  the  photos,
    despite the limitations which I have highlighted above.


31. The reality, however, is that the documentary evidence of  there  being
    any relationship between the  sponsor  and  his  children  is  limited.
    Evidence which I would have expected to see - such as evidence  of  the
    financial support which he is said to provide - is  altogether  absent.
    Nor is there anything from the sponsor's ex-wife, confirming  the  role
    that he continues to play in the lives  of  the  children.   These  are
    concerning omissions in a case of this nature, particularly  where  the
    Upper Tribunal has previously noted the sparsity  of  evidence  of  the
    relationship between the sponsor and his children.


32. The problems in this case are not merely  limited  to  the  comparative
    absence of evidence, however.  As Mr Lindsay quite properly  submitted,
    there were some difficulties  with  the  oral  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant and the sponsor.  Although they agreed  that  they  had  last
    seen the children in mid-November, the reasons they gave for  the  lack
    of contact differed.  The hearing was on a Monday.  The  appellant  and
    the sponsor stated that they had  been  working  during  the  preceding
    weekend and had been unable to see the children for  that  reason.   In
    relation to the previous weekend, however, the  appellant  stated  that
    she had tested positive for Covid-19 and had not been able to  see  the
    children, whereas the sponsor was not sure of the  reason.   He  stated
    that the children might have had a party or some schoolwork to do.   He
    then stated that he had been self-isolating with his wife but  that  he
    thought it was 'like two weeks ago'.


33. There were also difficulties with the evidence given by  the  appellant
    and the sponsor about fertility treatment.   The  appellant  gave  very
    specific details about a new package  of  treatment  she  had  recently
    started receiving from the NHS.  She  detailed  courses  of  medication
    which lasted for  five  days,  followed  by  hormone  tests  and  other
    assessments.  The sponsor, however, was  not  aware  of  any  of  this,
    stating that she was only receiving treatment for  'depression  stuff',
    as far as he was aware.  Mr Lindsay  did  not  suggest  that  I  should
    revisit the finding made by  the  FtT  about  the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship between the sponsor and the appellant  but  I  bear  these
    difficulties in mind in considering the relationship which is  said  to
    exist between the sponsor and his children.


34. I have reflected carefully on whether the appellant has discharged  the
    burden of proving on the balance  of  probabilities  that  the  sponsor
    continues to enjoy a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
    his children.  I have borne in mind the very real difficulties which  I
    have examined above.  In the final analysis, however, I have  concluded
    that there is sufficient before me to discharge the  burden.   I  reach
    that conclusion because I find the oral evidence of the  appellant  and
    the sponsor to be broadly consistent with  the  picture  which  emerges
    from the Whatsapp messages and the photographs I have mentioned  above.
    Both  spoke  with  genuine  emotion  about  the  importance  of   their
    relationship with the children, and that emotion chimed with the manner
    in which the messages in the bundle are expressed.  I was struck by the
    sponsor's reaction to the suggestion - put clearly and properly  by  Mr
    Lindsay - that he could  relocate  to  Nigeria.   He  seemed  genuinely
    bemused that it might be suggested that he would leave his children  in
    that way, asking Mr Lindsay how he would be able to  provide  for  them
    financially and how he and the appellant would manage to see them.  The
    oral evidence which ultimately decided this issue  in  the  appellant's
    favour came right at the end of the sponsor's oral  evidence,  however.
    He was asked by Mr Lindsay how often he sees the children and  he  gave
    an answer which, in my judgment, had  the  clear  ring  of  truth.   He
    stated that he saw them about three times a week and that the amount of
    contact had increased since they had returned to school.   He  did  not
    suggest that this was for any particular emotional or family reason but
    simply that his eldest daughter was dependent upon the train to get  to
    school in Chatham and would  often  call  him  to  ask  for  help  with
    transport if, for whatever reason, she was unable to depend  on  public
    transport.  This was not, in my judgment, a man who was  attempting  to
    paint an unreliable picture of his contact with his children; it was  a
    man who was honestly describing the vicissitudes of parenting  children
    during the ongoing pandemic.


35. Drawing these threads together, I come to the clear conclusion  on  the
    balance of probabilities that there is an ongoing and important  family
    life between the sponsor and his  children,  characterised  by  regular
    contact and financial support.  I also accept that  the  appellant  has
    formed a relationship with the children during the four years that  she
    has been married to the sponsor.


36. The children are now aged 14, 12 and 9.  Although they live with  their
    mother, it is clearly  in  their  best  interests  to  continue  having
    regular contact with their father.  No authority need be cited for  the
    principle that it is generally in the best  interests  of  a  child  to
    continue to do so.  I find that they  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with their father and that it would  be  contrary
    to their best interests  for  him  to  relocate  to  Nigeria  with  the
    appellant.  It was understandably not suggested by Mr Lindsay that  the
    children could relocate to Nigeria with their  father.   He  suggested,
    instead, that they would be adequately cared for in the UK and that the
    sponsor's separation from them would not  give  rise  to  very  serious
    hardship.  He cited the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Lal,
    submitting that the real focus of EX1 is on the  circumstances  in  the
    country of origin.  I accept that submission as far as  it  goes;  what
    Lal goes  to  show  is  that  the  situation  in  the  country  of  the
    appellant's origin must indeed be examined closely if it is to be  said
    that something about it precludes the sponsor's relocation  there.   In
    Lal, the obstacle to relocation was said to be the  sponsor's  aversion
    to the heat, which had been the subject of  insufficient  investigation
    by the Upper Tribunal.


37. What Lal did not decide, however, was that the effective severance of a
    parental relationship such as that which is at issue in  this  case  is
    incapable of giving  rise  to  'very  serious  hardship'  of  the  kind
    contemplated by  paragraph  EX2  of  Appendix  FM.   If  that  was  the
    submission made by Mr Lindsay, I reject it.  As I observed  during  his
    submissions, it runs counter to  the  respondent's  current  policy[1],
    which expressly contemplates (at p53) the possibility  that  separation
    from a child  from  a  former  relationship  might,  depending  on  the
    circumstances, amount to an insurmountable obstacle.  I  consider  that
    these  circumstances  are  such  as  to  amount  to  an  insurmountable
    obstacle.  The suffering which would be experienced by the sponsor  and
    his children in the event that he relocated  to  Nigeria  surmount  the
    threshold of 'very serious hardship' just as easily as, for example,  a
    sponsor's inability to obtain  crucial  medical  treatment  in  another
    country.  The emotional suffering experienced by parent  and  child  in
    the former circumstance is just as pressing, and causative of  just  as
    much hardship as the physical suffering experienced in the latter.   It
    matters not, in my judgment, that the children  would  continue  to  be
    housed and parented by their mother; they would suffer greatly  because
    they missed their father, and vice versa.


38. For all of these reasons, I  conclude  that  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to the sponsor relocating to Nigeria with the appellant.   It
    was accepted on all sides that this conclusion was determinative of the
    appeal for the reasons explained by the Senior President  of  Tribunals
    at [34] of TZ (Pakistan).  I accordingly  allow  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.


Notice of Decision

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   I
continue this direction, which was made by the Upper Tribunal on an  earlier
occasion, due to the children involved in the case.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                             29 January 2021
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Family life (as a partner or parent), private life and exceptional
circumstances, version 11.0, 16 October 2020

