
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04953/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 February 2019                  |On 26 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 Odarie [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 16 October 2018, I found that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell  to  be  set
    aside.  My reasons for reaching that decision were as follows:

         "1.  I shall refer to the  appellant  as  the  respondent  and  the
         respondent as the appellant (as they appeared  respectively  before
         the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant, Odarie [B], was  born  on
         15 May 1995 and is a citizen of Trinidad & Tobago.  He entered  the
         United  Kingdom  in  2004.   He  came  to  the  attention  of   the
         authorities first in June 2011 when convicted of assault and theft.
          The appellant was subsequently sentenced  between  June  2011  and
         June 2016 on  nine  occasions  for  a  total  of  fifteen  criminal
         offences including common assault and assault on a constable.  On 6
         January 2015, the appellant submitted an application for  leave  to
         remain which was rejected as the incorrect form had been  used  and
         no fee had been  paid.   He  was  served  with  notice  of  removal
         (RED.001 and RED.003) on 15 October 2015 having been arrested by  a
         police officer.  He was served with a  further  notice  of  removal
         (RED.004) on 2 June 2016 and removal directions  were  set  for  16
         April 2017.  The appellant applied for a  judicial  review  of  the
         decision on 12 April 2017 and, in consequence,  removal  directions
         were deferred.  The appellant was asked by  the  respondent  on  25
         April 2017 to provide reasons why he  should  not  be  expected  to
         appeal after he had left the United Kingdom.  In response  to  that
         request, on  10  May  2017,  the  appellant  claimed  asylum.   The
         appellant was refused permission to bring proceedings for  judicial
         review on 14 September 2017.  On  12  December  2017  a  notice  of
         intention to deport the appellant was issued.  On 5 March  2018,  a
         decision was made by the Secretary of State to refuse a  protection
         and human rights claim.

         2.   The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
         Davies) which, in a decision promulgated on 26 June  2018,  allowed
         the appeal.  The Secretary of State now appeals,  with  permission,
         to the Upper Tribunal.

         3.   The judge found that the appellant was not a  person  to  whom
         Section 117C of the 2002 Act (as amended)  should  apply.   Section
         117C provides:

             '(1) The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

             (2)  The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                  for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

             (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

             (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
             taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted.'

         4.   The judge's  reasoning  was  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
         "foreign criminal" as defined by Section 117D(2):

             'In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

                  (a)  who is not a British citizen,

                  (b)  who has been convicted in the United  Kingdom  of  an
                  offence, and

                  (c)  who-

                      (i)  has been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment
                      of at least 12 months,

                      (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused
                      serious harm, or

                      (iii)    is a persistent offender.'

         5.   The parties agree that the appellant had not been sentenced to
         a period of imprisonment of at least twelve months, nor has he been
         convicted of an offence that had caused serious harm; the  question
         as to whether the  appellant  is  a  foreign  criminal    turns  on
         whether the appellant is a  "persistent  offender".   Judge  Davies
         found that the  appellant  was  not  a  persistent  offender.   His
         reasons for reaching that decision are set out at [29] et seq.  The
         judge found that the offences for  which  the  appellant  had  been
         convicted "fall towards the lower end  of  the  scale  of  criminal
         offences".   The  judge  was  careful  not  to  underestimate   the
         seriousness of some of the offences committed  by  this  appellant.
         The judge found that the appellant committed many of  the  offences
         when "involved with a group of other youngsters of the same age  in
         the area where he lived in Romford in Essex."  He noted there was a
         break of  offending  of  nineteen  months  between  July  2012  and
         February  2014.   He  noted  that,  since  January  2017  when  the
         appellant moved to Manchester, he had  not  committed  any  further
         offences.  He accepted  the  appellant's  stated  remorse  for  his
         offending.  At [34] the judge stated:

             "As at paragraph 57 of the case of Chege [2016] UKUT 187 (IAC)
             before the Upper Tribunal indicates it is for me  to  find  on
             the basis of the appellant's whole history  whether  he  is  a
             persistent offender and whether he can be described as someone
             who keeps on committing criminal offences.  I have taken  into
             account the appellant's  overall  pattern  of  offending,  the
             frequency of the offences, their  nature,  their  number,  the
             period and periods over which they have been committed and any
             reasons underlying the offending.  I accept as  the  appellant
             has indicated the offences  were  in  the  main  committed  in
             association with others."

         6.   The case of Chege provides useful guidance:

             "The question whether the appellant "is a persistent offender"
             is a question of mixed fact and law and falls to be determined
             by the Tribunal as at the date of the hearing before it.

             2.   The phrase "persistent offender" in s.117D(2)(c)  of  the
             2002 Act must mean the same thing as "persistent offender"  in
             paragraph 398(c) of the Immigration Rules.

             3.   A "persistent offender" is someone who keeps on  breaking
             the law. That does not mean, however, that he has to  keep  on
             offending until the date of the relevant decision or that  the
             continuity of the offending cannot be  broken.  A  "persistent
             offender" is not a permanent status that  can  never  be  lost
             once it is acquired, but an individual can be  regarded  as  a
             "persistent offender" for the purpose of  the  Rules  and  the
             2002 Act even though he may not have offended for  some  time.
             The question whether he fits that description will  depend  on
             the overall picture and pattern  of  his  offending  over  his
             entire offending history up to that date. Each case will  turn
             on its own facts."

         7.   At [62], the Upper Tribunal held:

             "The fact that the Secretary of State  has  decided  that  the
             individual has met the requirements of that limb of  paragraph
             383(c) of the Rules and that  therefore,  his  deportation  is
             conducive to the public good, is obviously something that  the
             Tribunal is entitled to take into  account,  and  it  must  be
             afforded due respect; but the Tribunal cannot  substitute  the
             Secretary of State's decision for its own decision.  It  would
             be wrong in principle for  the  Tribunal  to  start  with  the
             premise that the appellant has been held to  be  a  persistent
             offender who shows a particular disregard  for  the  law,  and
             then ask whether anything has happened since that decision  to
             change that view of him. The Tribunal must  make  up  its  own
             mind, looking at the entire offending history and not just the
             period between the Secretary of State's decision and its  own.
             That is precisely what the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  in
             the present case."

         Judge Davies was correct, therefore, to direct himself that it  was
         for the Tribunal, considering all the relevant evidence, to make up
         his own mind as to whether the appellant may be characterised as  a
         persistent offender.  The judge was  also  right  to  look  at  the
         entire offending history  and  not  just  the  period  between  the
         Secretary of State's decision and his own decision.

         8.   The grounds of appeal challenge head-on  the  judge's  finding
         that the appellant is not a persistent  offender.   Notwithstanding
         the Tribunal's clear findings, the Secretary of State continues  to
         assert that the appellant is a persistent  offender.   The  grounds
         assert that the Tribunal's conclusion is devoid  of  reasoning  and
         reject the judge's finding that the appellant's remorse is  genuine
         and that the appellant did not show a propensity to reoffend at the
         time of the First-tier Tribunal.  With respect, the grounds  appear
         to ignore the text of the decision.  At [32] the judge found  that,
         "whilst I accept on the basis of the  case  law  that  a  break  in
         offending may well  not  indicate  that  the  appellant  is  not  a
         persistent offender, I do  not  believe  taking  into  account  the
         evidence... that the appellant is a... persistent offender."  It is
         not clear to me why the Secretary of State considers that statement
         to be devoid of reasoning.  The judge was accepting that a break in
         offending may not mean that  an  individual  is  not  a  persistent
         offender and he made it clear that that was not the only basis  for
         his finding in the appellant's favour.

         9.   Otherwise, the grounds are essentially a disagreement with the
         judge's findings.  The grounds assert that  the  appellant  is  not
         integrated into United Kingdom society.  However, a finding that he
         was integrated was available to the judge on the  evidence  and  he
         duly reached it, giving reasons.

         10.  Matters are further complicated by the  grant  of  permission.
         Judge O'Brien has effectively ignored the grounds  as  pleaded  but
         instead has written this:

             "The judge appears to treat the appeal as  being  against  the
             deportation order and allowed the appeal on the ground that it
             was not in accordance with the  law.   However,  it  was  only
             against the respondent's decision to  refuse  the  appellant's
             subsequent protection and human rights claim that a  right  of
             appeal existed (Section 82(1) NIAA 02).  The  only  ground  of
             appeal available (after it was confirmed that  the  protection
             ground was not pursued) was that a removal would  be  unlawful
             under Section 6 of the HRA 98 (Section 84(1)(c)).   The  judge
             does not appear to consider whether  the  appellant's  removal
             would be so unlawful.  It is arguable therefore that the judge
             has erred in law."

         11.  Whilst Judge O'Brien has highlighted a matter of difficulty in
         Judge Davies' decision, I told  Ms  Aboni,  who  appeared  for  the
         Secretary of State before the Upper Tribunal, that permission  had,
         in effect, been granted on a basis not pleaded by the Secretary  of
         State.  Having found  that  the  appellant  was  not  a  persistent
         offender, the judge concluded as follows:

             "On the basis of my decision it is not necessary for me to  go
             on and consider the question  of  the  appellant's  Article  8
             claim."

         12.  Earlier in the decision, the judge had noted that  the  asylum
         claim made by the appellant was not pursued.  In the light of  that
         unequivocal indication, the  judge  should  have  recorded  in  his
         decision  that  the  appeal  against  the  Secretary   of   State's
         international protection decision  was  dismissed.   However,  what
         Judge O'Brien says is  correct.   The  appellant  did  not  have  a
         separate right of appeal against  the  making  of  the  deportation
         order.  His only ground of appeal  which  was  pursued  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal was that  his  removal  would  be  unlawful  on
         Article 8 ECHR grounds.  All that the judge has done is to  make  a
         finding that the appellant is not a  persistent  offender  and  has
         left matters there.  As the Tribunal in Chege  stated  at  [6]  "if
         [the appellant] is not  a  foreign  criminal  when  the  First-tier
         Tribunal came to consider the question of whether the  decision  to
         deport him was an  unjustified  interference  with  his  Article  8
         rights, considerations under Section 117C  of  the  Act  would  not
         apply although Section 117B  would  apply  in  any  event."   Judge
         Davies' decision is silent as to the application of Section 117B of
         the 2002 Act.  In consequence, the judge's analysis is  incomplete.



         13.  I have concluded that the  Upper  Tribunal  should  set  aside
         Judge Davies' decision accordingly.  However,  for  the  reasons  I
         have given above, I do not see any reason  to  interfere  with  the
         judge's finding that the appellant is not a "persistent  offender".
         Further, I find that  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  grounds
         should be dismissed.  At the beginning of this decision I have  set
         out in some detail the immigration history of the appellant.  As  I
         have noted, the removal directions made against the appellant  were
         deferred following  judicial  review  proceedings  in  April  2017.
         Although deferred, it would appear that  those  removal  directions
         may be pursued.  The appellant has failed in his appeal  on  asylum
         grounds but, for the reasons I have given, it would seem  that  his
         Article 8 ECHR appeal remains outstanding.  That appeal  will  need
         to be determined at a  resumed  hearing  before  me  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal at Manchester.  At or before the resumed hearing, it would
         be very helpful if the Secretary  of  State  were  to  clarify  his
         position regarding the current status of this appellant and, if  it
         is still intended to remove him from the United  Kingdom,  on  what
         basis that removal will be  effected.   I  am  concerned  that  the
         appellant should reach some finality in these  proceedings  and  be
         left in no doubt as to the continuing status he may have,  if  any,
         to remain in this country.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 22
         June 2018 is set aside.

         The judge's  finding  that  the  appellant  is  not  a  "persistent
         offender" shall stand.

         I have remade the decision in respect of international  protection.
         The appellant's appeal on international protection (asylum) grounds
         is dismissed.

         The appeal on Article 8 ECHR  grounds  shall  be  considered  at  a
         resumed hearing of the Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lane)
         at Manchester Civil Justice Centre on a  date  to  be  fixed  (time
         estimate two hours) (no interpreter).

         No anonymity direction is made."

 2. In remaking the decision, I am aware that the appellant appeals against
    the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claims.  His asylum claim has already been dealt  with  as
    has the issue as to whether or not he is a "persistent  offender"  (see
    paragraph [13] of my error of law decision).

 3. The appellant gave brief evidence at the resumed hearing.  The standard
    of proof is the balance of probabilities in the Article 8 ECHR  appeal.
    He confirmed that he is now 23 years old and he has lived in the United
    Kingdom since he was 9 years old.  He went to school here but  did  not
    finish his GCSEs.  He has never worked in the United  Kingdom  but  all
    his family are  living  here;  he  has  no  family  members  living  in
    Trinidad.  His family in the United Kingdom include a grandmother, aunt
    and uncles.  He lives with one of his aunts who is unwell  although  he
    was unaware of the nature of her illness.  The appellant explained that
    while other members of his family had over the years acquired status in
    the United Kingdom his grandmother had never got  around  to  obtaining
    such status for him.

 4. I reserved my decision.

 5. Mr McVeety, who appeared for the Secretary of State,  helpfully  raised
    the issue as to whether the appellant might qualify (should he make  an
    application) for leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v):

         '(v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent  at
         least half of his life living continuously in the  UK  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment);'

 6. The problem for the appellant is  that  he  also  has  to  satisfy  the
    general suitability requirements (S-L).  In particular,  the  appellant
    has to show that, notwithstanding his criminal record, he is a suitable
    person to be granted leave to remain by reference to the provisions  of
    S-LTR 1.6:

         'The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the
         public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
         not  fall  within  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.3.  to   1.5.),   character,
         associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to  allow  them
         to remain in the UK.'

 7. Mr McVeety submitted that the appellant's only family life as an  adult
    was with other adults including his aunt.  There was little evidence of
    the details of the appellant's private life.

 8. I have had regard to Section 117 of the 2002 Act (as amended):

         'Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.'

 9. The appellant speaks English as his first language.  He has not  relied
    upon public funds for his maintenance.  He is not, of course, a foreign
    criminal as defined in the Act (see above).   In  his  favour,  he  has
    lived in the United Kingdom for a very considerable portion of his life
    and, even if one were  to  remove  from  the  calculation  the  limited
    periods he has spent in prison, he has certainly spent more  than  half
    his life here.  My own impression of the appellant is that he has taken
    steps to improve his conduct.  He told me at the initial  hearing  that
    he had committed offences when in bad company whilst living  in  Essex.
    He appears and I find as a fact  that  he  has  achieved  a  degree  of
    personal and social stability since he has begun living with his family
    in the north of England.  It is true  that  he  has  not  produced  any
    specific evidence about his private life ties in this country  but  the
    operation of paragraph 276 of Appendix FM is  an  indication  that  any
    individual who has spent more than half his life before the age  of  25
    years living in the United Kingdom is  likely  to  have  established  a
    substantial private life here.

10. Notwithstanding his previous criminality, I found the appellant  to  be
    an honest and truthful witness.  I accept what he says about his family
    in this country and also the absence of any family members in Trinidad.
     In considering Article 8 ECHR, I have to determine whether there  are,
    in  effect  in  reality,  insurmountable   obstacles   preventing   the
    appellant's return to Trinidad  and  Tobago.   I  find  that  he  would
    experience very significant obstacles  to  reintegration  into  society
    there.  He has not been in Trinidad for more than fourteen years.   All
    his formative years as an individual have  been  spent  in  the  United
    Kingdom since the age of 9 years.  I found this  a  difficult  case  to
    determine but, upon a consideration of all  the  evidence,  and  having
    regard to the fact that he  substantially  meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE, I have concluded that it would not  be  proportionate
    to remove him to Trinidad.  I make that finding fully aware of his past
    offending and of the public interest  concerned  with  the  removal  of
    those  who,  notwithstanding  a  length  of   residence,   have   never
    established a legal status in this country.

Notice of Decision

11. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    to refuse his human rights claim is allowed  on  human  rights  grounds
    (Article 8 ECHR).

12. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 21 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

