
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04285/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Determination & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11th December 2017                 |On 10th January 2018                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [K K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu (Counsel), M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M R Oliver, promulgated on 24th July 2017, following a hearing at
    Hatton Cross on  2nd  June  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Albania, who  was  born  on  [  ]
    1997.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State dated 21st February 2013 refusing his asylum claim and his  claim
    for humanitarian protection under paragraph 336 of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he has been involved in  a
    blood feud, such that there is no sufficiency of  protection  available
    for him in Albania.  It is also the case  that  he  has  suffered  from
    haemophilia and vitamin K deficiency.  With respect to the  blood  feud
    he fears the [L] family.  He lived on  a  farm  with  his  parents  and
    sister.  The  [L]  family  were  their  neighbours.   They  wanted  the
    family's lands because these lands  were  more  fertile.   The  dispute
    began in 2007 and the following year the Appellant's father  was  badly
    beaten up by the [L] family.  The police did not do anything.  This was
    despite the incident being reported.  In September 2010,  the  body  of
    [AL], who had gone to school with the Appellant, was found in the local
    river.  The Appellant's family were connected  with  the  murder.   The
    village elders expelled his family from  the  village.   The  situation
    escalated.  This is the background to the Appellant's claim of fear  of
    ill-treatment and persecution if he were to be returned home.

 4. The judge rejected the claim that the Appellant  was  at  risk  from  a
    blood feud.  He held that the  Appellant's  family  did  not  take  the
    matter to court.  When the initial claim to be a victim of a blood feud
    was refused the Appellant did not appeal that decision.  Second,  there
    was no reasonable likelihood that the Appellant  would  face  reprisals
    from the [L] family on return.  Third, the  Appellant  had  been  given
    ample opportunity to provide evidence that  treatment  for  haemophilia
    and vitamin K deficiency was available  in  Albania.   The  Appellant's
    condition had been adequately treated over many years  in  Albania  and
    there was no reason to think that this should not  continue  on  return
    (see paragraph 36).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by
    refusing to grant an adjournment, which had been  applied  for  at  the
    hearing, and by failing to make adequate findings on the credibility of
    the Appellant's claim to be a party  to  a  blood  feud,  and  also  by
    failing to have regard to the  evidence  relevant  to  Article  3  with
    respect to his health.

 7. On 30th August 2017, the First-tier Tribunal held  that  there  was  no
    error of law on the part of the judge.

 8. When the application was renewed, the Upper  Tribunal  on  4th  October
    2017 held that there were arguable grounds in the application  for  the
    following reasons.  First, by refusing to adjourn the hearing, in order
    to give the Appellant an opportunity to obtain extra medical  evidence,
    on the availability of treatment in Albania for his medical  condition,
    the judge had arguably interfered with a fair hearing.

 9. This is because from the date of the decision letter on 19th April 2017
    to the date of the hearing on 2nd June 2017, there was only a period of
    about five weeks, whereas the Appellant's  representatives  required  a
    period of eight weeks in order to get a medical Report.  The  Appellant
    arguably did not have a fair opportunity to prepare for the hearing.

10. Second, the country guidance case of  EH  [2012]  UKUT  00348  was  not
    applied in relation to the threshold for medical  treatment  cases  and
    the judge failed in this  regard  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
    findings.

11. Third, the judge arguably overlooked the relevant medical  evidence  in
    rejecting the Appellant's human  rights  claim  based  on  his  medical
    condition.

12. On 31st October 2017 a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Respondent.



Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 11th December 2017, Ms Akinbolu,  appearing
    on behalf of the Appellant, relied upon her skeleton argument (of three
    pages).  She submitted that the determination of  the  judge  was  very
    brief.  The actual findings were only  at  the  end  at  paragraph  31.
    There had been an adjournment  request  so  that  the  Appellant  could
    procure a comprehensive medical report.  This was wrongly rejected.

14. A report by Dr Mary Mathias had already indicated  that  treatment  for
    haemophilia was deficient in Albania (see page 65 of the  bundle),  and
    the medical practitioner concerned had in terms stated as follows:   "I
    first met [K] in 2012 after he entered the UK."  He goes  onto  reflect
    on how the  "care  for  his  severe  bleeding  disorder  in  his  early
    childhood was very limited and consequently by the time I  met  him  he
    had significantly damaged joints ...".  The diagnosis goes  on  to  say
    that, "he has significant lifelong damage in both his knees and  ankles
    and is highly likely to develop some degree  of  anthropy  ...".   This
    report is dated 23rd May 2017.

15. Ms Akinbolu submitted that it was  a  entirely  sufficient  basis  upon
    which the judge ought to have granted an adjournment to enable  a  more
    comprehensive report to be provided in relation to the availability  of
    treatment, which was already found to be deficient in Albania, were  he
    to be returned back to that country.

16. Ms Akinbolu also drew attention to  a  more  up-to-date  letter  (which
    could of course not in itself point to an error of law on behalf of the
    judge as it  was  not  before  the  judge)  dated  4th  December  2017.
    However, she wished to make the  point  that  the  situation  that  the
    Appellant was in had not ameliorated by  any  stretch  of  imagination.
    She drew my attention to the first paragraph which reads,  "whilst  [K]
    has received ad hoc treatment then in his earlier childhood,  this  was
    inadequate  to  prevent  long-term  significant  joint  damage  and  in
    addition expose him to a blood borne  virus  because  of  the  lack  of
    safety of the Albanian blood supply".

17. Second, Ms Akinbolu submitted that it was  entirely  unclear  from  the
    judge's determination (see paragraphs 34 and 35) whether  he  had  even
    accepted the existence of a blood feud in the way that it had been  put
    forward as a risk factor.  The determination was by no means  clear  on
    this critical issue.  It was the basis of the Appellant's asylum  claim
    after all.

18. Third, in relation in relation to Article 3 of the  ECHR,  Ms  Akinbolu
    submitted that this was the only issue that  the  judge  did  expressly
    deal with (at paragraph 36) when concluding  that,  "I  find  that  his
    condition has been adequately treated for many  years  in  Albania  and
    there is no reason to think that this would not  continue  on  return".
    Even so, however,  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  leading
    decisions such as Paposhvili [2016] ECHR 1113.

19. For his part, Mr Nath submitted that there was no error of  law.   This
    was because of the following reasons.  First, the judge  (at  paragraph
    27) was quite clear that no case had been made out for  an  adjournment
    "to obtain expert evidence about the availability of  medical  services
    in Albania" because "there had been more  than  ample  time  to  obtain
    medical evidence".  Second, insofar as new  medical  evidence  was  now
    produced in the form of a letter from Haemophilia Centre and Thrombosis
    Unit, at the Royal Free Hospital, dated 4th December 2014, this was new
    evidence and was not before Judge Oliver, and could not go to show that
    he had erred in coming to a conclusion if the evidence was  not  before
    him, which the Appellant now wished to put in issue.  Third, as far  as
    the blood feud was concerned, the judge dealt with this adequately  (at
    paragraphs 34 to 36), and took special care to look at  the  individual
    circumstances of the Appellant (at paragraph 34).  The judge came to  a
    firm view in relation to the failure of the  Appellant  to  demonstrate
    that he had been a victim of a blood feud.   Finally,  proper  reliance
    was placed upon the case of Agyarko [2017] UKSC which showed  that  the
    threshold for exceptional circumstances was very high and such that the
    Appellant could not possibly have met it.  For all these reasons, there
    was no error of law.

20. In reply, Ms Akinbolu stated that even if one looked at the Home Office
    bundle itself, it was plain that there was evidence even  in  the  Home
    Office's own documentation that indicated a need for an adjournment  to
    enable the Appellant to procure a medical report.

21. Thus, at F1 of the Home Office bundle there was a letter from Islington
    Social Services, dated 18th May 2015 which was quite clear that,

         "[K] has severe haemophilia and is under the care of  Great  Ormond
         Street (being transferred to Royal  Free  as  a  adolescent  as  we
         speak).  He has to inject himself with factor eight every two  days
         and relies on the  health  service  to  provide  this.   Whilst  in
         Albania he has not been provided with the treatment he requires and
         as a result had uncontrolled bleeds into his joints ...".

22. It even goes on to say that, "this inability for him to get  the  right
    treatment in Albania is life threatening".  Similarly, there is another
    letter from the Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children at F18 of the
    Home Office bundle, and this is dated 4th June 2015, which states that,
    "[K] is from Albania where haemophilia care is virtually non-existent".
     It goes on to say that "unfortunately  due  to  the  plasma  .........
    treatment that [K] received in Albania he was infected with hepatitis C
    and is currently also seeing the hepatitis  C  service  here  at  Great
    Ormond Street Hospital  ...".   All  of  this  submitted  Ms  Akinbolu,
    indicated that treatment for the Appellant was entirely  inadequate  in
    Albania.

23. Second, the European Court judgment in Paposhvili makes it  clear  that
    the appropriate question to be asked was whether the Appellant faces,

         "A real risk, on account of the absence of appropriate treatment in
         the receiving country or the lack of access to such  treatment,  of
         being exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline  in  his
         or her state of health resulting  in  intense  suffering  or  to  a
         significant reduction in life expectancy".

24. This was not a question, submitted Ms  Akinbolu,  that  the  judge  had
    asked himself, still less to have answered it in an accurate manner.

25. Third, as far as the blood feud is concerned, the  case  of  EH  [2012]
    UKUT  00348  recognises  that  blood  feuds  in  Albania  are  few  and
    declining.   However,  in  certain  areas,  particularly  in   northern
    Albania, the risk remains and internal relocation  is  not  necessarily
    available.   Indeed,  the  decision  goes  on  to  recognise  that   in
    determining whether an  active  blood  feud  exists,  the  fact-finding
    Tribunal should consider  a  number  of  factors.   These  include  the
    history of the alleged feud, the length of time since the  last  death,
    the ability of members of the aggressor clan to locate  the  Appellant,
    and the past or likely future attitude of the police.

26. In the instant case, however, the judge had not even  referred  to  the
    case of EH [2012] UKUT 00348,  and  had  not  taken  into  account  the
    factors that needed to be considered.   The  judge  had  simply  stated
    that, "I find no reasonable likelihood that he will face reprisals from
    the [L] family on return".

27. From this it was not clear what the judge had accepted or what  he  had
    rejected.  It was not clear whether the judge  accepted  that  a  blood
    feud in fact existed.  It was not clear whether, if this was the  case,
    the Appellant would be exempt from such a blood feud.  It was also  not
    clear whether the judge actually challenged the existence of the  blood
    feud at all.

Error of Law

28. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, in relation to the Appellant's  medical  condition  it
    was not the case that "there had been more than ample  time  to  obtain
    medical evidence" (see paragraph 27).

29. On a matter as serious as this, there were barely five weeks, in  which
    it was doubtful whether the Appellant even  would  have  been  able  to
    procure an appointment with a medical expert.

30. Second, and allowing the witness, insofar as the medical  evidence  was
    considered, the judge's determination  was  unsustainable.   The  judge
    concluded that, "I find that his condition has been adequately  treated
    for many years in Albania and there is no reason  to  think  that  this
    would not continue on  return"  (paragraph  36).   In  point  of  fact,
    precisely the opposite is the case as there was evidence, even  in  the
    Home Office bundle, both from Islington Children's Services on 18th May
    2015 and from Great Ormond Street Hospital  on  4th  June  2015.   Both
    sources  highlighted  the  woefully  inadequate  treatment   that   the
    Appellant had received.  So much so that the latter even made it  clear
    that the Appellant had infected the hepatitis C and was also now having
    to see a hepatitis C specialist.

31. Third, in relation to the blood feud the strictures of EH  [2012]  UKUT
    00348 have not been applied and it  is  not  clear  whether  the  judge
    accepts a blood feud, or rejects it, or found it to  be  in  existence,
    but thought that the Appellant would be exempt from it.  For all  these
    reasons, the decision was sufficiently in error for Practice  Statement
    7.2 to be applied in that the effect of the error has to be to  deprive
    a party before the First-tier Tribunal of  a  fair  hearing  or  of  an
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal (see Practice Statement 7.2(a)).

Notice of Decision

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I remake the decision as follows.
     This appeal  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined by a judge other than Judge Oliver under Practice  Statement
    7.2(a).  The Appellant  should  have  been  granted  adequate  time  to
    procure a comprehensive medical report.  I direct that this  appeal  be
    not listed before the First-tier Tribunal until ten  weeks  after  this
    determination.  The findings below are not  preserved  and  the  matter
    will be determined de novo.

33. This appeal is allowed.

34. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 8th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss
