
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04744/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11th September 2018          |On 9th November 2018            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON



                                   Between

                                    M A R

                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors.

For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal a determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judges Nightingale and S H  Smith,  which  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on refugee, humanitarian protection and human rights
    grounds (Article 3) but allowed it on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   The
    Secretary of State had, on 21st March  2018,  refused  the  appellant's
    asylum and human rights claim.

 2. The appellant, a national of Liberia born on 5th June 1980, claimed  to
    have arrived in the United Kingdom in September  2006  and  his  asylum
    claim was refused in 2006. His appeal was dismissed in October 2006 and
    he became an appeal rights exhausted on 25th October 2006. He submitted
    a series of further representations but finally on 20  September  2010,
    he  lodged  further  submissions  which  were  the   subject   of   the
    respondent's refusal on 21st March 2018. Within further submissions, he
    included medical  evidence  from  Miss  Maria  McMillan,  a  Specialist
    Psychotherapist with the Tavistock and Portman NHS.

 3. Whilst in Liberia, in 2004, the appellant claimed he was attacked by  a
    group of men in uniform who searched the vehicle he was travelling  in,
    robbed him and beat him.   In December 2005 the appellant's kiosk  shop
    was burnt and although he reported it to the police he  ran  away  from
    the area.

 4. The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  in  2006  considered  the  background
    evidence and accepted that the appellant may well have  been  assaulted
    but noted that by the date of the hearing in 2006,  the  situation  had
    improved in Liberia and rebel combatants no longer retained control  of
    the relevant areas. The judge did not accept the shop was destroyed and
    even if it  were  there  was  nothing  to  suggest  the  appellant  was
    personally targeted. The improving conditions in Liberia were noted.

 5. The Tribunal of 2018 identified at [10] that  the  appellant's  present
    claim related to his physical and mental health. The appellant had been
    diagnosed with a major depressive disorder and  complex  post-traumatic
    stress disorder.   He claimed he was considered to be at real  risk  of
    committing suicide in Liberia not  least  because  of  his  significant
    health problems: mental health, chronic abdominal  pain  owing  to  the
    violent assault in Liberia, hepatitis B, glaucoma  and  ptosis  of  the
    eye.   It was submitted that return to Liberia would breach  Article  3
    because he would face a  real  risk  of  suffering  serious  harm.  The
    appellant was using a TENS machine  and  was  prescribed  antipsychotic
    medication  and  monitored  by  the  local  mental  health  trust.  The
    appellant had also presented with suicidal gestures.

 6. The Tribunal set out the respondent's case  at  [11].   The  respondent
    cited Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702. The report of Dr Thomas,  a
    Consultant Clinical Psychologist, dated 20th December  2014,  had  been
    based on an account from the appellant and it was not clear whether she
    had taken into account findings the judge in 2006. The  previous  judge
    had found the attack of 2004 to be  a  criminal  attack  only  and  the
    appellant had not shown he would be unable to access  state  protection
    on return to Liberia. The appellant had not shown that he lacked family
    support in Liberia who could assist with integration.    The respondent
    had taken into account the  availability  of  financial  support  to  a
    returnee through the voluntary returns programme. It was accepted  that
    the appellant was suffering with a major depressive order  and  complex
    PTSD but there were  many  other  ways  he  could  have  developed  the
    condition. He was not at risk from the  authorities  returned  Liberia.
    The appellant had no family in the United Kingdom.  Article 8  was  not
    engaged on the  basis  of  family  life  and  that  there  was  medical
    treatment available in Liberia.  It was not accepted that the appellant
    met the high threshold as set down in N [2005] UKHL 31 (endorsed by the
    ECtHR in 2008) such that his return would breach article 3.

 7. It was accepted that there was limited psychiatric treatment  for  PTSD
    and outpatient treatment for pain management.  The country only had one
    psychiatrist, but the country was enhancing its medical provision.  The
    report of Dr Thomas, in the respondent's view, did not  ameliorate  the
    findings of the judge in 2006, at which time he made no acknowledgement
    in his asylum interview  that  he  had  mental  health  problems.   The
    appellant did not meet the high  threshold  ill-treatment  and  foreign
    cases set out in J and the appellant's case could be distinguished from
    that of Y in that the appellant's  claim  had  been  found  not  to  be
    credible. The appellant had not evidenced  that  he  would  be  without
    family or friends to assist in Liberia.  The  conditions  he  would  to
    return to Liberia would not breach article 3.

 8. At paragraph 20 the Tribunal recorded that  the  previous  hearing  had
    been heard under the detained FastTrack rules 2005 and  the  respondent
    had failed to consider the appellant's  severe  medical  condition  and
    that he was a vulnerable  individual.  The  medical  professionals  had
    confirmed that the appellant presented as  a  severe  suicide  risk  if
    returned to Liberia.

 9. At paragraph 27 the judges recorded this

      'we asked Miss Fitzsimons if it  was  correct,  with  a  view  to  her
      substantive skeleton argument, that the appellant now relied on mental
      health as a particular social group in his asylum claim  and,  in  the
      alternative, articles 3 and 8 on mental health and  suicide  (physical
      and moral integrity) grounds in addition to paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi).
      Miss Fitzsimons agreed that this was now, in essence, the  appellant's
      case'.



Application for Permission to Appeal

10. The application for permission advanced the following grounds

    (i) there was a failure to allow the  appeal  grounds  of  humanitarian
    protection on the basis of the findings made under paragraph 276ADE.

    The panel accepted the appellant  was  a  victim  of  violent  assault,
    Liberia was a very poor  country  [74],  he  had  significant  physical
    health problems, mental health  problems  and  a  voluntary  assistance
    grant would be temporary [79].  Cumulatively, the  appellant  would  be
    returned to the country with no support network no prospects  of  being
    able to access care or support and was  be  likely  to  be  unwell  and
    destitute. That was the equivalent of article 3 conditions and amounted
    to serious harm for the purposes of the qualification directive.

    (ii)   suicide risk - there was a  rejection  of  the  expert  evidence
    without adequate reasons and a failure  to  have  account  to  relevant
    considerations.

    The panel accepted the appellant  had  a  genuine  subjective  fear  on
    return to Liberia and that he suffered from  serious  a  mental  health
    condition.  At [63] and [64 and [74] the panel concluded  that  removal
    would not breach article 3 on suicide grounds because the evidence  did
    not show a causal nexus between  suicidality  and  removal.   That  was
    contrary to the evidence of Dr Thomas in her 2017 report who found  the
    appellant would be 'considerably re-traumatised owing to the return  to
    his traumatic experiences and the fact of his psychiatric condition was
    that he strongly believed in his actual future risk of  harm  and  this
    would have a significant impact  on  his  already  fragile  psychiatric
    condition.  It was noted that he was already currently suicidal in  the
    absence of  removal  directions  and  had  reported  ideation  suicidal
    impulses and enactment.  Dr Thomas in her report of 14th  October  2017
    stated that

      'his suicidal risk in the event of  removal  directions  being  issued
      will be even more  augmented.  Mr  R  does  not  have  any  protective
      familial, professional or social relationships in Liberia  that  could
      act as psychologically protective factor for him against  such  risk'.
      AB B95/96.

    Dr Thomas' clear clinical opinion was that the fear was genuinely  held
    that the  appellant  was  already  suicidal,  and  that  removal  would
    increase the risk of suicide.

    The panel in not accepting the  evidence  established  a  causal  nexus
    between thoughts and the actions of the Secretary of  State  failed  to
    give cogent reasons for departing  from  the  clinical  opinion  of  Dr
    Thomas who had assessed the appellant twice in 2014 and  in  2017.  The
    panel accepted her clinical expertise.  The fact his mental health  had
    deteriorated over time did not prevent him from establishing  a  causal
    nexus  between  removal  and  increased  risk  of  suicide.   This  was
    supported by his medical records from  his  GP  which  highlighted  the
    increase stress the appellant  was  under  owing  to  his  removal  and
    confirmed his mental health condition. The appellant's GP noted

      "his mental state is still fragile, and he is at risk of regression to
      overtly psychotic symptoms and suicidal ideation and behaviours"

    The evidence of Dr Thomas should also be seen in the context of the 9th
    May 2018 report of Maria Macmillan, psychotherapist  at  the  Tavistock
    and Portman NHS trust.  She stated

      "Mr R remains in dire need continued support in respect of his complex
      health conditions which span physical and psychological pathology stop
      in respect of his health conditions his illnesses are chronic  and  as
      such are being managed rather than treated. His capacity to  undertake
      travel for extended periods is seriously compromised  due  to  complex
      psychological and physical conditions...

       The consensus was that he was too disturbed to use the more intensive
      and orthodox  therapeutic  methods  used  at  the  Institute.  He  was
      assessed as suffering with extreme symptoms of PTSD  which  leave  him
      vulnerable to  debilitating  panic  attacks  which  are  triggered  by
      sensory perceptions which lead to flashbacks of brutal attack suffered
      by the militia in Liberia. These states of mind cause  him  to  become
      physically affected and lead to bizarre behaviours which have  led  to
      him being  apprehended  by  police  when  in  a  public  area.   These
      behaviours are manifestations of psychotic phenomena which are treated
      with   antipsychotic    medication    (Quetiapine)    and    monitored
      intermittently by the local CMHT"
    It was submitted the evidence was  sufficient  to  establish  a  causal
    nexus between the act of removal and an increased suicide. It was not a
    matter of requiring clear proof of  their  claim  that  they  would  be
    exposed to proscribed treatment (Paposhvili).

    (iii)   there  was  a  contingent  failure  to  allow  the  appeal   on
    humanitarian protection grounds regarding suicide risk in line with  MP
    (Sri Lanka) C - 353/16 where  the  CJEU  recognised  that  humanitarian
    protection is available to torture survivors whose removal would breach
    article 3 owing to its effect on my health. The appellant was a  victim
    of torture, the assault place during the civil war, the expert evidence
    of Dr Ahmad also accepted by the tribunal showed Liberian states unable
    to provide for rehabilitation of persons affected by the civil war.

The Hearing


11. At the hearing, Ms  Fitzsimons  relied  on  her  written  grounds.  She
    emphasised the nature and contents of the medical reports.   There  was
    insufficient reasoning for  rejecting  the  medical  opinion  that  the
    appellant was suicidal and would be on removal. The 'Y and Z' test  was
    satisfied.  There was simply a quibble with one part of the report that
    was the nexus. The extracts from the GP reports  supported  the  expert
    evidence and it was the context for construing Dr Thomas' report rather
    than standing as evidence in its own right.  The  judges  ignored  this
    evidence.   At paragraphs 63 and 64 the nexus was established.

12. Mr Avery submitted that  the  humanitarian  protection  and  article  3
    grounds were not met.  The analysis of  article  3  was  comprehensive.
    The judges were entitled to take into account the medical expert report
    and there was no real attempt at self-harm.  The expert was  equivocal.
    The fact that the appellant was more agitated did  not  take  the  case
    further.

Conclusions


13. The Tribunal did not accept that the appellant's mental  health  placed
    him in a particular  social  group  leading  to  engagement  under  the
    refugee  Convention.  That  conclusion  was  not  challenged   in   the
    application for permission to appeal.  I  have  carefully  studied  the
    skeleton argument which was adopted, and recorded as being  adopted  by
    the tribunal at paragraph 32. The indication at  paragraph  27  of  the
    decision was that the appeal was being approached on article  3  mental
    health grounds only. The decision records

      'We asked Ms Fitzsimons  if  it  was  correct,  with  a  view  to  her
      substantive skeleton argument, that  the  appellant  now  relied  upon
      mental health as a particular social group in his asylum claim and, in
      the alternative,  Article  3  and  8  on  mental  health  and  suicide
      (physical and moral integrity) grounds in addition  to  paragraph  276
      ADE (1) (vi).  Ms Fitzsimons agreed that this was now, in essence, the
      appellant's case'.

14. It was the appellant's case that the appellant psychiatric health would
    rapidly  deteriorate  to  a  severe   episode   with   much   increased
    suicidality. There was a dearth of psychiatric care in Liberia and that
    the Ebola crisis and the legacy of the civil  war  had  undermined  the
    healthcare system which was in 'crisis'.   It was also  the  case  that
    article 3 was engaged on the grounds of suicidal propensity  and  owing
    to his fragile mental health.

15. At paragraph 88 of the skeleton argument it was stated

      "in the light the jurisprudence it is submitted that  removal  of  the
      appellant would be contrary to the U.K.'s obligations  in  respect  of
      articles 3 and 8 of ECHR as he would  be  at  high  risk  of  suicide,
      unable to access resources and removal would clearly  be  contrary  to
      the appellant's physical and moral integrity'.

    As set out at paragraph 72 of  the  skeleton  argument  'an  additional
    significant risk factor is the appellant's precarious social status  on
    return'.  Although this argument was presented as a part  of  advancing
    the appellant's qualification as part of  a  particular  social  group,
    this claim was specifically made.    Indeed,  at  paragraph  34  of  Ms
    Fitzsimons' submissions the tribunal recorded

      "in the alternative, if we did not find that individuals  with  mental
      health conditions were a  particular  social  group  in  Liberia,  she
      submitted that he was still at risk of serious harm  and  humanitarian
      protection applied in the alternative".

16. Paragraph 35 of the First-tier Tribunal decision recorded

      "the appellant was at risk on article 3 and 8 grounds on the basis  of
      his mental health and the suicidal ideation which went to his physical
      and moral integrity. She [Ms Fitzsimons] referred us to AM  (Zimbabwe)
      and asked us to find that the tests are done in N  had  been  somewhat
      modified from that of  imminent  death  to  rapid  experience  intense
      suffering due to non-availability of medical treatment.

      The appellant's psychological deterioration is likely to  be  a  rapid
      one on return and he had already shown a marked deterioration  in  the
      UK.  His GP records were consistent with that. He had been in  the  UK
      for 12 years and had  been  cared  for  here.  He  had  no  family  or
      financial resources in Liberia. It's clear that  the  availability  of
      psychiatric services in Liberia was limited and it was  accepted  they
      were not as easily accessible as in the  UK  and  that  the  appellant
      would have to pay. Dr Ahmed's report  had  looked  in  detail  at  the
      availability of treatment in Liberia. There were only 3  psychiatrists
      in Liberia the present time and only one of these Liberia. There  were
      less than 300 doctors,  in  general,  for  the  entire  population  of
      Liberia'.

17. In sum, it was quite clear that the case was put on the  basis  of  the
    appellant's mental health.  The destitution and lack of family was  the
    framework for considering the grounds in relation  to  article  3  (and
    humanitarian protection).  I do not find the tribunal can be criticised
    for approaching  the  appeal  on  the  basis  on  it  was  specifically
    clarified.

18. In relation to ground (ii), the tribunal directed itself  appropriately
    in law citing the relevant medical cases of D v United  Kingdom  (1997)
    24 EHRR  and N and AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64. The decision  also
    noted at paragraph 55 MM (Zimbabwe) 2012 EWCA Civ 279 that

      'Where an article 3 claim fails on health  grounds  it  is  considered
      that article 8 would be unlikely to see succeed without some  separate
      or additional factual element which brings the case into the article 8
      paradigm to be weighed in the balance  with  other  factors  which  by
      themselves engaged article 8'.

19. However, the findings in relation to article 8 appear to  rest  on  the
    medical grounds without more.  The findings in relation  to  article  8
    stated that

      'we have found him to be a vulnerable and traumatised individual  with
      a very real, if only subjective, fear of returning to Liberia. We  add
      to this that the appellant is without family support in Libera and  we
      also accept it is likely that he  has  no  remining  ties  by  way  of
      friends'... We add also in considering the obstacles, this appellant's
      present physical health. ... we  note  the  lack  of  availability  of
      medical facilities in Liberia in general'. [78] and [79].

      ...

      'we are also mindful of the concerns expressed by  Dr  Thomas  and  Ms
      McMillan relating to this appellants' possible  relapse  and  risk  of
      further psychotic episodes'. [80]

20. In relation to Article 3,  the  tribunal  made  various  findings  from
    paragraph 56 onwards

21. The appellant was attacked and seriously assaulted in 2004 by armed men
    in uniform. Part of that attack  involved  stabbing  to  his  abdominal
    region and the appellant awoke to find himself in hospital  [56].  That
    finding was not challenged.

22. The previous judge had  not  found  the  kiosk  shop  was  burned,  the
    appellant's evidence as to the perpetrators was  vague,  but  even  so,
    there was no convention  reason  disclosed  [57].   The  appellant  was
    accepted as a vulnerable witness and that his mental  health  may  have
    been present when he arrived in the United Kingdom  and  underwent  his
    first appeal [58].  The  Tribunal  specifically  noted  that  it  could
    depart from the previous findings but there was no additional  evidence
    relating to the events in  Liberia.   There  was  no  finding  that  he
    appellant was attacked by the authorities.  It was  accepted  that  his
    attack was potentially capable of giving rise to a subjective  fear  on
    return and,  indeed,  to  have  led  to  his  long-term  mental  health
    problems. [59]

23. The Tribunal found the criticism by the respondent of Dr Thomas' report
    which  diagnosed  a  depressive  disorder  and  complex  post-traumatic
    disorder, was not well founded. The diagnosis was supported by  further
    medical evidence over time,  and,  the  appellant  had  been  receiving
    treatment for a number of years. Dr Thomas had  reviewed  the  previous
    decision the tribunal and set out her clinical observation.  There  was
    nothing in the report which  lacked  objectivity  was  not  a  reliable
    insight into the appellant's mental health condition. Dr Thomas  was  a
    consultant clinical psychologist with over 15 years post  qualification
    experience and had been employed  at  the  Tavistock  and  Portman  NHS
    foundation trust [60].

24. The report from the Tavistock and Portman NHS foundation trust dated  9
    May 2018 described the appellant as suffering from complex PTSD and the



      "consensus  of  the  several  referring  physicians   was   that   the
      appellant's presentation was too disturbed to use more  intensive  and
      orthodox therapeutic  methods.  He  was  assessed  as  suffering  with
      extreme symptoms of PTSD which left  him  vulnerable  to  debilitating
      panic attacks which were triggered by sensory perceptions  leading  to
      flashbacks of the brutal attack suffered at the hands of  the  militia
      in Liberia.  This  had  caused  the  appellant  to  become  physically
      affected and led to  bizarre  behaviours  which  had  led  him  to  be
      apprehended  by  the  police  in  public  areas.  His  behaviour   was
      considered to be a manifestation of psychotic phenomena which has been
      treated with antipsychotic medication monitored intermittently by  the
      local community mental health trust'.

      ...

      His GP regards his mental health is still fragile  and  considers  the
      appellant to be at risk of a regression to the psychotic symptoms  and
      suicidal ideation and behaviours. We find,  on  the  totality  of  the
      evidence relating  to  the  appellant's  mental  health,  that  he  is
      suffering from a severe depressive illness and complex PTSD which,  on
      the evidence of Dr Thomas, appears to have worsened in the intervening
      years between 2014 when she first saw him and her most  recent  report
      dated 14th of October 2017'. [61]

25. The tribunal also accepted that the appellant suffered from a number of
    chronic health conditions which were managed rather  than  treated  for
    example coma, chronic hepatitis B and advanced liver disease suggestive
    of cirrhosis. He has centralised abdominal pain. [62]

26. The decision recorded at [63] that the  appellant's  attempts  to  hang
    himself was 'now some years ago'.  The tribunal opined

      "whilst Dr Thomas notes that the  appellant  fears  letters  from  the
      respondent, and weeps on seeing them, this does not form part  of  the
      causal link to the appellant's reported suicidal ideation which  does,
      from paragraph 44 to 48, appear to arise more from his frustration  at
      his considerable ongoing health  problems.  Dr  Thomas  does,  however
      express her concerns, at paragraph 72, that  she  considers  it  "very
      possible", given the high levels of fear the appellant presents in the
      context of psychiatric illness, that he could make a  suicide  attempt
      either prior to boarding or whilst on the plane. She does not consider
      him fit to fly also on the basis of  his  physical  difficulties.  She
      expressed the view that whether the actual  future  risk  of  harm  in
      Liberia held by the  appellant  is  correct  or  not,  he  appears  to
      strongly believe it to be true. She regards the appellant  is  already
      recurrently  suicidal  in  the  absence  of  removal  directions   and
      considers that this risk would be augmented in the  event  of  removal
      directions being issued.  She also  considers  return  to  Liberia  to
      carry a risk of re-traumatisation and fears that he would  become  too
      psychiatrically unwell due to his fear to  reintegrate  into  Liberian
      society. She also regards him  as  physically  and  mentally  able  to
      work'' [63].

27.  The  tribunal  did  not  reject  the  professional  qualifications  or
    assessment by Dr Thomas and Dr  Thomas  wrote  the  medical  report  in
    accordance with JL  (medical  reports-credibility)  China  [2013]  UKUT
    00145.  The respondent did not challenge that the appellant experienced
    a serious mental health condition.  Further the tribunal found that the
    appellant had no family in Liberia to whom he could turn.

28. In the assessment of the suicide risk, the  tribunal,  however,  failed
    give adequate reasoning for countering the clear  professional  opinion
    of the Consultant Psychologist, Dr Thomas  and  the  GP  evidence  with
    regards the appellant's suicide  risk  and  the  causal  nexus  between
    removal and suicide.  It was accepted he  had  indeed  a  very  serious
    mental health  disorder  documented  over  many  years,  was  on  anti-
    psychotic medication, there was  a  dearth  of  medical  facilities  in
    Liberia and he had previously made a suicide attempt by trying to  hand
    himself.  The evidence was supported by the context of  the  report  of
    the psychologist, Ms MacMillan, and the GP notes.  It is also the  case
    that Dr Thomas had seen the appellant over time both in 2014  and  2017
    and had written comprehensive reports.  There was  no  indication  that
    she had failed to comply with the Practice Direction on Expert  reports
    cited in JL (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145.

29. With reference to  the  article  8  findings  the  tribunal  found  the
    appellant

      'to be a vulnerable and traumatised individual with a  very  real,  if
      only subjective, fear of returning to Liberia'

30. It was accepted that the appellant had been attacked, albeit it was not
    accepted that this was anything other than a random attack, it appeared
    to be accepted that the appellant genuinely believed he was at risk  of
    persecution.   In  the  light  of  this  finding,  it  was  Dr  Thomas'
    professional opinion as recorded in the judgment that

      'the appellant is already  recurrently  suicidal  in  the  absence  of
      removal directions and considers that this risk would be augmented  in
      the event of removal directions being issued.

    This sets out a clear causal nexus between the removal to  Liberia  and
    suicide.   Applying the principles in J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629, the
    focus should be on the foreseeable consequences of the removal  of  the
    applicant; the threshold is high, the  risk  of  breach  in  article  3
    should be objectively well founded  and  further  there  should  be  an
    assessment of whether the receiving state has  effective  mechanism  to
    reduce the risk of suicide.  Y (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  362
    confirmed that a subjective fear  of  renewed  torture  and  abuse  may
    sometimes be just as real and its potential consequences just as grave.
      In this case  unlike  Y,  no  sustainable  fault  was  found  in  the
    psychiatric  material  before  the  Tribunal  and  in  support  of  the
    appellant's case.  Nothing was so controverted in the appellant's  case
    so as to undermine the medical evidence. As Y sets out at paragraph 13.

      'it is the reality and the consequences of  such  subjective  fear  as
      each appellant may nevertheless have'.

    And at paragraph 16

      'one can accordingly add to the fifth principle in  J  v  SSHD  [2005]
      EWCA Civ 629 that what may nevertheless  be  of  equal  importance  is
      whether any genuine fear which the  appellant  may  establish,  albeit
      without an objective foundation, is  such  as  to  create  a  risk  of
      suicide if there is an enforced return'.

31. It should be noted that the standard of proof is 'real  risk'  and  the
    risk must be more than something  'just  fanciful'.   In  view  of  the
    evidence that I have set out I find that the medical  evidence  clearly
    explains the evident nexus between the act of removal and  the  inhuman
    treatment (suicide).  As Dr Thomas found

      'his suicidal risk in the event of  removal  directions  being  issued
      will be even more  augmented.  Mr  R  does  not  have  any  protective
      familial, professional or social relationships in Liberia  that  could
      act as psychologically protective factor for him against  such  risk'.
      AB B95/96.

32. The appellant's appeal should be allowed on Article 3  grounds  because
    of the risk of suicide.

33. With regards the application  on  the  combination  of  general  health
    grounds and destitution grounds, the authority Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department v Abdulkadir Ahmed Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442,  cited
    the importance of D v United Kingdom (1997) 24 EHRR 423 and N v  United
    Kingdom  47  EHRR  885.  These  cases  emphasised  the  need  for  very
    exceptional circumstances in medical cases.

34. In D the applicant 'was critically ill and  appeared  to  be  close  to
    death, could not be guaranteed any  nursing  or  medical  care  in  his
    country of origin and had no family there willing or able to  care  for
    him or provide him even a  basic  level  of  food,  shelter  or  social
    support: para [42]'.

35. As Said set out at [14] and [15] with reference to the case of N:

      ''Its overall conclusions are found in paras 42 to 45 of the judgment.
    In short:
           i) Those subject to expulsion are not entitled to remain to
           continue to benefit from medical, social or other forms of
           assistance provided by the expelling state. The fact that he
           would find himself in reduced circumstances, or with reduced
           life expectancy, does not of itself give rise to breach of
           article 3 ;
           ii) The decision to remove someone suffering from a serious
           physical or mental illness to inferior facilities in the
           receiving country would give rise to a violation of article 3
           only in a very exceptional case, where the humanitarian grounds
           against removal are very compelling;
           iii) The circumstances of D's case provided such exceptional and
           compelling circumstances.
           iv) There may other exceptional cases but the high threshold
           should be maintained because "the alleged future harm would
           emanate not from the intentional acts or omissions of public
           bodies or non-state bodies, but instead from the a naturally
           occurring illness and the lack of sufficient resources to deal
           with it;
           v) The Convention is essentially concerned with civil and
           political rights. There is no obligation to alleviate
           disparities in the availability of treatment across the world
           through the provision of free and unlimited medical treatment;
           vi) These principles apply to the expulsion of any person with a
           serious, naturally occurring physical or mental illness which
           may cause suffering, pain and reduced life expectancy and
           require specialised treatment not available in the receiving
           state.
      15 The significance of point (iv) in the summary is that the paradigm
      case, as Laws LJ described it at para 39 of the GS case , in which
      article 3 prevents removal involves the necessary risk of being
      subject to an intentional act which constitutes torture, or inhuman or
      degrading treatment. Medical cases, and I would add cases where the
      complaint is that someone returned would be destitute on arrival, do
      not fall within that paradigm. Laws LJ reviewed the decisions of the
      Strasbourg Court in the case of MSS, Sufi and Elmi , SHH and Tarakhel
      which, in addition to the medical exception narrowly defined in the D
      and N cases, illuminate the limited circumstances in which it is
      appropriate to depart from that paradigm in article 3 cases.
      ...

       [18] These cases demonstrate that to succeed in resisting removal  on
      article 3 grounds on the basis of suggested poverty or deprivation  on
      return which are not the responsibility of the  receiving  country  or
      others in the sense described in para 282 of Sufi and Elmi  ,  whether
      or  not  the  feared  deprivation  is  contributed  to  by  a  medical
      condition, the person liable to deportation  must  show  circumstances
      which bring him within the approach of the Strasbourg Court in  the  D
      and N cases .

      [31] An appeal to article 3 which suggests that the  person  concerned
      would face impoverished conditions of living  on  removal  to  Somalia
      should, as the Strasbourg Court indicated in Sufi  and  Elmi  at  para
      292, be viewed by reference to the test in the  N  case.  Impoverished
      conditions which were the direct result of violent activities  may  be
      viewed differently as would cases  where  the  risk  suggested  is  of
      direct violence itself''.

36. In respect of Said, the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department v MA (Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ 994 had this to  say  at
    paragraph 64

      'the decision of this  Court  in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department v FY (Somalia) [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1853  could  be  read  as
      departing from Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442 and as accepting that  it  was
      sufficient for art.3 purposes that a person returning to  his  country
      of origin might end up living in an IDP camp. Although the holding  of
      the FTT in that case ([22]), which this Court held had  not  erred  in
      law ([23]), could be read as so holding, Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442  was
      not cited and therefore in my judgment to the extent that there is any
      conflict between the decision of this Court in Said  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
      442 and that in FY Somalia , the decision of this Court in Said should
      be followed'.

37. The Court of Appeal in MI (Palestine) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1782 did not depart from Said but found that
    conditions in Gaza were attributable to the direct and indirect actions
    of the parties to conflict within the meaning  of  [282]  of  Sufi  and
    Elmi.

38. The conditions in Liberia that this appellant faces are limited medical
    treatment, rather than total absence, impoverished living and  lack  of
    family support.  The case was argued on medical grounds and not on  the
    basis  that  the  conditions  were  attributable  to  the   direct   or
    indirection  actions  of  parties  to   conflict.     The   case   was,
    specifically, not argued on that basis and that is important.  Further,
    the applicant is not through his illness on the brink  of  death.   The
    harm he will suffer is not as a result of the commissions or  omissions
    of public bodies  or  non-state  agents  but  from  his  own  naturally
    occurring illness. Further to AM (Zimbabwe), save for  my  findings  in
    relation to suicide, it has not been shown that the appellant is to  be
    exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in  his  state  of
    health resulting in intense suffering or to a significant reduction  in
    life expectancy.

39. I find, therefore, that the appellant cannot  succeed  in  relation  to
    Article 3 save in relation to my findings with regard to suicide.   The
    panel did not err in this regard despite the findings they made.

40. Nor in relation to ground (iii), on the grounds put as they were, am  I
    persuaded that the panel erred in  relation  to  the  assessment  under
    humanitarian protection.

41. In  M'Bodj v Etat Belge case C-542/13 CJEU Grand Chamber, it  was  held
    that the risk of deterioration of health of a  third  country  national
    suffering from a  serious  illness  as  a  result  of  the  absence  of
    appropriate treatment in his country of origin was  not  sufficient  to
    warrant  the  grant  subsidiary  protection  unless  the   person   was
    intentionally deprived of health care.

42. The judgment of MP v SSHD  [2018]  CJEU  C-353-16   (a  decision  on  a
    preliminary point on  referral  from  the  Supreme  Court)  found  that
    Articles 2(e) and 15 (b) of Directive 2004/83 should be interpreted  as
    meaning that for a third country national, who has been tortured by the
    authorities of his country in the past but no longer faces  a  risk  of
    such on return, but whose physical and psychological health  could,  if
    so returned, seriously deteriorate leading to a  serious  risk  of  him
    committing suicide on account of trauma resulting from the  torture  he
    was subjected to, is eligible for humanitarian  protection  (subsidiary
    protection).   That, however is  not  the  case  here.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal judge in the  decision  of  October  2006  accepted  that  the
    appellant was assaulted but he did not know who had assaulted  him  and
    it was concluded that the  attack  on  the  appellant  was  a  criminal
    attack. There was no finding that the was the fall out from  the  civil
    war. The account of his shop being burned down was  rejected  was  also
    considered a criminal attack. There was nothing  to  suggest  this  was
    personal, it was found to be merely  a  random  attack.  The  appellant
    continued to live safely in the border town of Ganta  for  nine  months
    after the fire.

43. I am therefore not persuaded that the judges erred in relation to their
    assessment of humanitarian protection.

44. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision (only to the extent of my findings below) pursuant to  Section
    12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  (TCE  2007)
    and remake the decision under section 12(2) (b) (ii) of the TCE 2007.

45. In the light of the above I find that the decision should be set  aside
    in relation to the finding  on  Article  3  (suicide)  only.   In  that
    respect I set aside the conclusion remake the decision  and  allow  the
    appeal on Article 3 (suicide) grounds.

46. The appeal remains refused on humanitarian protection grounds.

47. The appeal remains allowed on Article 8 grounds.

48. The appeal is allowed on Article 3 grounds.






Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed           Helen Rimington        Date     12th October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



