

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04822/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On 9 January 2019                    |On 21 January 2019                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     OMM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Warren instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                            FINDINGS AND REASONS


     1. By a decision promulgated on 1 November 2018 it was found  a  judge
        the First-Tier Tribunal had erred in law in dismissing the  appeal.
        That decision  was  set  aside.  The  matter  returns  for  further
        consideration today to enable the Upper Tribunal  to  substitute  a
        decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.



Discussion


     2. There has been a dispute regarding the appellant's  nationality  in
        the appeal, whether he is a citizen of  Burundi  or  Tanzania.  The
        First-Tier Tribunal found in a decision promulgated  on  4  January
        2017 the appellant was more likely than not to be a  national  from
        Tanzania and not at risk of persecution  for  reason  of  his  Hutu
        ethnicity or imputed political opinion  within  that  country.  The
        appellant subsequently  claimed  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
        persecution in either Burundi or Tanzania for his membership  of  a
        Particular Social Group (PSG) as  a  gay  man.  The  appellant  has
        maintained he is a national of Burundi. The respondent refused  his
        claim for international protection and on human rights  grounds  on
        28 March 2018.
     3. The issues in the case needs to  be  considered  in  light  of  the
        prevailing country information, evidence file by the appellant  and
        his witness, and the decision of the Supreme Court in HJ  (Iran)  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31.


   Sexual identity


     4. As submitted on the appellant's behalf, he has provided a  detailed
        account of how he came to realise his sexuality. That  account  has
        not been  shown  to  be  affected  by  material  implausibility  or
        inconsistency. It is plausible that  the  appellant  was  secretive
        regarding  his  sexual  identity  as  a  result  of  the   negative
        institutional and societal attitudes to homosexuality in Tanzania.
     5. Considering the country information, it is not arguably implausible
        that the appellant was approached by men on the street for  sex  in
        return for payment in a situation where he was in Tanzania,  living
        on the street, clearly vulnerable, and in which it was more  likely
        than not those who approached him will have assessed that he  would
        agree to sex in return for money rather than reporting them to  the
        authorities.
     6. I accept, as submitted by Ms Warren, that the fact a person is  not
        in a relationship does not mean  their  assertion  regarding  their
        sexual identity is untrue, many people remaining  single  for  long
        periods of time within their lives.
     7. It is also accepted that the  appellant's  account  of  his  sexual
        identity is corroborated by the evidence from the founder and chair
        of the Huddersfield Gay Group, Mr James Martin. The  appellant  has
        been a member of this group since August 2017 and  has  spent  time
        with Mr Martin socially outside group  meetings.  It  was  accepted
        that Mr Martin and the group have observed the appellant  attending
        meetings and interacting with others which  is  said  to  form  the
        basis of their view the appellant is a gay man.
     8. It was accepted by both advocates, on the basis of the evidence  in
        the round at the hearing, that the answer  to  the  first  question
        posed by the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) is that the appellant is  a
        gay man.
     9. The issue becomes the  answer  to  the  second  question  which  is
        whether  the  appellant  has  a  credible  well-founded   fear   of
        persecution on return to either Burundi or Tanzania and if he  acts
        openly or, if he chose to act discreetly on  return,  whether  this
        would this be as a result of his choice to do so or out of fear  of
        suffering persecution if he acted openly.
    10. The appellant relies on a number of country sources in  support  of
        his claim to have a well-founded fear of  persecution  in  Burundi,
        set out in Ms Warren skeleton argument, as follows:

          a. Homosexual sexual activity is outlawed in Burundi in law  from
             2009 (ILGA, pO83).  After  2009  laws  proposed,  over  10,000
             people gathered to show their support for the  criminalisation
             of homosexuality. Testimonies collected by Human Rights  Watch
             highlighted  several  beatings,  evictions,  dismissals   from
             employment. The NGO MUCO  said  'the  preconceived  idea  that
             homosexuality is a  phenomenal  brought  about  by  the  white
             colonisers is still very much alive. Since 2009,  another  NGO
             MOLI as recorded and documented many cases of  discrimination,
             arrests, abuses, threats and corruption, directed at the  LGBT
             community (Contra Nocendi International, p K1).


          b. In September 2014 a Vietnamese telecommunications  worker  was
             arrested  on  charges  of  homosexual  practices  (Erasing  76
             Crimes, September 2014, p.J1)


          c. in 2015 the Burundi delegation at its 2nd  Universal  Periodic
             Review (UPR) responded to recommendations about discrimination
             of same sex relations acknowledging the  Criminal  Code  still
             punished homosexuality. That situation was in  line  with  the
             country's customs and values, and the delegation asked for the
             international  community's   understanding   while   Burundian
             society prepared for a change in mentality. A Shadow Report to
             the Human Rights Committee describes the repressive conditions
             under which LGBT people live in Burundi and in  November  2014
             the committee recommended that Burundi should  remove  any  de
             jure or de facto  obstacles  to  or  any  restriction  on  the
             establishment of associations  by  homosexuals  and  take  all
             necessary steps to provide effective protection  from  threats
             to their physical integrity and  from  discrimination  of  any
             kind. (International Lesbian Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex
             Association (ILGA), May 2017, pp.L1- L2).


          d. On 2 November 2016,  the  High  Court  of  Chibitoke  Province
             convicted of 15-year-old boy who admitted to the rape of a  7-
             year-old boy of  homosexuality  as  well  as  rape  (US  State
             Department Report 2016, p. N21).


          e. In 2017 there were no reports  of  prosecution  the  same  sex
             sexual acts but there were cases of harassment,  intimidation,
             arbitrary arrest and demands for bribes by police officers and
             members of the Imbonerkure  targeting  LGBTI  individuals  (US
             State Department Report 2017, p.160).


          f. In October 2017, Burundi announced an 'official hunt' for LGBT
             people... Burundi was one of 13 to vote against the UN ban  on
             using the death penalty for gay people... Police announced the
             'hunt'  homosexuals  on  6th  October,  informing  the   media
             'several' had been arrested. "The reason is just they are  gay
             and the government says  it  is  against  Burundian  culture,"
             Bakari Ubena, a human rights journalist told Gay Star News. It
             is  believed  the  UN  motion  had  "some  influence  on   the
             crackdown." Both gay  and  trans  people  face  arrests.  "Gay
             people  must  have  a  hidden  life",   Ubena   added.   "LGBT
             associations have been closed by police (Erasing 76 Crimes, p.
             M1).

    11. I find the country evidence  supports  the  appellant's  contention
        that he faces a real risk of serious harm sufficient to  amount  to
        persecution as an openly gay man  in  Burundi.  The  only  way  the
        appellant would be able to have such relationships will be to do so
        discreetly.  The  need  to  act  discreetly  would  be   to   avoid
        persecution and for no other reason. Accordingly the  appellant  is
        entitled to a grant of international protection in relation to  any
        proposal to return him to Burundi.
    12.  In  relation  to  Tanzania,  the  appellant  relies  upon  country
        information detailed in Ms Warren's skeleton argument  establishing
        a well-founded fear of persecution sufficient to warrant a grant of
        international protection. It  is  noted  there  has  been  a  major
        crackdown by the authorities in Tanzania since  mid-2016.  Specific
        information provided in support of the appellant's claim includes:

          a. Homosexuality is outlawed in Tanzania (ILGA, p. O101).


          b. Tanzania has some of the harshest anti-gay laws in  the  world
             (LGBT Voice, 21 June 2014 quoted in RFRL para 61).


          c. Alongside official  authorities,  several  community  policing
             organisations and vigilante  groups  such  as  "polisi  jamil"
             (community police in Kiswahili) operate in Tanzania  and  have
             committed human rights violations, according to  Human  Rights
             Watch. Gay men have been beaten by police officers but reports
             to the police have not been followed up; in one  interviewee's
             case, the police extorted a Tsh 500 bribe to release him  from
             custody (Rights in Exile, pp R11-R12).


          d.  In  September  2009,  39  gay  and  lesbian  activists   were
             arbitrarily arrested and detained for 2 weeks in Dar es Salaam
             (Rights in Exile, p. R11).


          e. LGBTI people and sex workers  say  they  cannot  form  legally
             recognised membership groups and register with the government.
             In 2011, police arrested and beat one gay man in Dar es Salaam
             simply because he tried to organise a workshop for  other  men
             who have sex with men. (Human  Rights  Watch,  quoted  in  the
             International Business Times, 16 January 2014, quoted in  RFRL
             para 61).


          f. In 2011, during the Gender Festival,  participants  who  self-
             identified as LGBTI noted during interviews  with  Human  caps
             right Watch [that they were] chased by  media  and  forced  to
             evacuate the  premises,  to  be  then  violently  attacked  by
             members of the public who reportedly  'wanted  to  kill  gays'
             (Rights in Exile, p.I2).


          g. In July 2012 LGBTI activist Morris Njombul was murdered in Dar
             es Salaam (Rights in Exile, p. R12).


          h. According to a detailed 2013 report by Human Rights Watch, men
             in Dar es  Salaam  have  been  repeatedly  beaten  with  belts
             stripped naked (Rights in Exile, p. R11). The same report said
             arrests of LGBTI  person  rarely  led  to  prosecutions.  They
             usually were a pretext for the police  to  collect  bribes  or
             coerce sex from vulnerable individuals  (US  State  Department
             Report 2017, p. 190).


          i. The law does  not  prohibit  discrimination  based  on  sexual
             orientation and gender identity. LGBTI persons were target  of
             the government sanctioning 'sungusungu' citizen patrols. There
             were  often  afraid  to  report  violence  and  other  crimes,
             including those committed by  state  agents  due  to  fear  of
             arrest.  LGBTI  persons  faced  societal  discrimination  that
             restricted their access to healthcare coming including  access
             to information about HIV, housing and employment.  There  were
             no known government efforts to combat such discrimination  (US
             State Department Report 2015, quoted in RFRL para 61).


          j. During 2016, government officials publicly  stated  opposition
             to improved safeguards for the rights of LGBTI persons,  which
             are characterised as contrary to the law of the land  and  the
             cultural norms of society. Senior governmental officials  made
             several anti-LGBTI  statements.  In  August  the  Minister  of
             Constitutional affairs and justice  stated  the  ministry  was
             investigating NGO's believed to support homosexuality and same-
             sex marriage and threatened drastic legal action against them,
             saying that the  "dirt  nonsense"  of  the  Westerners  should
             remain with them (US State Department Report 2016, p. Q13).


          k.  In  mid-2016  the  government  initiated   an   unprecedented
             crackdown on the rights of LGBT people and their advocates. In
             December  2016,  Dar  es  Salaam  raided  a  workshop  on  HIV
             prevention among  key  populations,  and  briefly  detained  8
             participants.  In  Zanzibar,  please  detained  nine  men  for
             several days on suspicion of homosexual conduct and  subjected
             them to forced anal examinations, a form of torture. In March,
             police arrested a man, 19 suspected of homosexuality based  on
             his Instagram posts and subjected him to an anal exam. Several
             activists were arrested for holding meetings (Human caps right
             Watch, p.204).


          l. In July 2016 the government banned the  import  and  sales  of
             sexual lubricants, which Health  Minister  Ummy  Mwalimu  said
             encouraged homosexuality which led to the spread  of  HIV  and
             AIDS (The Herald, p. R1, see also the Daily Beast, p. 201).


          m. In  October  2016,  the  Minister  of  Health  announced  that
             Tanzania will ban HIV/AIDS  outreach  projects  aimed  at  gay
             men... About 30% of gay men in Tanzania are  HIV  -  positive,
             now health workers say  that  figure  could  rise.  Tanzania's
             actions appear to mark the first time  that  the  country  has
             suspended parts of the United States hugely successful foreign
             HIV/AIDS initiative in an attempt to crack  down  on  the  gay
             community... The ban comes after months of bitter speeches and
             threats from Tanzania officials aimed at the gay community and
             that organisations treating its HIV/AIDS patients. This  year,
             police raided two US-funded HIV/Aids organisations and  seized
             confidential patient information and supplies, officials said.
             In  September,  the  deputy   minister   of   health,   Hamiel
             Kigwangalla, accused HIV treatment organisations of "promoting
             homosexuality".  "Any attempt to commit unnatural offences  is
             illegal and severely punished by law" Kigwangalla  said...  In
             an August speech, Paul Makonda, the regional  Commissioner  of
             Dar es Salaam, the capital, threatened to  arrest  people  who
             were linked to gay men on social networking sites... "In  this
             environment, it's not safe to be a known gay man in the  open"
             [a gay man  in  Dar  es  Salaam]  said  (Washington  Post,  23
             November 2016, pp. R15-R17, re Makonda's threat  see  also  p.
             R2).


          n. Tanzania on 18 February 2017 announced plans to publish a list
             of gay people allegedly selling sex online - just  days  after
             shutting  dozens  of  AIDS  clinics   accused   of   promoting
             homosexuality... The country's deputy health  minister  Hamiel
             Kigwangalla said on Twitter... 'Those who think this  campaign
             is a joke are wrong. The government has long arms and it  will
             arrest all those involved quietly.  Once  arrested  they  will
             help us find others' (The Herald, p. R1)


          o. 28 June 2017, the Tanzanian President John Magufuli said  that
             'cows' disapprove of gay sex in a speech criticising those who
             campaigned for LGBT equality. Days  after  Magufuli's  speech,
             Interior  Minister  Mwigula  Nchemba  threatened   to   arrest
             Tanzania LGBT campaigners, the register LGBT organisations  in
             the country and deport foreign LGBT advocates... Those who are
             interested in homosexuality should go and  live  in  countries
             that entertain such business" ... According to  Neela  Ghoshal
             gay men had been arrested on  charges  laid  against  them  in
             recent months, although the outcome of  their  cases  was  not
             known (The Daily Beast, p. 190-192).

    13. Ms Warren further  submitted  that  persecution  in  detention  for
        having same-sex relationships is persecution by itself, in addition
        to any matters that arise as a result of harsh prison conditions in
        Tanzania.
    14. The country information does not establish that  a  sufficiency  of
        protection or internal relocation option is  applicable  in  either
        country as the State is an actor of persecution and it was not made
        out it is reasonable or possible for the appellant to find  a  safe
        place to which he could relocate in either country; as the  matters
        set out in the country material are said to  affect  all  parts  of
        both Burundi and Tanzania.
    15. I find the appellant faces a real risk as a gay man  on  return  to
        Tanzania  too.  The  only  way  he  could  continue  any   same-sex
        relationship would be if he undertook the same discreetly. The only
        reason he would have to act discreetly is to avoid persecution.  He
        is, according, entitled to a grant of international protection.
    16. I find that in both cases  if  the  appellant  was  identified  and
        arrested by the authorities as a result of his  sexual  orientation
        the  treatment  he  would  receive  is  sufficient  to  amount   to
        persecution, and at the very least a breach of article 3 ECHR.
    17. I accept  the  submission  made  by  Ms  Warren  that  the  country
        information  also  supports  a  findings  that   very   significant
        obstacles exist to the appellant re-establishing life within either
        Burundi or Tanzania, pursuant to paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi) of  the
        Immigration Rules.
    18. Having considered the evidence with the required degree of  anxious
        scrutiny I find the appellant has establish  an  entitlement  to  a
        grant of international protection within  the  United  Kingdom  and
        allow this appeal accordingly.



Decision

    19. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    20. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 10 January 2019












