
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04121/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd February 2019                        |On 21st May 2019              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                    A.R.M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Ms. L Mair, Counsel instructed by Greater
                  Manchester    Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr. Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").  As
    this a protection claim, it is appropriate that a  direction  is  made.
    Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies amongst others to all parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 2. The appellant is a national of Iran who appealed to the FtT  against  a
    decision of the respondent dated 13th March 2018 refusing his claim for
    asylum and humanitarian protection.  His appeal was dismissed  for  the
    reasons set out in the decision of FtT Judge Alis promulgated  on  20th
    November 2018.


 3. It appears that the appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  July
    2017, aged 16.  The respondent accepts that the appellant is a  citizen
    of Iran and that he is of Kurdish ethnicity.


The decision of the FtT Judge


 4. The account of events relied upon by the appellant leading to the claim
    for international  protection  are  summarised  by  the  FtT  Judge  at
    paragraphs [19] to [23] of the  decision.   The  Judge's  findings  and
    conclusions are set out at paragraphs [31] to [62] of the decision.  It
    is not necessary for me to refer to the particular findings made by the
    FtT Judge in this decision.  It is sufficient to  say  that  the  Judge
    rejected the claim made by the appellant.  The Judge  noted,  at  [35],
    that the appellant has never personally experienced any  problems  with
    the authorities, and that his fear arises from what his mother  may  or
    may not have told him. The Judge found there  to  be  an  inconsistency
    between what the appellant had stated in  his  witness  statement,  and
    what he had told the Tribunal in oral evidence.  That inconsistency  is
    explained at paragraphs [36]  to  [38]  of  the  decision.   The  Judge
    confirms, at [39], that he makes allowances for the appellant's lack of
    education and had in mind, the President's Guidance No.2  of  2010  and
    the decision in AM (Afghanistan) -v- SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123.   At
    paragraph [41], the FtT Judge states:


         "Whilst accepting allowances must be made for vulnerable  witnesses
         I do find that the appellant has provided an  inconsistent  account
         about what was perhaps the most important event in his life."


 5. At paragraph [47] of the decision, the FtT Judge states as follows:


         "47. For the appellant's claim to have any credibility  I  have  to
         accept his core claim that his father  was  detained  and  he  fled
         because of that event. Whilst the appellant  may  have  provided  a
         consistent account on other issues I am not satisfied  that  either
         he or his father experienced any problems with the authorities."


The appeal before me


 6. There are two grounds of appeal. First, in reaching the  decision,  the
    FtT Judge, failed to have proper regard to the fact that the  appellant
    was a child at the time of the material events, and when he arrived  in
    the United Kingdom.  Although the  Judge  refers  to  the  Presidential
    Guidance and the decision of the Court of Appeal in  AM  (Afghanistan),
    the Judge failed to apply the guidance given, in reaching the decision.
     Second, the FtT Judge found there to be an inconsistency between  what
    the appellant had stated in his witness statement, and what he had told
    the Tribunal  in  oral  evidence,  when  in  fact  there  was  no  such
    inconsistency, and the appellant's  evidence  has  remained  consistent
    throughout.


 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated FtT Judge  MacDonald  on
    14th December 2018.  The matter comes before me  to  determine  whether
    the decision of the FtT Judge contains a material error of law, and  if
    so, the remake the decision.


 8. Although I accept, as Mr Bates submits, that the Judge appears to  have
    had regard to the appellant's age and  vulnerability  in  reaching  the
    decision, in my judgement the Judge erred  in  his  assessment  of  the
    evidence.  The Judge rejected the  appellant's  account,  and  made  an
    adverse credibility finding having found that there is an inconsistency
    between what the appellant had stated in  his  witness  statement,  and
    what he told the Tribunal in oral evidence, regarding what he had  been
    told by his mother, immediately before arrangements were made  for  the
    appellant to leave Iran.  Having carefully read the  interview  record,
    the appellant's witness statement and the decision of  the  FtT,  there
    is, in my judgement, no inconsistency between the evidence referred  to
    at paragraphs [36] to [39] of the decision.  At questions [70] to  [72]
    of the interview record, it is plain that the appellant was asked about
    what his mother told him following the arrest of his father. He claimed
    he had been told that the authorities were asking about  him.  That  is
    referred to at paragraph [38] of the decision.  As the Judge  sets  out
    at paragraph [37], in his witness statement the appellant  stated  that
    his mother told him "the authorities were asking for  me  as  well  and
    wanted to arrest me".  That  statement  is  consistent  with  what  the
    appellant said at interview.  At paragraph [36], the Judge records that
    in cross-examination,  the  appellant  was  asked  whether  his  mother
    explained to him why the authorities were looking  for  him,  and  this
    response was "No. She simply told  me  to  leave  the  country".   That
    answer does  not  appear  to  be  inconsistent,  with  the  information
    provided by the appellant at interview, and in his  witness  statement.
    In his interview and witness statement, the appellant confirms that  he
    was told that the authorities were asking about him.  The  question  in
    cross-examination, was not concerned with whether the authorities  were
    looking for him, but why the authorities were looking for him. From the
    appellant's answer to the question in  cross  examination,  it  appears
    that he was unable to explain why the authorities were looking for him


 9. I have considered whether the reference to an  inconsistency,  when  in
    fact, there does not appear to be an inconsistency, would  be  material
    to the outcome of the appeal. In the end, I cannot  be  satisfied  that
    the Judge would have reached the same conclusion, were it not for  that
    perceived inconsistency, that the Judge refers to, at  paragraph  [41],
    as relating to what  was  perhaps  the  most  important  event  in  the
    appellant's life.  I also  note  that  at  paragraph  [47],  the  Judge
    records that "... the appellant may have provided a consistent  account
    on other issues...".  The fact that  the  Judge  erroneously  perceived
    there to be an inconsistency regarding a matter that was at  the  heart
    of the appellants claim, is plainly a  matter  that  impacts  upon  the
    outcome of the appeal.


10. I must then consider whether to remit the case to the FtT,  or  to  re-
    make the decision myself.


11.  When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside, section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. The error of the FtT Judge vitiates
    other findings of fact and the conclusions reached by the Judge so that
    there has not been a valid determination of the issues in the appeal.


12. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the FtT, I do  so  on  the
    basis that this is a  case  which  falls  squarely  within  the  Senior
    President's Practice  Statement  at  paragraph  7.2.  In  my  view,  in
    determining the appeal, the nature and extent  of  any  judicial  fact-
    finding necessary will be extensive. The parties will be advised of the
    date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


13. The appeal is allowed, and the decision of FtT Judge Alis is set aside.




14. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh  hearing  of  the  appeal
    with no findings preserved.


    Signed                                  Date          2nd April 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





TO THE RESPONDENT


    FEE AWARD


    No fee is payable and there can be no fee award.


    Signed                                  Date          2nd April 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

