


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/04412/2016




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields             |             Decision & Reasons         |
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|On 26th May 2017                   |             On 31st May 2017           |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                     HM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant: Miss C.Querton, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence Lupin,
Solicitors (Olympic Way).
For the Respondent:  Mr.Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1. This is an appeal by the respondent against the decision of First-tier
      Immigration Judge Fox sitting at North Shields on 8 December 2016. For
      convenience, I will continue to refer to the parties as they where in
      the First-tier Tribunal.


   2. The appellant claimed protection from the respondent on the basis that
      he is a national of Burundi and a homosexual who would be at risk
      because of his sexuality if returned. Hereinafter, I will use the
      generally preferred nomenclature `Gay'.

   3. His claim is that he was from Buyenzi, Berundi.When he was 7 he went
      to live in Tanzania with his mother. She had left Burundi because of
      issues with her sexuality. His mother died shortly after childbirth
      and he sought shelter in a Mosque or Madrasa when he was 10. He
      remained there until he was 19. One of the teachers found him engaged
      in a sex act with another male. Following this, he and five others
      were held and beaten to the extent that some of them died. However,
      the appellant managed to escape and left the country.

   4. The respondent did not accept the claim was true. The respondent did
      not accept he was from Burundi but felt he was most likely from
      Tanzania. It was not accepted he was gay. His account of how he
      escaped was not considered credible. It was felt he could safely
      return to either Tanzania or Burundi, either to his former home area
      or elsewhere.

   5.  The appellant produced no documentation to confirm his identity. It
      was not accepted he was from Burundi. He was asked about the country
      and could give no details. He spoke Swahili. He was able to give
      details about Tanzania.

   6. Regarding his claimed sexuality the respondent referred to
      inconsistencies between screening and his substantive interview. At
      screening he said the Burundi and Tanzanian authorities were seeking
      him because he had abused children. In his substantive interview he
      referred to having relationships but was unable to explain his
      feelings.

The First tier Tribunal


   7. Judge Fox found the appellant to be a national of Burundi and that he
      is gay. He also found that homosexuality would not be acceptable in
      either Burundi or and Tanzania. Judge Fox found that the appellant had
      led an active gay sexual life in Tanzania with different people and
      that if returned there would be able to live a similar lifestyle
      albeit an element of discretion would be needed. However, in Burundi
      he would have to alter his behaviour considerably and there would not
      be protection from the State. The judge found that the State would be
      the persecutor and consequently relocation was not an option. The
      judge allowed the appeal on the basis of the Refugee Convention and
      articles 2 and 3.


   8. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the basis the conclusion
      by the judge that the appellant was gay was irrational given the
      judge's comment about his evidence: he was described as obstructive
      and reluctant to answer questions put directly. The judge said the
      appellant's account of his sexual orientation focused upon the
      physical rather than emotional aspects and attributed this to his
      upbringing. However it was submitted this ignored the appellant's
      evidence that he had been in love .It was also contended the judge had
      failed to give adequate reasons for finding the appellant to be a
      national of Burundi.


The Upper Tribunal

   9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge had not applied the correct standard of proof and had failed to
      give adequate reasons for concluding the appellant was gay and a
      national of Burundi .


  10. On behalf of the appellant I have received a rule 24 response. I also
      received an indexed bundle of six items which were before the First-
      tier Tribunal.

  11. The rule 24 response sought to place the query in relation to the
      judge's approach to the standard of proof against the judge's self-
      direction by reference to case law such as Karanakaran [2000]3All ER
      449. It was contended that First-tier Judge Fox had looked at matters
      in the round and had given adequate reasons for finding the appellant
      was gay and from Burundi. The judge had not found the appellant's
      evidence was unworthy of belief but had commented upon the manner with
      which he gave his evidence. It was also contended that whether the
      expression of sexual orientation was through the physical act or
      through motions was not an issue before the tribunal. Rather the judge
      had looked at matters in the round including a medical report which
      indicated scarring probably arose as a result of a beating. The judge
      had referred to section 8 and the assessment of credibility and had
      given reasons as to why his failure to claim in other countries did
      not detract from his account.

  12. At the outset of the hearing both representatives suggested that if I
      found an error of law the appropriate course would be to remit the
      matter to the First-tier Tribunal. If this occurred, Miss Querton
      asked that the judge's findings in relation to how homosexuality was
      viewed in Burundi and Tanzania should be preserved. Mr.Diwnycz was in
      agreement with this. As a matter of practicality I would not have been
      in a position to remake the decision if evidence from the appellant
      was required because no interpreter had been arranged.

  13.  Mr.Diwnycz relied upon the grounds on which leave had been granted.
      He submitted that the judge failed to adequately explain why he
      accepted the appellant was from Burundi. Similarly, it was arguable
      that the judge did not adequately explain his reasons for finding the
      appellant was gay and there was apparent confusion as to the standard
      of proof applied.

  14. In response, Miss Querton, who also appeared below, submitted the
      judge had given adequate reasons for his finding of the appellant's
      nationality. At paragraphs 17 and 18 the judge referred to the
      backdrop of the appellant's lack of education; that he had lived on
      the streets and that his mother only spoke to him in Swahili.
      Regarding the appellant's sexual orientation the judge had acknowledge
      the difficulty in reaching a finding and had noted the appellant
      focused upon the sexual act rather than any emotional aspect. The
      judge explained this as being attributable to his upbringing. At
      paragraph 27 the judge said analysing the appellant's physical or
      emotional viewpoint was not the issue but whether he in fact was gay.
      The judge acknowledged that he could not look inside the head of the
      appellant but concluded on the evidence produced to the low standard
      of proof applicable the appellant was gay. Miss Querton submitted that
      the respondent's challenge amounted to no more than a disagreement
      with the judge's conclusions.

   Consideration

  15. There are some references in the decision which give scope for arguing
      the judge did not apply the correct burden and standard of proof. For
      instance, at paragraph 19 the judge states: `... on the balance of
      probabilities and recognising that the appellant only has to satisfy
      me to the low level of proof....' In paragraph 32 the judge states:
      `... I am satisfied that the appellant has provided a credible basis
      for challenging the assertions, analysis and conclusions in the
      respondent's refusal letter...' However, I agree with Miss Querton in
      relation to these comments that the decision has to be looked at in
      the round rather than giving undue weight to the use of a phrase. I am
      satisfied when the decision is looked at in that context that the
      judge appreciated the low standard of proof applicable and that the
      burden of proof was upon the appellant.


  16. It is exceedingly difficult to determine certain types of claims, such
      as sexual orientation. Deciding whether someone is genuinely gay
      should not be based upon stereotypical notions.  Detailed questioning
      of sexual practices or use of sexually explicit evidence is
      inappropriate. The latter would not necessarily have probative value
      in any event. At the same time, simply because someone says they are
      gay does not mean this has to be accepted. However, it is a starting
      point. They must demonstrate to a reasonable degree of likelihood they
      are or are perceived to be gay. Inconsistencies at the various stages
      of their claim or improbabilities may go to the assessment of the
      truth of the claim. A history given of sexual awareness may be
      relevant in establishing credibility. A person's sexual orientation is
      not necessarily defined by their sexual behaviour. The role of the
      interpreter is particularly important: this is illustrated in the
      present case where the appellant was of the view that `gay' meant the
      submissive partner.

  17. The respondent did not accept the appellant was credible. Matters
      going to general credibility can be relevant in assessing the specific
      claim. Regarding the claim itself, the respondent at paragraph 29 of
      the reasons for refusal letter focuses upon an apparent inconsistency
      between the claim made at screening of being wanted for abusing
      children and in the substantive interview of homosexuality. No comment
      was made about this on behalf of the appellant until much later. The
      respondent referred to his inability to express emotion regarding
      homosexual relationships.

  18. Judge Fox at paragraphs 24 and 25 referred to the appellant's evidence
      about how he felt about his sexual orientation. He formed the view
      that the focus was upon the sexual act rather than any emotional
      feelings. At paragraph 26 the judge considered the appellant's account
      of his upbringing may explain his difficulty expressing his emotions.
      At paragraph 27 the judge concluded in any event this was not the
      issue: the issue was whether the appellant was gay.

  19. The judge acknowledges the difficulty deciding sexual orientation:
      referring to his inability to look inside the head of the appellant.
      Nevertheless, he concluded he had demonstrated he was gay. The judge
      refers generally to the evidence and the standard of proof but does
      not say what specific factors have led to this finding.

  20. I appreciate entirely the difficult task the judge had in trying to
      determine the truth of the claimed sexual orientation.  However, it is
      not sufficient to highlight the difficulties .This was a central part
      of the appellant's claim and it was something he had to establish. The
      judge had indicated he was not straightforward witness. I find the
      judge did not adequately explain why this claim was accepted.

  21. Regarding the appellants nationality, at paragraph 16 the judge refers
      to the respondent's rejection of his claim that he is a national of
      Burundi. He could not identify any features about the country and
      could not give information about languages except that he spoke
      Swahili.

  22. The judge said that Swahili is one of the languages spoken in Burundi.
      The judge seeks to put the appellant's evidence in context, given his
      claim that he was uneducated. At paragraph 19 the judge accepts that
      the appellant is a national of Burundi.

  23. As with the question of sexual orientation, I find the judge has
      failed to adequately explain the basis for this finding on
      nationality.. The judge said he is likely to be a national of Burundi
      but does not say why. There is no consideration for instance, as to
      the country information about the use of Swahili and whether or not
      the use of any other language is to be expected. The judge stated at
      paragraph 17 it was not disputed the appellant has spent the first
      seven years of his life in Burundi. I do not know if this was conceded
      at the hearing but this is at odds with the reasons for refusal as
      well as paragraph 15 of the decision which states it was not accepted
      he was born in Burundi.

  24. The judge did deal with section 8 in relation to the appellant's
      credibility. The judge accepted the appellant did not have an
      opportunity to claim protection in any of the other countries he
      passed through. The judge refers in support of this to him only
      speaking Swahili and most likely not using his own passport and
      travelling with a friend. It is not my function to agree or disagree
      with this conclusion. However, it is only one part of the credibility
      assessment. At paragraph 23 the judge referred to the appellant's
      prevarication on other matters.

  25. In conclusion, I find material errors in the decision of Judge Fox
      have been established. There has been a failure to adequately explain
      the findings by the judge that the appellant is gay and is from
      Burundi. These findings were central to the appeal and notwithstanding
      the difficulties faced by the judge a greater explanation was
      required.

  26. At paragraph 28 the judge found that homosexuality is not tolerated
      either in Burundi or Tanzania. The judge commented the appellant would
      not be at risk in Tanzania if he lived as he had before but would in
      Burundi. The presenting officer, Mr.Diwnycz, was prepared to accept
      that homosexuals would face difficulties in either country. This
      finding by the judge can be retained. However, there may still be a
      need for evidence about country conditions to be led and the comment
      by the judge about the exercise of discretion will have to be read in
      light of the case law including HJ (Iran)

Decision.

The decision of First-tier Judge Fox allowing the appellant's appeal under
the Refugee Convention and on articles 2 and 3 materially errs in law and
cannot stand. The decision is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
remaking de novo.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

26th May 2017



