
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: PA/04922/2019 (V)
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 December 2020                          |On 13 January 2021                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                     AI

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For the appellant: Ms M Bayoumi, instructed by Ferial Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a national of Egypt with date  of  birth  given  as
   15.7.85, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  31.10.19  (Judge  Bart-
   Stewart), dismissing on all grounds his appeal against  the  decision  of
   the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  16.5.19,  to  refuse  his  claim   for
   international protection on the basis of political opinion  as  a  former
   member of the Muslim Brotherhood who had been sentenced by  the  Egyptian
   authorities to 4 years imprisonment with hard labour  for  his  political
   activities.

2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused by the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 13.12.19. However, when the application was  renewed  to  the
   Upper Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson  granted  permission  on
   14.1.20.

3. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

The Appellant's Case & Relevant Background

4. The appellant's claim and the relevant background to the  appeal  can  be
   summarised as follows.

5. It is accepted that the appellant's family have a significant history  of
   involvement with the Muslim Brotherhood (MB) and that the  appellant  was
   personally involved from an early age. He  claims  to  have  become  more
   involved whilst studying at university in 2002  and  to  have  become  an
   official member in 2005, in which capacity he  helped  organise  meetings
   and participated in election campaigns. After  graduation,  he  continued
   with the MB and began "protesting the government" in 2011. He  claims  to
   have been involved in the 2012 election campaign in which  Mr  Morsi  was
   elected as President. He  asserts  he  continued  to  protest  after  the
   military coup in July 2013. His case is that whilst protesting  with  his
   family in Rabaa Square on 14.8.13 he was shot through the  arm  and  into
   the chest. He evaded the police and was treated in a  temporary  hospital
   and at home. He  stated  that  at  the  end  of  2013  he  abandoned  his
   involvement with the MB, for the sake of his family and his own safety.

6. However, he claims  that  on  21.11.15  he  was  arrested,  detained  and
   interrogated. He alleges his  family  paid  surety  for  his  release  on
   14.12.15 but  on  16.1.16  he  was  sentenced  in-absentia  to  4  years'
   imprisonment. Despite that, he somehow managed to obtain a visa for Saudi
   Arabia and a passport and left Egypt on 18.2.16,  allegedly  bribing  his
   way through security and after having paid a private clinic to remove the
   bullet so as not to set off the metal detector. He was  joined  in  Saudi
   Arabia by his wife and child in  February  2016.  He  remained  in  Saudi
   Arabia until coming to the UK, accompanied by his wife and child.

7. The appellant first arrived in the UK in March 2018  on  a  visa  granted
   for medical treatment. He and his family returned to the UK from  Bahrain
   on 12.9.18 whereupon he immediately claimed asylum.

8. The respondent's refusal  decision  accepts  that  the  appellant  was  a
   former member and supporter of the MB but concluded he was neither a  mid
   nor high-level ranking member. It was accepted that he  had  participated
   in the 2013 Rabaa Square demonstration but not that he had been  arrested
   and sentenced  by  the  Egyptian  authorities,  or  that  he  had  evaded
   subsequent arrest and detention.

9. In summary, the grounds of application for  permission  to  appeal  argue
   that the judge erred in:

     i. Making factual errors and failing to consider relevant evidence;

    ii. Failing to raise concerns about the documents with the  appellant's
        representative during the hearing;

   iii. Appearing  to  go  behind  the  respondent's  concession  that  the
        appellant was a former MB member  by  concluding  at  [66]  of  the
        decision that the appellant was merely an active supporter;

    iv. Failing to adequately consider the  country  expert  report  of  Dr
        Fatah.

10. The Tribunal has received the lengthy skeleton argument of  Ms  Bayoumi,
   dated 17.4.20, which I have carefully considered and taken  into  account
   together with her oral submissions to me.

11. The respondent's Rule 24 reply, dated 17.4.20, responds to the  skeleton
   argument and the grounds of appeal. It is submitted that  in  a  detailed
   determination, Judge Bart-Stewart considered all of the evidence and  was
   clearly fully conversant with the issues involved in the  claimed  arrest
   of the appellant and the  alleged  reasons  for  that,  setting  out  the
   evidence of the journalist between [39] to [47] of the decision.

12. The respondent pointed out that the  crucial  issue  considered  by  the
   judge was whether the appellant had been a mid to high level  MB  member,
   as alleged. Reliance is made by the respondent on the CPIN of July  2017,
   'Egypt: Muslim Brotherhood v3.0', to  the  effect  that  low-level,  non-
   political, or inactive members and supporters, or those perceived  to  be
   supporters, are not generally targeted and it is unlikely that they  will
   be able to demonstrate being at risk of persecution. However,  each  case
   will need to be considered on its facts. It is also submitted that it was
   open to the judge to reject  the  appellant's  claim  that  he  had  been
   arrested on 21.11.15 or sentenced as claimed. The  judge  considered  the
   purported  documents,  applying  Tanvir  Ahmed  when  considering   their
   reliability. The respondent argues that the judge was entitled to  reject
   the appellant's claim that at the age of 17 he was a high-level MB member
   and to conclude that his involvement was in fact only at a low-level, and
   ceased by his own  admission  in  2013,  so  that  the  alleged  fear  of
   persecution was unfounded.  The  respondent  asserts  that  the  findings
   rejecting as not credible the claimed arrest, conviction, and sentence to
   imprisonment were entirely open to the judge.

13. In respect of Dr Fatah's expert report, the respondent points  out  that
   from [60] of the decision the judge set out the relevant sections of  the
   report and made findings open on the evidence. It is  asserted  that  the
   judge was not obliged to accept everything opined by the  expert  and  it
   cannot be said that the report was not adequately considered.

14. As Judge Gleeson noted when considering permission to appeal, the  judge
   expressly recorded the respondent's concession, and fully  accepted  that
   the appellant was a former MB member, stating at  [50]  of  the  decision
   that "there is no issue about his former membership." I am satisfied that
   the statement at [66] to the effect that  the  appellant  was  an  active
   supporter for most of his life does not go behind the concession  and  is
   not inconsistent with the acceptance of membership  at  [50].  The  judge
   also identified the challenge as being to the appellant's claim  to  have
   been arrested, detained, convicted in absentia,  and  sentenced  to  four
   years' imprisonment with hard  labour.  At  [66]  the  judge  stated,  "I
   entirely agree the respondent's  conclusion  that  on  the  evidence  the
   appellant was not a high-profile member. On his evidence he was an active
   supporter for most of his life yet was never arrested or detained  during
   the period that he was an activist. This suggests that there was  nothing
   that he did that brought himself to the attention of the authorities." In
   the premises, the third ground of appeal is unfounded  and  discloses  no
   error of law.

15. In her submissions to me, Ms Bayoumi  placed  considerable  reliance  on
   the first ground of appeal and the assertion that in the  seven  respects
   therein identified, the  judge  "incorrectly  recorded  the  evidence  or
   failed to consider documents or unchallenged aspect  of  the  appellant's
   account." However, this ground and the submissions advanced  are  largely
   based on an incorrect understanding of the Tribunal's  decision  and  the
   refusal decision. For example, it is suggested that the findings at  [30]
   of the decision are inconsistent with [23] and that  the  respondent  had
   accepted that the appellant's account of his arrest  was  consistent  and
   credible. In oral submissions to me, Ms Bayoumi repeatedly overstated the
   respondent's concession, which was strictly limited to that he had been a
   low-level MB supporter until leaving the MB in 2013. It is clear that the
   grounds and submissions are based on a highly  selective  and  misleading
   reading of the refusal decision. Whilst  [53]  of  the  refusal  decision
   stated that the appellant's description of his arrest  and  treatment  by
   the security forces is  "detailed  and  plausible  given  the  background
   information," that and subsequent paragraphs pointed out the internal and
   external  inconsistencies  in  the  account.  Contrary  to  Ms  Bayoumi's
   submissions, the respondent never stated that the account  was  credible.
   Ultimately, at [75] of the refusal decision under the heading of 'Summary
   of Findings of Fact', the respondent accepted the appellant's nationality
   and that he had participated in the 2013 Rabaa Square demonstration,  but
   specifically rejected the claim to be a mid to high level ranking  member
   of the MB and rejected the claim to have been arrested  and  detained  by
   the Egyptian  authorities  and  to  have  evaded  subsequent  arrest  and
   detainment.

16. Mr Tan did not accept any of the  alleged  factual  errors  and  further
   pointed out that in any event no findings were  based  on  those  alleged
   errors. I am satisfied that in general terms, the grounds as drafted fail
   to understand that between [15] and [32] of the decision  the  judge  was
   summarising the respondent's refusal decision and that between  [33]  and
   [49] the judge summarised the evidence. It is only from [50] onwards that
   the findings and reasons are set out. Some of the grounds  are  based  on
   disagreements with the judge's record of the oral  evidence  but  without
   evidence that the record is inaccurate. For example, it  is  denied  that
   the appellant asserted that he was a high-ranking member of the  MB  from
   the age of 17 as recorded at [36] of the decision. In her submissions  to
   me, Ms Bayoumi put a further gloss  on  this  ground,  stating  that  the
   appellant did not claim to be a high-ranking member of the entire MB, but
   only at a local level by virtue of his position within the MB  whilst  at
   university. However, this appears to have been accurately recorded by the
   judge within [36] of the decision.

17. Other elements of the grounds pick trivial arguments  with  the  way  in
   which the judge summarised the evidence. For example, at [52]  the  judge
   recorded that the appellant was still in Cairo at the time he  claims  he
   was being watched. The grounds argue that the appellant never  said  that
   he was being watched, only that he felt as though he was  being  watched.
   Again, there is no evidence that the judge's record of  the  evidence  is
   inaccurate. The point is not material to the outcome of the appeal.

18. In relation to the documents relied on by the appellant, I am  satisfied
   that the judge was entitled to consider their  reliability,  pursuant  to
   Tanveer Ahmed. It was for the appellant to  demonstrate  that  they  were
   reliable. It was not required of the judge to  raise  concerns  with  the
   documents within the hearing so that they could be specifically addressed
   by the appellant or his legal representatives. The points made about  the
   documents in the Tribunal's decision between [50] to [55] were obvious on
   the face of the  documents;  the  judge  did  not  raise  new  issues  in
   assessing those documents. In the  circumstances,  no  error  of  law  is
   disclosed by this ground.

19. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Gleeson considered  it  arguable
   that the judge erred by giving "insufficient  reason  for  rejecting  (Dr
   Fatah's) assessment of the criminal law process in Egypt and the  ongoing
   risk to former Muslim Brotherhood members such as this appellant." I have
   carefully considered the judge's treatment of the expert evidence and the
   relevant findings.

20. On consideration of the decision as a whole, I  am  satisfied  that  the
   judge was entitled to and properly did consider the risk on return for  a
   former low-level MB supporter, taking into account the expert opinion.  I
   note that at [153] Dr Fatah's  opinion  was  that  "as  someone  who  has
   previously taken part in activities with  the  Muslim  Brotherhood,  (the
   appellant) would possibly face a risk from the Egyptian  authorities,  if
   his activities are, or become known to them." Effectively, Dr  Fatah  was
   considering the appellant's claim at its highest, the basis of which  the
   judge was not bound to, and did not, accept. At [61] the  judge  accepted
   Dr Fatah's expertise and that  she  asserted  a  risk  to  the  appellant
   although he was no longer a formal MB or FJP member. The judge also found
   that the appellant had not been arrested, charged,  sentenced,  etc.,  so
   the primary premise of the risk described by the expert did not arise.

21. At [66] the judge accepted that the appellant was never  a  high-profile
   member but that on his evidence he was an active supporter  for  most  of
   his life yet was never arrested or detained during the period that he was
   an activist. "This suggests that there  was  nothing  that  he  did  that
   brought himself to the attention of the  authorities."  Contrary  to  the
   assertion in the grounds that the judge considered the risk related  only
   to high-ranking members, at [67] the  judge  confirms  the  understanding
   that "Dr Fatah considers the risk to low-level members  and  associates."
   However, it is pointed out that the indication is that this  risk  is  to
   those with particular  profiles,  none  of  which  match  the  appellant.
   Similarly, documented arrests on  terrorism-related  charges  in  2014-15
   were not consistent with the charges set out in the documents produced by
   the appellant, which were effectively for attending a demonstration.  The
   judge also concluded that as he was no longer a student, he was  unlikely
   to be one of those systematically  targeted  in  2014-15.  All  of  these
   findings were entirely open to the judge on the evidence.

22. Between [67] and [71] of the decision, the judge carefully assesses  the
   expert opinion, including as to the criminal procedure in Egypt,  applied
   to the facts found in the appellant's case, concluding by a rejection  of
   the claim of being arrested, convicted  in  absentia,  and  sentenced  to
   imprisonment. "I have found that the appellant was never arrested by  the
   authorities as a member of MB there is little before me  to  support  the
   conclusion that the appellant would be considered a member of a terrorist
   organisation in Egypt." At [73] the judge also pointed out  that  despite
   being strong MB supporters, no family member of the appellant came to the
   adverse attention of the authorities between the period of the  beginning
   of the uprisings in 2007 up to  the  point  of  his  departure  to  Saudi
   Arabia. "This supports the conclusion that the appellant was not of high-
   profile and not of interest when he left Egypt."

23. One of the reasons given for rejecting the appellant's  account  is  the
   inconsistency between the detail of his claim and the objective  evidence
   and expert opinion, including as to his being released  on  bail  pending
   further investigation when the evidence was that  alleged  MB  supporters
   were retained in detention and dealt  with  speedily  (see  [65]  of  the
   decision). At [69] the judge took into account the expert evidence as  to
   the bail system in Egypt and noted at [70]  that  there  was  "little  to
   support the appellant's account of being bailed on serious  charges  with
   no follow-up by the authorities." In his submissions on this  ground,  Mr
   Tan pointed to [237] of the expert report where  Dr  Fatah  stated,  "The
   available evidence shows that  individuals  affiliated  with  the  Muslim
   Brotherhood would generally  not  be  released  on  bail  when  they  are
   detained." It was also observed at [236] of the report that  humanitarian
   organisations have criticised the approach of the Egyptian authorities in
   seeking to extend pre-trial detention and failing to grant bail.  Similar
   submissions were made as to the claim of  the  appellant  being  able  to
   leave Egypt via the airport despite being the subject of  an  in-absentia
   sentence of imprisonment. He alleged that he was able to  bribe  security
   not to check his documents. Mr Tan pointed to [260] of the expert report,
   where limited evidence was found for security officials at Cairo  Airport
   accepting bribes to allow wanted individuals to flee.

24. The grounds also complain that the judge did  not  consider  a  risk  on
   return arising from sur place activities. At [32]  the  judge  summarised
   the refusal decision to the effect that the  appellant  had  not  resumed
   political activity since arriving in the UK. At [74] the judge found that
   the appellant had not engaged in any anti-government activity since 2013.
   Nothing in the oral evidence  summary  related  to  sur  place  activity.
   Evidently, this was not an  issue  pursued  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   appeal hearing and Mr Tan observed that  it  was  not  addressed  by  the
   expert evidence. At [49] the judge recorded Ms Bayoumi's submission  that
   the appellant would be at risk on return as a  failed  asylum-seeker  but
   made no mention of any risk arising from sur  place  activities.  In  the
   premises, this ground was not advanced  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   and, therefore, there is no error in failing to address it.

25.  In  summary,  the  grounds  are  in  large  part  little  more  than  a
   disagreement with the findings  and  conclusions  of  the  Tribunal.  The
   grounds are in a number of respects flawed by  a  selective  citation  or
   misunderstanding of both the refusal decision and that of  the  Tribunal.
   The grounds also fail to recognise that the summary which  precedes  [50]
   of decision is not  the  findings  and  reasons  which  begin  from  that
   paragraph. The judge was not in error of law for not  accepting  at  face
   value the expert opinion, having  given  clear  and  cogent  reasons  for
   departing  from  that  opinion,  distinguishing   the   risk   from   the
   circumstances of the appellant's case,  or  otherwise  finding  that  the
   circumstances of the appellant's case did not place him at any real  risk
   on return for any of the reasons identified by the expert opinion.

26. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the First-tier Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands, and the appeal remains
      dismissed on all grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       4 January 2021



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       4 January 2021

