
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04478/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Oral decision given following hearing|                                     |
|On 27 January 2020                   |On 13 May 2020                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                    Ms F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Chowdhury, Counsel, instructed by Stuart & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is a protection claim which also involves young children.  For these
reasons it is appropriate that the proceedings are anonymised and I so
order.  I will be remitting this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal for
the reasons which will appear below, and in the event that the appellant
ultimately were to lose her appeal, unless the appeal is anonymised, the
fact that her name has been published alongside her claim to be a supporter
of a separatist organisation could be sufficient of itself to place her at
risk.

The appellant is a Turkish national of Kurdish ethnicity who now appeals
against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rai, who, following a
hearing at Taylor House on 12 June 2019, in a Decision and Reasons
promulgated some three months later on 18 September 2019, dismissed her
appeal against the respondent's decision, refusing her asylum.  The judge
also dismissed her appeal on human rights grounds.

The appellant arrived in the UK in February 2013 and claimed asylum in that
year on the basis of her imputed political opinion, her husband having been
accused of involvement with the PKK.  Her original asylum claim was refused
and although the appellant lodged an appeal against that decision that
appeal was withdrawn and her appeal rights were exhausted in November 2015.

The appellant made further submissions in May 2018 and it was against the
refusal of these submissions that the appellant appealed and this is the
subject of her current appeal to this Tribunal.

It is not necessary for the purposes of this decision to do more than
briefly summarise the outline of the appellant's claim.  Essentially, she
claims to be at risk because she has been (on her case) arrested and
detained by reason essentially of members of her family's involvement with
separatist organisations in Turkey.  Her claim is that she was detained on
two occasions and during that detention she was subject to torture and was
also raped.  Obviously, the allegations she makes are extremely serious.

The appellant has four children, two of whom were born in the UK.  The
oldest of the two children born in the UK is now nearly 7 years old and
will be 7 in March at which time that child will be a "qualified" child for
the purposes of the Immigration Rules and also for the purposes of Section
117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  However, at
present that child is not a qualified child.

The appellant's claim is that she would be at risk on return because the
Turkish authorities would continue to have an interest in her essentially
because of her family connection.

In her decision refusing the appellant's appeal, among other matters Judge
Rai made adverse credibility findings, as follows, at paragraph 44 of her
decision:

"44. I do not find the core of the appellant's claim to be truthful.  I am
not satisfied the Gendarme would single the appellant out and detain her
twice when she had no political profile and cannot state why as mere
supporters of the HDP they would come to the authorities' attention".

The judge went on to say with regard to this finding that "there was no
evidence before me of distributing leaflets, or engaging in any
demonstrations such that she would come to the attention of the
authorities.  It follows that I do not find it reasonably likely that she
was required to report weekly".

Having found the appellant's account not credible, the judge rejected her
claim for asylum and under Article 3 and this was a factor in her Article 8
claim also; had the account given by the appellant been true (or arguably
true) this would have had to be considered also in the context of whether
there were very significant obstacles to the appellant returning, with her
four young children, to Turkey.

At paragraph 20 of her decision, the judge notes as follows:

"20. The grounds state that the defendant committed a material error of law
by failing to engage with the country guidance of IA HC KD RO HG (Risk -
Guidelines - Separatist) Turkey CG [2003] UKIAT 00034 and in particular
whether the appellant has family connections with a separatist organisation
such as KADEK or HADEP or DEHAP.  As a result, the respondent has failed to
exercise 'most anxious scrutiny' in the assessment of her claim".

In other words, the judge was well aware that the major issue in this case
was whether or not by reason of the activities of the appellant's family
the Turkish authorities would have an interest in her on return and as part
of her claim that it was for this reason that they had an interest in her
which caused them to detain her, during which detention she suffered in the
way that she had stated as part of her claim.

This is the context in which the judge's finding, set out above, made at
paragraph 44 is challenged.  Although the one finding that the "core of the
appellant's claim to be truthful" is not accepted, the judge does not set
out whether any, and if so what, parts of the claim might be truthful.  It
is simply a blanket finding that "the core" of the claim is not truthful.
The sole reason for that finding is set out in that one sentence that the
judge is "not satisfied the Gendarme would single the appellant out and
detain her twice when she had no political profile and cannot state why as
mere supporters of the HDP they would come to the authorities' attention".
What is significant about the finding is that despite the judge having set
out previously that one of the issues was whether or not there had been a
failure to engage with albeit old but nevertheless still current country
guidance given in IA and Others, the 2003 case, the judge does not consider
that country guidance at all.

In the grounds, at paragraph 2.1, under "Error 2 - Failure to appreciate
assess sufficiency of protection", it is said as follows with regard to the
country guidance decision in IA and Others:

"In para 46 of the country guidance case above, the Tribunal outlined the
factors which are inexhaustively considered 'to be material in giving rise
to potential suspicion in the minds of the authorities concerning a
particular claimant'.  Those include:

...

f)   Whether the appellant has family connections with a separatist
organisation such as KADEK or HADEP or DEHAP (p.20).  As a result, the
defendant failed to sufficiently take into account a relevant consideration
in the assessment of the appellant's asylum and human rights case which
evidences a failure to exercise 'most anxious scrutiny' in the assessment
of his claim".

The judge does make the point in her decision that within the bundle itself
there is lacking any precise details of the reasons why certain members of
the appellant's family had been granted asylum, and in particular in the
case of a cousin, although a decision is exhibited granting that lady
asylum in January 2015, the reasons why the respondent granted that lady
asylum were not enclosed within the bundle.

On behalf of the respondent before this Tribunal, Ms Jones suggested that
the "starting point" in this appeal ought to be the rejection of the
appellant's husband's claim in 2003, because this appellant's claim was in
large part dependent on that claim.  However, on behalf of the appellant,
Ms Chowdhury fairly points out that this decision proceeded by a number of
years the alleged detention of this appellant some nine or ten years later,
on which the claim is really based.  She also submits, with some
justification, that it was incumbent on the judge before rejecting the
claim that she had been detained to explain why it was that she felt able
to reach this decision apparently ignoring the guidance given in the very
old country guidance case that one reason why the Turkish authorities would
or might consider a person with suspicion is that that person had family
connections with a separatist organisation, which arguably this appellant
did.

I appreciate, as was submitted on behalf of the respondent also by Ms
Jones, that the evidence in support of the assertions as to the involvement
of members of the appellant's family are not as strong as they could have
been, but it certainly does seem at the very least that members of the
appellant's family have been granted asylum in this country and in those
circumstances, although this may well be a finely balanced case, this
Tribunal considers that the judge ought at the very least to have
considered this claim in the context of the country guidance decision which
was still current, albeit that it was old, especially as she appreciated,
as she makes clear at paragraph 20 of her decision, that this was an issue
which was being taken within this appeal.

It follows that in the view of this Tribunal this decision did contain a
material error of law, being the failure to have regard to the appellant's
case in the context of current country guidance relating to Turkey (which
was the main reason why Judge Holmes considered it right to grant
permission to appeal) and the decision will accordingly have to be remade.

Because the findings with regard to credibility cannot be sustained, and
these findings formed the basis of the decision, it will be necessary to
have a completely fresh hearing with no findings of fact retained, and in
those circumstances, it is agreed on behalf of both parties that it is
appropriate to remit this case back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be
reheard by any judge other than Judge Rai, at Taylor House with no findings
of fact retained.

I accordingly make the following decision:





Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rai, dismissing the appellant's
appeal on asylum and human rights grounds, is dismissed as containing a
material error of law.

The appeal will be remitted for rehearing at Taylor House, by any judge
other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Rai.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Dated: 18 March 2020




