
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04269/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields             |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 19th September 2018             |On 23rd October 2018               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  MR.M K F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Ms L Brakaj of Iris Law Firm(Middlesbrough)
For the respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. This is a resumed hearing from 23 April 2018 when  I  concluded  that
       the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  K  Henderson  materially
       erred in the assessment of the 15C risk for the appellant. To  recap,
       he was found to be a Kurdish national of Iraq originally from Kirkuk.
       The judge had found he could not remain in Baghdad because  he  is  a
       Sunni Muslim and does not speak Arabic. An overland journey to Kirkuk
       presented serious risks. To get to the IKR would involve  a  stopover
       in Baghdad. Regarding the IKR, there was  no  evidence  of  links  or
       support or of his employment prospects.

    2. The presenting officer in the First-tier Tribunal accepted  that  the
       appellant was in a relationship with a British national and that  the
       marriage was genuine and subsisting. They have a child who is British
       and at the time of hearing they were expecting their 2nd child.

    3. The appellant's appeal was allowed on  the  basis  of  article  8  by
       reason of his marriage to a British national and their child.

    4.  I was advised that there were certain advantages to the appellant if
       his appeal were allowed under article 15C, including the fact that he
       could apply for settlement after 5 years.

    5. The individual claim for protection was on the  basis  the  appellant
       would be at risk because his father had been a member of  the  Ba'ath
       party. There had been an earlier appeal which did not find a need for
       protection and this was adopted in the subsequent  appeal  under  the
       Devaseelan principle. The focus in the subsequent appeal was upon the
       general security situation and his personal circumstances.

    6. The respondent in refusing  his  claim  suggested  the  situation  in
       Kirkuk had changed since the country guidance case and the  appellant
       could return there.  In  the  alternative,  internal  relocation  was
       reasonable.

    7. The judge  rejected  the  suggestion  the  appellant  could  live  in
       Baghdad. The judge  referred  to  the  decision  of  BA  (returns  to
       Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC), pointing out that he has no
       family support or  links  to  Baghdad  and  is  a  Sunni  Muslim.  At
       paragraph 45 the judge concluded he faced a real risk of serious harm
       from nonstate agents in Kirkuk or if he had  to  remain  in  Baghdad.
       This then left the IKR.

    8. The judge concluded at paragraph 54 that the objective  evidence  was
       that Iraq remain volatile and insecure. The judge  concluded  it  was
       not realistic for the family to go to Iraq. Referring  to  his  wife,
       the judge said:

           "she should not  be  expected  to  go  to  Iraq  to  an  unknown
           destination where there is no evidence that her partner has  any
           financial support, housing or employment at this  stage  of  her
           pregnancy or after that  when  she  is  a  primary  carer  of  2
           children under the age of 5.  I  consider  that  the  option  of
           returning the appellant with his partner is unreasonable."





Conclusions

    9. The judge's findings should have  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the
       appellant was entitled to be granted humanitarian protection  on  the
       basis of there being an article  15C  risk  in  Kirkuk.  The  country
       information would not suggest that an  article  15C  risk  exists  in
       Baghdad and it certainly does not exist  in  the  IKR.  However,  the
       appellant cannot in the circumstance reasonably relocate  to  either.
       On the basis relocation therefore is not  feasible  and  the  country
       guidance decision is that there is a 15C risk in  his  home  area  it
       would follow he should be entitled to humanitarian protection.

   10. The judge did not go beyond the country guidance case on  Kirkuk  and
       is not to be faulted for this. There is no further  country  guidance
       case giving an authoritative view  that  conditions  have  materially
       changed. I am dealing with the specifics of this appeal and would not
       propose straying beyond the country guidance in the circumstance.

Decision

The appeal is allowed under article 15C.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

