
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04970/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th January 2019                           |On 15th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                              MISS THERESE [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Pipi (instructed by Toltops Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer}


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, in relation to a Decision and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Mailer) promulgated on 2nd July 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Gambia born on 28th July 1974.  She  had
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision by the Secretary
    of State, taken on 28th March 2018, to refuse her Protection claim.

 3. The Appellant had originally arrived in the United Kingdom  in  January
    2008 as a domestic worker in a diplomatic home. That leave was extended
    until January 2013. During that period of leave she returned to  Gambia
    for two weeks in 2009.

 4. Her application to renew that leave  in  2012  was  refused.  She  then
    applied for leave to remain as a Tier 5 migrant which was also refused.
    She was then granted leave as a Tier 5 migrant in September 2013  until
    August 2015. An application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  that
    basis was refused in June 2015. In August 2015 she made  an  Article  8
    application for leave to remain, which was refused in January 2016.  In
    October 2017 she was arrested while reporting with a view  to  removing
    her to Gambia the following  day.  She  then  claimed  asylum  and  her
    removal directions were deferred.

 5. She claimed asylum on the basis that she was  a  bisexual  woman  in  a
    lesbian relationship with a partner in the UK.   She  claimed  to  have
    been in that relationship for more than two years.

 6. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing  the  Judge  accepted  that  if  the
    Appellant was a lesbian and would conceal her relationships in  Gambia,
    this would be as a result of fear and the Judge accepted that there was
    hostility towards gay people in Gambia.

 7. The issue for the Judge to decide therefore  was  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant was in truth a lesbian.

 8. In that regard the Judge heard evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  her
    claimed partner, Ms Kore. The Judge concluded that  the  Appellant  was
    not gay and dismissed the Protection claim. Having found the  Appellant
    and her claimed partner not to be in  a  relationship  the  Judge  also
    dismissed the human rights claim.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  of  three  grounds.  The
    first ground asserts the Judge erred in noting at paragraph 149 of  the
    Decision and Reasons that in her application made in  August  2015  the
    Appellant made no mention of having any partner. The Judge  said  there
    was no mention of Ms Kore and it was only after  that  application  was
    certified that she claimed to have a partner. The error asserted  there
    was that the evidence was that the  Appellant's  relationship  with  Ms
    Kore only commenced in October 2015 which explained why no  mention  of
    it was made in August 2015.

10. Mr Bramble accepted that error but submitted that  the  error  was  not
    material.

11. Ground 2 argues that the Judge erred  in  that,  while  making  several
    adverse credibility findings against the Appellant, he made no  adverse
    credibility findings against the witness in the case, Ms Kore.

12. The third ground asserts that the Judge  erred  in  making  an  adverse
    finding against the Appellant  on  the  basis  of  contradictions  with
    regard to the dates when the relationship started. With regard to  that
    ground, Mr Bramble also conceded there were errors but again  submitted
    that these were not material.

13. Mr Bramble is correct to concede that the decision does contain errors,
    as asserted by grounds 1 and 3 but for the reasons which follow I  also
    agree with him that those errors are not material.

14. I do not find that the Judge made an error in not making a finding,  in
    terms, that Ms Kore's evidence was not credible.

15. The Decision and Reasons in this case is lengthy. The Judge set out the
    Appellant's immigration history, her evidence, the evidence of Ms  Kore
    and the documentary evidence in the form of photographs  submitted.  He
    set out the submissions made by both representatives and  his  findings
    start at paragraph 120 and continue to paragraph 159.

16. Mr Pipi took me to paragraph 127 of the Decision and Reasons where  the
    Judge stated that a Judicial  Review  claim  made  in  April  2016  was
    dismissed and the Appellant asserted  that  the  matter  was  currently
    under consideration before the Court of  Appeal  but  that  no  further
    information was given as to the  progress  of  that  application.  With
    regard to that Mr Pipi  produced  an  order  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
    refusing permission sealed on 3rd September 2018. It is clear from that
    document that before the Court of Appeal the Appellant was arguing that
    she was providing financial support to her relatives in Gambia.

17. The Judge noted the Appellant's claim  to  have  had  one  relationship
    whilst in the Gambia, with Catherine. She claimed to have been seen  by
    her uncle with Catherine and that her uncle reported  the  incident  to
    Catherine's uncle who beat her as a result. The Appellant claimed  that
    Catherine  had  died  of  her  injuries  but   was   inconsistent   and
    contradictory as to the dates when these incidents took place.

18. The Judge noted that the Appellant claimed to have travelled to the  UK
    in 2008 in order to escape the problems in Gambia but nevertheless made
    no attempt to claim asylum. It was her case  that  she  did  not  claim
    asylum because she had a visa.

19. The Judge noted the Appellant had in fact returned to  Gambia  for  two
    weeks in 2009 and claimed to have been in fear and to have had to  move
    away from her home area. Again, upon her return to the  United  Kingdom
    she did not claim asylum.

20. At paragraph 139 the Judge found  the  Appellant's  evidence  regarding
    Catherine's death to be problematic due to contradictory evidence.  The
    Judge also noted that the  Appellant  had  been  able  to  successfully
    relocate during her visit to Gambia in 2009  without  any  interference
    from the authorities or her family.

21. The Judge noted that she had lived openly in Gambia at the time she had
    a  relationship  and  he  also  noted  that  she  had  had  no  lesbian
    relationships in Gambia after Catherine died and nor had  she  had  any
    lesbian relationships prior to that.

22. The Judge noted that was no evidence that the Appellant's son or  adult
    brother were in any way hostile towards her on account of her sexuality
    and in that  regard,  I  note  the  evidence  that  she  claims  to  be
    supporting them financially.

23. The Judge considered in some detail the evidence regarding the  claimed
    relationship with Ms Kore and at paragraph  146  noted  that  they  had
    never lived together as a couple. It was argued by Mr  Pipi  that  they
    had never claimed to have lived together as a couple and the  case  was
    not put on that basis. The fact that they had not  lived  together  did
    not mean that they were not in a relationship. Whilst that is  correct,
    the fact that they have been in a relationship for  in  excess  of  two
    years and have never lived together is a factor that can  detract  from
    the credulity of their claim to be in a relationship.  The  Judge  also
    noted the Ms Kore had said that she had many relationships with men.

24. The Judge noted that a few photographs had been produced but they  were
    all very recent notwithstanding  the  relationship  was  said  to  have
    subsisted for over two years. The Judge also noted that the photographs
    appeared to have been staged

25. The Judge noted, at paragraph  150,  that  notwithstanding  the  fairly
    lengthy relationship, no evidence was produced by  way  of  any  texts,
    photographs or any other  form  of  communication  such  as  emails  to
    substantiate the assertion. The Judge noted there was nothing  to  show
    any ongoing commitment.

26. At paragraph 151 the Judge noted that no evidence was produced from any
    friend claiming to know them. Ms Kore did not herself claim to have had
    any previous lesbian relationships and the Judge  also  noted  in  that
    paragraph that the Appellant and Ms  Kore  had  very  little  knowledge
    about each other's personal details.

27. At paragraph 152 the  Judge  noted  that  there  was  no  corroborating
    evidence from any friend or associate who knew  the  Appellant  and  Ms
    Kore and nor was there any evidence of any social links to  any  groups
    or organisations such as LGBT confirming the nature and extent  of  the
    asserted relationship.

28. The Judge concluded at paragraph 154 that he was not satisfied,  having
    considered the evidence as a whole, that the Appellant was gay or  that
    she would be treated as gay by  potential  persecutors  in  Gambia.  He
    found the Appellant to have fabricated a claim to prevent her  removal,
    having failed on earlier occasions to have her leave extended  on  non-
    asylum grounds and it was only after she was detained in  October  2017
    that she made the claim based on her alleged sexuality.

29. Whilst the Judge has not specifically  found  Ms  Kore  to  be  lacking
    credibility or not to be a lesbian it  is  abundantly  clear  from  the
    findings that the Judge has found that the Appellant and  Ms  Kore  are
    not in a lesbian relationship and has done so for numerous  sustainable
    reasons. The errors as to the length of time since  they  met  and  the
    fact she made no mention of it earlier do not  materially  affect  that
    finding. The Judge noted the lack of knowledge each had for the  other,
    the lack of any corroborating  evidence  from  anybody  save  the  mere
    assertions by the two of them. The Judge noted  the  lack  of  previous
    relationships in relation to  Ms  Kore  and  the  fact  that  both  had
    relationships with men and indeed the Appellant has a son. The  Judge's
    conclusions, even without those tainted by error, are firmly  based  on
    the evidence, or lack of it, and are sustainable.

 Decision

30. The Decision and Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal  does  not  contain
    any material errors of law and the appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

31. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction. There  was
    no application for one to be made before me and I see no  justification
    in making one and do not do so.


Signed [pic]                            Date 4th January 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

