
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04107/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 August 2016                     |On 9 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                           ms shrishtina shrestha
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Chaudhry, Solicitor, of Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Nepal who was born on 12 February  1991.
    She first entered this country on 15 October 2010 as a student, and her
    husband (at  that  time)  was  also  granted  entry  clearance  as  her
    dependant.  The  appellant's  leave  was  extended  subsequently,  most
    recently until 24 February 2015.  However,  following  enquiries  which
    had been made by the  respondent  on  6  October  2014  the  respondent
    concluded that she had  submitted  false  educational  certificates  in
    order to  enter  this  country  and  on  the  basis  that  she  was  an
    immigration offender within Section 21(1)(a)  of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971, she became liable for removal to Nepal.

 2. The appellant thereafter submitted a judicial  review  application  but
    this was refused and following service of a  notice  informing  of  her
    liability to detention, she  was  detained  on  29  February  2016  and
    removal directions were served on her on 4 March 2016.  On that day she
    made a claim for asylum, which was refused by the respondent on 6 April
    2016.

 3. The appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Buckwell,  sitting  at  Yarl's  Wood
    Detention Centre on 2 June 2016.

 4. In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 15 June 2016,  Judge  Buckwell
    dismissed the appellant's appeal, on  asylum  grounds  and  also  under
    Article 3  of  the  ECHR.   She  now  appeals  against  that  decision,
    permission having been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 8
    July 2016.

 5. The appellant was represented before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  Mr
    Chaudhry, who has  also  represented  the  appellant  today.   At  that
    hearing, Mr Chaudhry had relied upon  a  skeleton  argument  (which  is
    referred to below) and also on a  relatively  small  bundle  (some  124
    pages) which contained some background material relating to Nepal.

 6. The appellant's case as advanced in the skeleton argument was that  she
    would face persecution on  return  to  Nepal  for  two  reasons,  first
    because she had converted to Islam  in  December  2015  "following  her
    discussions with her Muslim friends, and attendances at a  mosque"  and
    would for this reason "face persecution from her family  and  from  the
    Nepalese authorities" and secondly because she still owed money  to  "a
    powerful man from a powerful political family in Nepal".

 7. It was also argued that she is of "a vulnerable disposition"  and  that
    she would face "social discrimination due to her conversion" which  she
    contended "will amount to persecution due to  her  family's  historical
    practising of the Hindu faith".  It was suggested  that  her  "family's
    targeting will be tantamount to so-called 'honour' based  violence  for
    this reason".

 8. It was argued at page 4 of the skeleton  argument  that  the  appellant
    could not relocate within Nepal and continue her life elsewhere  within
    the country because she was "a single woman of vulnerable  disposition,
    and is likely to become a marked woman, due  to  her  change  of  faith
    which is now illegal in Nepal and her duty as an  evangelical  Muslim".
    I deal below with whether or not it can properly  be  argued  that  her
    change of faith is indeed "now illegal" in Nepal, and  Mr  Chaudhry  on
    the appellant's behalf was unable to demonstrate by  reference  to  the
    new Nepalese Constitution or in any other way that this was indeed  the
    case.

 9. Within the skeleton argument there is reference to what is said  to  be
    some "objective evidence" which is  said  to  support  the  appellant's
    claim.  This amounts to seven items in total.

10. The judge was apparently unimpressed by the appellant's  appeal,  which
    he dismissed on all grounds.  In a decision which it is said on  behalf
    of the appellant to be very brief (but which  amounts  to  some  eleven
    pages), he made adverse credibility findings regarding the bulk of  the
    appellant's claim.  In particular, he did not accept that she would  be
    at risk from the family friend who had lent her money before she  came,
    and he also did not see  that  there  would  be  any  obstacle  to  her
    relocating to a Muslim dominated area within Nepal, of which there were
    some (see paragraph 59).  He noted that the asylum claim had been  made
    very late, and only when removal directions were served  (at  paragraph
    57) and his conclusion, at paragraph 60, was that he was "firmly of the
    view that the appellant wishes to remain in this country as her husband
    appears to  have  deserted  her  and  because,  and  nevertheless,  she
    believes that this country will provide more opportunities for  her  in
    life, as compared to returning to Nepal".



Grounds of Appeal

11. There are two grounds of appeal, namely first that the judge "failed to
    make findings of fact on a number of key matters in  this  appeal"  and
    secondly that he "failed to give any or adequate consideration  to  the
    objective evidence within the appellant's bundle and expressly referred
    to in the appellant's skeleton argument".

12. Ground 1 is argued at paragraphs 5 to 9 of the grounds, while ground  2
    is argued at paragraphs 10 to 18.

13. Regarding ground 1, it is submitted at paragraph 5 that the  respondent
    having accepted that the appellant had converted to  Islam,  which  was
    the "main aspect of the appellant's account of the risk on return"  the
    finding at paragraph 59 relating to there not being a  risk  on  return
    due  to  the  appellant's  faith  was  insufficient,  because  it  only
    contained six lines.  It is said that her claim had "concerned  a  risk
    on return due to her family's long history of being  followers  of  the
    Hindu faith and that as she had converted  to  a  non-Hindu  faith  she
    would be seen to have caused 'dishonour' to the family".  It  is  noted
    that the judge had recorded her belief that she  "might  be  killed  by
    family members", but it is said that the judge makes no finding of fact
    based on risk from her family members.  The judge, it  is  said  merely
    considers the likelihood of her behaviour "attracting the attention  of
    the authorities".

14. It is also asserted that the judge had made no findings of  fact  based
    on the evidence that the appellant had converted, as opposed  to  those
    Nepalese Muslims "who were born into Muslim families".

15.  Also  within  ground  1,  it  is  asserted  that  the  judge  did  not
    specifically consider whether relocation to  a  Muslim  area  would  be
    reasonable "in view of her being  a  single  young  Muslim  convert  to
    Islam".   It  is  submitted  that  accordingly  the  finding  that  the
    appellant could relocate internally "lacks analysis" and  is  therefore
    unsafe.

16. In this regard reliance is also placed on the appellant's account "that
    she would return to Nepal as a Muslim  convert  wearing  a  headscarf".
    Reference is made to the changes in  the  Nepalese  Constitution  which
    would affect the appellant,  in  particular  as  her  headscarf  "could
    identify her as being a Muslim".

17. Regarding ground 2, at paragraph 10 of the  grounds  it  is  stated  as
    follows:

         "10. The  appellant  submitted  a  substantial  quantity  of  high-
             quality,   reliable   objective   evidence   demonstrating   a
             significant curtailment of rights of religious conversion from
             Hinduism".

18. Reference is made at paragraph 12 to a news article exhibited  at  page
    72 of  the  bundle  indicating  (it  is  asserted)  "that  Nepal's  new
    Constitution bans religious conversions".  It  is  said  that  "it  was
    submitted on behalf of the appellant that the appellant was at risk  of
    the  change  in  the  Constitution  and  legislation   concerning   her
    conversion to Islam".  This asserted failure of the judge  to  consider
    this evidence and to make findings as to whether the evidence regarding
    her conversion was accepted or rejected "is of paramount importance".

19. It is also said at paragraph 13 that  "there  were  several  other  key
    pieces of objective evidence that  shed  light  on  the  likelihood  of
    mistreatment that would amount to persecution specifically due  to  the
    appellant's religious conversion" and in this regard reference is  made
    to the skeleton argument, which as noted above, contained a few  pieces
    of evidence in this regard.

20. It is said that the judge should have given more attention, or "anxious
    scrutiny" to the appellant's arguments  with  specific  regard  to  the
    evidence submitted, and that had he done so, his findings may well have
    been different.  At paragraph 16, it is said that this failure was  not
    cured by the "generic reference to all  of  the  evidence  having  been
    taken into account, at paragraph 55 [of the decision maker]".

21. Objection is also made to the  judge's  findings  with  regard  to  the
    delayed timing of the asylum  application  because,  it  is  said,  the
    appellant had instructed her previous representatives in relation to an
    asylum application prior to her detention.



Arguments made orally at the Hearing

22. At the hearing, on behalf of the appellant, Mr Chaudhry relied upon the
    grounds, and expanded on them.  He  submitted  that  the  new  Nepalese
    Constitution had come into effect in September 2015 and, as  argued  in
    the grounds, the First-tier Tribunal Judge had not adequately  explored
    the risks aspects which the appellant would now face on return, firstly
    from her family as a result of her conversion to Islam  and,  secondly,
    because there was now a risk from the Nepalese authorities  because  of
    the recent change in the Constitution.  The Tribunal was reminded  that
    the appellant's evidence was that  she  would  be  returning  to  Nepal
    wearing a religious headscarf.

23. When asked by the Tribunal what objective  evidence  should  have  been
    considered but had not been,  Mr  Chaudhry  relied  especially  on  the
    document contained at paragraph 72 of  the  bundle,  referring  to  the
    Constitution "barring religious conversion".  In the  context  of  this
    appeal it was important that the judge should have noted  this  article
    which suggested that the authorities were "bowing to pressure from hard-
    line Hindu groups".

24. Also, the material at page 24 onwards  of  the  bundle  was  important,
    which was a  written  statement  submitted  by  the  Pax  Romana,  (the
    international Catholic movement), which made reference to it now  being
    a criminal act to convert someone from one religion  to  another.   The
    appellant's evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that if she was
    to return to Nepal she would attempt to evangelise.  It  was  submitted
    that the judge had  not  given  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  that
    evidence.

25. At page 25 the Pax Romana had given examples of actions  taken  against
    Muslims.

26. With regard to a question from the Tribunal as to what course the judge
    should have taken with regard to existing country guidance on Nepal  to
    the effect that there were Muslim communities within that country where
    a Muslim who returned  could  live,  Mr  Chaudhry  submitted  that  his
    understanding was that the country guidance was old  and  therefore  it
    should have been acceptable to depart from it because  there  had  been
    considerable changes in the country situation.  He did not point to any
    authorities, however, to the effect that being a Muslim per  se  placed
    one at risk within Nepal.

27. It was not justifiable for the judge to say that the appellant would be
    protected by the Nepalese authorities and this was not  sustainable  on
    the evidence.  At page 28, in the first part of  the  report  from  the
    Asian Human Rights Commission, there was an example given of  a  Muslim
    family where little assistance had been provided.  When  asked  by  the
    Tribunal why this appellant could not relocate to an area populated  by
    Muslims, Mr Chaudhry replied that her case was put on  the  basis  that
    her position should be distinguished  from  that  of  someone  who  was
    returning who had always been a Muslim because  she  had  converted  to
    Islam.  This would be akin to an "honour based situation" from her  own
    family.

28. Mr Chaudhry also then stated that  his  "understanding"  was  that  the
    respondent had accepted that she  had  a  subjective  fear  of  return,
    (although this was certainly not accepted on behalf of  the  respondent
    before me).

29. At paragraph 59, there was no specific finding that the appellant would
    not seek to evangelise.  It was also unclear (as argued in the grounds)
    what the judge had in mind  when  deciding  that  she  could  relocate,
    especially because she was (on her case) of a vulnerable disposition.

30. In answer to a question from the Tribunal as to whether the  judge  was
    entitled to reject her account that she  would  be  at  risk  from  the
    person who had lent her money (which was at the heart of her  claim  to
    be of "a  vulnerable  disposition"),  Mr  Chaudhry  responded  that  an
    important part of her appeal was the judge's  finding  that  she  could
    seek the protection of the authorities.

31. Mr Chaudhry also referred to the material at page 123  of  the  bundle,
    which was a  report  from  Amnesty  International  headed  "Nepal:  new
    Constitution  fails  to  adequately  protect  women   and   marginalise
    communities", and starts by  stating  that  "Amnesty  International  is
    concerned by several provisions in Nepal's new Constitution".

32. In answer to a question from the Tribunal as  to  whether  Mr  Chaudhry
    could point me to any evidence that a change of faith is illegal  under
    the Constitution, as asserted within the skeleton  argument  which  was
    before the judge (at page 4, under "internal relocation"  where  it  is
    said that "the appellant is a single woman of a vulnerable disposition,
    and is likely to become a marked woman, due  to  her  change  of  faith
    which is now illegal in Nepal..."), Mr Chaudhry replied that he did not
    have the Constitution in front of him and therefore could not cite what
    the specific reference was within the Constitution, but it did  suggest
    that converts would face difficulties.  "Taken in the round" the  judge
    had not considered the evidence properly.  He had not made any findings
    as to  what  risk  she  would  be  under  because  of  changes  in  the
    Constitution.



Arguments on behalf of the Respondent

33. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Bramble submitted  that  the  focus  in
    this appeal was the judge's alleged failure to have  proper  regard  to
    the objective material (as so called within the grounds) which material
    had been before him.  The key point here was the way  this  was  argued
    within ground 2, at paragraph 10, which  was  that,  as  already  noted
    above the appellant had "submitted  a  substantial  quantity  of  high-
    quality,  reliable  objective  evidence  demonstrating  a   significant
    curtailment of rights of religious  conversion  from  Hinduism".   That
    assertion had been maintained at this hearing.

34. What the Tribunal had to consider was  how  the  judge  in  making  his
    decision had gone about this.

35. At paragraphs  48  to  51,  the  judge  had  set  out  the  appellant's
    submissions.  It was important to note that  in  those  paragraphs  the
    judge had set out the key relevant material, including  that  contained
    at pages 72 and 25 of the bundle.  At paragraph 49, the judge had  also
    referred to the appellant's submission  with  regard  to  the  argument
    contained within the skeleton argument  that  the  appellant  would  be
    identified in Nepal as a Muslim by the wearing of a headscarf, and that
    she had converted to Islam while in  this  country.   At  paragraph  50
    there was specific reference to the appellant's argument based  on  the
    criminalisation of conversion and denial of rights within Nepal.   Then
    at paragraph 51, there was reference to the argument that the appellant
    would be vulnerable as a single woman.

36. Although the decision was relatively short, it was not necessary  in  a
    decision to refer to every specific document and at  paragraph  55  the
    judge had made it clear  that  he  had  taken  all  the  evidence  into
    account, whether or not specifically referred to within the decision.

37. Accordingly, it was clear from the Decision that the  judge  had  taken
    into account all the arguments which had been made.   However,  by  the
    time of the decision, the judge clearly had issues with the appellant's
    credibility.  In particular he was concerned about the delay in  making
    the asylum application, when it was clearly  evident  on  her  evidence
    that she had converted to Islam in December 2015 (see paragraphs 56 and
    57 of the decision).

38. At paragraph 58, the judge addressed the other  aspect  of  this  case,
    which was the issue of whether or not the appellant had borrowed  money
    from a friend of her family, and the possibility of threats being  made
    against her or other family members by this friend, which he  rejected.
    Then at paragraph 59, the judge turned his attention to  the  issue  of
    the appellant's conversion to Islam, in which he had concluded that  it
    would  not  be  either  unreasonable  or  impractical  to  require  the
    appellant to relocate to  other  areas  of  Nepal  which  were  Muslim-
    dominated.

39. In answer to a question from the Tribunal, Mr Bramble said that whether
    or not the appellant would be inclined to proselytise was not material,
    because she could relocate.

40. Nowhere within the bundle was there information of magnitude which  had
    not been taken into account by the judge.  There was no evidence  which
    the judge had ignored which could have moved him or any other judge  to
    come to a  different  conclusion.   The  findings  of  the  judge  were
    adequately reasoned in light of the adverse view taken by the judge  as
    to the appellant's credibility, as expressed at paragraph 60 (which  is
    where the judge found that the reason she  wished  to  remain  in  this
    country was not because of a genuine fear of  persecution  but  because
    "she believes that this country will provide more opportunities for her
    in life, as compared to returning to Nepal").



Discussion

41. I note the submission at paragraph 16 of the grounds that the judge had
    failed to have specific regard to the evidence submitted and  that  his
    reference to "all of the evidence having been taken  into  account,  at
    paragraph  55"  was  "generic"  but  having  considered  the   Decision
    carefully, it is clear that the judge's consideration of  the  evidence
    was not only not generic but was carefully structured  (as  Mr  Bramble
    had argued in his submissions). Having referred to the evidence  relied
    upon in the submissions which had been made, the judge gave his reasons
    all for rejecting the credibility  of  the  appellant's  account.   The
    judge was entitled to take into account that the claim for  asylum  had
    been made very late and was also entitled to reject as untruthful  (and
    not credible) that she had been threatened by the man from whom she had
    borrowed money.  The reasons are given at paragraph 58 of the  decision
    and are sustainable.

42. It is also clear that the judge did have regard to the evidence  relied
    upon by the appellant because the important parts of that evidence  are
    referred to specifically within his summary of  the  submissions  which
    had been made, especially at paragraph 48, where reference is  made  to
    the change in the Constitution of Nepal, in which the appellant  relied
    upon  evidence  that  "the   conversion   of   individuals   is   being
    criminalised", and which the judge recognised was said to  have  become
    very significant now, and at paragraph 50, where the  judge  refers  to
    the evidence  contained  at  page  25  of  the  bundle  concerning  the
    criminalising of conversion and the denial of rights which  was  relied
    on as demonstrating that  "there  is  evidence  of  the  harassment  of
    Muslims and of the dominance of Hindus".

43. However, the judge was also entitled to find, as he  did  at  paragraph
    59, that evangelical activities  would  be  unlikely  to  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities because the appellant had open to her  the
    option of relocating to  Muslim  dominated  areas  in  Nepal,  and  was
    entitled to  conclude  that  he  "[did]  not  find  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable or impracticable to require that the appellant relocate to
    such an area".

44. It is notable that Mr Chaudhury was  not  able  to  point  to  anything
    within the Constitution which made a change of faith in itself illegal,
    and having had regard to the evidence which has been placed before  the
    Tribunal (and which was before Judge Buckwell) there does not appear to
    be any.  The highest the appellant's case can be put in this regard (by
    reference to the Article contained at page 72 of the  bundle)  is  that
    "the Constitution stipulates fines  and  jail  time  for  'any  act  to
    convert another person from one religion  to  another  or  any  act  or
    behaviour to undermine or jeopardise  the  religion  of  another'";  in
    other  words  evangelical  activity  is  proscribed,  rather  than  the
    individual decision of a person to change his or her faith.

45. Essentially, the real challenge  in  this  appeal  is  to  the  judge's
    findings of fact, in which he rejected her core account as  untruthful,
    but the judge's findings are adequately reasoned and were open to  him.
    Having made the findings of  fact  that  he  did,  including  that  the
    appellant's real motivation for claiming asylum was that she would have
    more opportunities  in  this  country  than  in  Nepal,  there  was  no
    realistic basis upon which he could regard her as a "vulnerable" person
    on return.  As the background material (and current  country  guidance)
    is that there are Muslim areas within Nepal  to  which  this  appellant
    could relocate, and as the judge's finding at paragraph 59 that it  was
    neither unreasonable nor impractical to require her to do so  was  open
    to him and cannot realistically be said on the evidence to be perverse,
    she would be free within those areas to discuss her religion with like-
    minded co-religionists and would have no occasion on  which  she  would
    need to discuss her views with non-Muslims such as might cause  her  to
    fall foul of the new Constitution.

46. It follows that I do not consider that  there  has  been  any  material
    error in Judge Buckwell's decision and accordingly this appeal must  be
    dismissed.



Decision

There being no material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 4 November 2016

