
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04845/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 7 January 2020                    |On 20 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   Mr M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Azimi, Counsel, instructed by Braitch RB
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Iran,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Hatton of the First-tier Tribunal sent  on  1  August
    2019 dismissing his appeal against the decision made by the  respondent
    on 10 May 2019 to refuse his protection claim.

2.   The appellant's grounds were essentially twofold,  it  being  submitted
    that the judge fell into legal error in:

    (1)  failing to factor in  when  assessing  the  risk  profile  of  the
         appellant the fact that the respondent had accepted that he  was  a
         KDP supporter; and

    (2)  failing to consider the likely risk arising out of the appellant's
         accepted Facebook posts and also his sur place activities.

3.   I received well-formulated submissions from both representatives.

4.   It will assist in  analysing  the  grounds  to  recall  the  applicable
    country guidance, in particular the case of HB (Kurds) Iran  CG  [2018]
    UKUT 00430 which the judge stated he took into account.   Its  headnote
    states:

         (1)  SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016]
             UKUT 308 (IAC) remains valid country guidance in terms of the
             country guidance offered in the headnote. For the avoidance of
             doubt, that decision is not authority for any proposition in
             relation to the risk on return for refused Kurdish asylum-
             seekers on account of their Kurdish ethnicity alone.

         (2)  Kurds in Iran face discrimination. However, the evidence does
             not support a contention that such discrimination is, in
             general, at such a level as to amount to persecution or
             Article 3 ill-treatment.

         (3)  Since 2016 the Iranian authorities have become increasingly
             suspicious of, and sensitive to, Kurdish political activity.
             Those of Kurdish ethnicity are thus regarded with even greater
             suspicion than hitherto and are reasonably likely to be
             subjected to heightened scrutiny on return to Iran.

         (4)  However, the mere fact of being a returnee of Kurdish
             ethnicity with or without a valid passport, and even if
             combined with illegal exit, does not create a risk of
             persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

         (5)  Kurdish ethnicity is nevertheless a risk factor which, when
             combined with other factors, may create a real risk of
             persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment. Being a risk factor it
             means that Kurdish ethnicity is a factor of particular
             significance when assessing risk. Those "other factors" will
             include the matters identified in paragraphs (6)-(9) below.

         (6)  A period of residence in the KRI by a Kurdish returnee is
             reasonably likely to result in additional questioning by the
             authorities on return. However, this is a factor that will be
             highly fact-specific and the degree of interest that such
             residence will excite will depend, non-exhaustively, on
             matters such as the length of residence in the KRI, what the
             person concerned was doing there and why they left.

         (7)  Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are at
             risk of arrest, prolonged detention and physical abuse by the
             Iranian authorities. Even Kurds expressing peaceful dissent or
             who speak out about Kurdish rights also face a real risk of
             persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

         (8)  Activities that can be perceived to be political by the
             Iranian authorities include social welfare and charitable
             activities on behalf of Kurds. Indeed, involvement with any
             organised activity on behalf of or in support of Kurds can be
             perceived as political and thus involve a risk of adverse
             attention by the Iranian authorities with the consequent risk
             of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

         (9)  Even 'low-level' political activity, or activity that is
             perceived to be political, such as, by way of example only,
             mere possession of leaflets espousing or supporting Kurdish
             rights, if discovered, involves the same risk of persecution
             or Article 3 ill-treatment. Each case however, depends on its
             own facts and an assessment will need to be made as to the
             nature of the material possessed and how it would be likely to
             be viewed by the Iranian authorities in the context of the
             foregoing guidance.

         (10) The Iranian authorities demonstrate what could be described as
             a 'hair-trigger' approach to those suspected of or perceived
             to be involved in Kurdish political activities or support for
             Kurdish rights. By 'hair-trigger' it means that the threshold
             for suspicion is low and the reaction of the authorities is
             reasonably likely to be extreme.

5.   It is pertinent to recall  the  guidance  set  out  in  HB  because  it
    underlines the importance of judges making careful findings as  to  the
    political profile of Kurdish appellants.   In  this  regard,  there  is
    nothing to indicate that the judge, in  seeking  to  apply  HB  and  in
    particular paragraphs 3, 7 and 9  of  the  above  headnote,  took  into
    account the conclusions of the respondent on the appellant's status  as
    a KDP supporter.  The respondent had  stated  in  paragraphs  31-38  as
    follows:

         "31. You have claimed that you are a supporter of the KDP (AIR  78)
             and as such this part of your claim shall now be considered.

         32.  In response to your claim of supporting KDP,  you  were  asked
             'For what reasons did you begin to support the KDP?'  to  this
             you explained 'I would like, like this country, my language to
             have a country as well, for that reason  I  worked  for  them'
             (AIR 79).  You have  provided  an  emotive  account  into  the
             reasons why you supported the KDP.  As a result, your  account
             is deemed as credible.

             In addition to this you were asked 'can you tell me  what  the
             KDP's policies are?'  To this you  replied  'For  success  for
             Kurds'    (AIR    81).     External    evidence    found    at
             https://dckurd/org/2018/07/25/democratic-party-of-kurdistan-
             iran-kdpi/ illustrates that 'The party  defines  itself  as  a
             democratic socialist organization with  economic,  social  and
             political policy predicated on a belief of human equality  and
             freedom, advocating a federal model  of  governance  in  Iran.
             The account you have  provided  is  consistent  with  external
             evidence and therefore deemed as credible.

         33.  You were asked 'Was there any recruitment process to become  a
             supporter?' to this you explained 'As a friend  I  worked  for
             Kurdalati   (Kurdish   Nationalism)   (AIR    88).     Country
             Information: Iran: Kurds and Kurdish political groups: January
             2019:  6.2.2  outlines  '...Concerning  the  organization   of
             members of  KDPI  in  Iran,  KDPI's  representative  in  Paris
             informed the delegation that there  are  three  categories  of
             persons  affiliated  with  KDPI:  members,  sympathizers   and
             'friends'.   Your   account   is   consistent   with   country
             information and therefore deemed as credible.

         34.  You were asked 'I am trying to establish your thought process,
             you said you thought about it for 6 months, what was the final
             reason why you decided to help? to this you responded 'When  I
             was thinking about it, in Iran we are not free, it is not like
             here.  We need to be free.'  (AIR 118).  You have provided  an
             emotional account when questioned about  why  you  thought  to
             help the KDP.  Your account is therefore deemed as credible.

         35.  You were also asked 'Did  you  have  any  sort  of  membership
             card?'  to  which  you  replied  'no'   (AIR   87).    Country
             Information: Iran: Kurds and Kurdish political groups: January
             2019: 6.3.1 states '...Mohammad  Nazif  Qadiri  (KDPI)  stated
             that KDPI normally does not issue ID cards and  certainly  not
             to members in Iran.  Your response  is  externally  consistent
             with country information and as a result, found as credible.

         36.  You were additionally asked 'Do you know when  the  party  was
             founded' to this you responded 'about 73 years ago' (AIR  82).
             External             evidence             found             at
             https://thekurdishproject.org/history-and-culture/kurdish-
             democracy/kdp-kurdistan-democratic-party/   illustrates   'The
             Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP) is the oldest Kurdish political
             party in Iraqi Kurdistan.  It  was  founded  in  1946  in  the
             Kurdish region of Iran.   Your  response  is  consistent  with
             external evidence and therefore deemed as credible.

         37.  You were also asked 'Where is the KDP's headquarters?' to this
             you replied  'Koya'  (AIR  85).  External  evidence  found  at
             https://www.reuters.com/article/us-mideast-crisis-iraq-
             iran/iran-attacks-iranian-kurdish-opposition-group-base-in-
             iraq-idUSKCN1LO0KZ  illustrates  'The  Democratic   Party   of
             Iranian Kurdistan (PDKI), an armed opposition  group  fighting
             for greater autonomy for  Iran's  Kurdish  community,  tweeted
             pictures and video of explosions, as well as of  the  wounded,
             at  its  headquarters  in  Koya,  in  Iraq's   semi-autonomous
             Kurdistan region'.  Your response is consistent with  external
             evidence and therefore deemed as credible.

         38.  Consideration  has  been  given  to  the  responses  you  have
             provided at interview.  In addition to this external  evidence
             and country information have also been considered with regards
             to the responses you have given.  You  have  also  provided  a
             detailed  and  emotive  account  when  questioned  about  your
             reasons  and  motivations  into  why  you  supported  the  KDP
             political party.  As a result, it is accepted that you were  a
             supporter of the KDP".

6.   When one turns to consider the judge's  treatment  of  the  appellant's
    KDP involvement, it appears to be premised on the  basis  that  he  had
    failed to  demonstrate  that  he  had  any  involvement  with  the  KDP
    whatever: see paragraphs 32-47 in particular.  If that were  the  case,
    then he at least  needed  to  explain  why  he  was  going  behind  the
    concession made by the respondent.  If, on the other  hand,  the  judge
    meant to accept the appellant was a KDP supporter, then  he  needed  to
    explain what significance he attached to that  fact  in  light  of  the
    guidance given in HB.  Of course, even applying HB, acceptance that the
    appellant was a  KDP  supporter  did  not  necessarily  mean  that  the
    appellant would have succeeded in his appeal. It was  the  respondent's
    position at least that  despite  being  a  KDP  supporter  "it  is  not
    accepted that you ever came to the attention of the Iranian authorities
    or that they have any adverse interest in yourself, nor that you worked
    for the KDP".  But the judge simply arrived at the conclusion that  the
    appellant would not be of adverse interest to the  Iranian  authorities
    without considering the significance or otherwise of his KDP support.

7.   The judge's error in relation to ground (1) interacts with his  further
    error in his treatment of the appellant's  Facebook  activity  and  his
    involvement in demonstrations in London.  As  regards  the  appellant's
    Facebook activity, the judge found:

         "80. On consideration of the  above  documents,  I  find  that  the
             Appellant has created and shared posts of a  political  nature
             on Facebook, relating to the regime in Iran.

         81.  In so finding, I note that by his own admission, the Appellant
             has a relatively modest number of Facebook friends,  and  that
             the documentary evidence provided of the Appellant's political
             activity on Facebook relates to  a  very  limited  and  recent
             period of time i.e. June 2019.

         82.  On the above basis, I consider it  exceedingly  unlikely  that
             anyone other than the Appellant's Facebook  friends  would  be
             aware of his posts.  Even if someone other  than  one  of  the
             Appellant's Facebook friends were to see  his  Facebook  page,
             this would not enable them to  trace,  identify  or  otherwise
             target the Appellant.

         83.  As the documentation provided  by  the  Appellant  relates  to
             Facebook posts made in June 2019, there is nothing to  suggest
             that the Appellant is a prolific poster of political material.
              The Appellant has around three hundred  Facebook  friends  by
             his own  admission,  and  his  online  presence  is  therefore
             marginal, at best.

         84.  In considering the country guidance case of HB (Kurds) Iran CG
             [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC), I accept that Facebook content  would
             put an Iranian citizen at risk of persecution if discovered by
             the Iranian authorities.  I find there  is  no  real  risk  of
             discovery in the Appellant's  case,  by  virtue  of  my  above
             observations".

8.   As regards the appellant's involvement  in  demonstrations,  the  judge
    found at 85-87:

         "85. I am  additionally  satisfied  on  the  photographic  evidence
             provided from  the  Appellant's  Facebook  account,  that  the
             Appellant has taken part in demonstrations against the Iranian
             regime in this country, although by his own admission, he  has
             attended  no  more  than  three  [Appellant's   Bundle,   p.4,
             para.47].

         86.  In so finding, I  note  there  are  very  few  people  in  the
             photographs  provided.   I  further  note  that  none  of  the
             photographs  appear  to  show  the  presence  of  any  police,
             security personnel,  loud-hailers,  cameras,  video  recording
             equipment, members of the press, or any representative of  the
             Iranian authorities.

         87.  Accordingly, I find  that  the  demonstrations  in  which  the
             Appellant has participated have been low key  in  nature.   On
             this basis, I find that the Appellant's participation in these
             demonstrations has not subjected him to a real risk of  coming
             to the adverse attention of the Iranian authorities".

9.   There are a number of difficulties with these findings.

10.  Firstly, in relation to the appellant's Facebook  activity,  the  judge
    does not appear to have engaged with the Tribunal's assessment  of  the
    Facebook activity of the appellant in the HB case. At  paragraphs  113-
    116, It wrote:

         113. Mr Metcalfe submitted that there is insufficient evidence that
         the Iranian authorities would necessarily be aware of that material
         and that the evidence did not establish that the Iranian
         authorities routinely inspect the internet profiles of failed
         asylum seekers.

         114. However, we noted at [97] above that it is not disputed that a
         returnee without a passport is likely to be questioned on return,
         confirmed in the expert evidence before us and recognised in
         existing current country guidance, for example, SSH and HR. Ms
         Enayat's evidence was that it is part of the routine process to
         look at an internet profile, Facebook and emails of a returnee.  A
         person would be asked whether they had a Facebook page and that
         would be checked. When the person returns they will be asked to log
         onto their Facebook and email accounts.  That is also the effect of
         her evidence given in AB and Others which was accepted by the
         Tribunal in that case (see [457]).

         115. Mr Metcalfe accepted that the material posted by the appellant
         on Facebook, if it became known to the authorities, would expose
         him to prosecution with a risk of imprisonment and that this would
         result in a real risk of ill-treatment. It was also accepted that
         the appellant's Facebook page is currently visible to the public at
         large.

         116. We are satisfied that the content of the appellant's Facebook
         page would become known to the authorities on return as part of the
         process of investigation of his background. That is the effect of
         the expert and background evidence before us. It is then, no step
         at all to the conclusion that this would involve a real risk of
         persecution and Article 3 ill-treatment in his case, by reason of
         detention and ill-treatment and likely prosecution. His Facebook
         posts would reveal not only his support for Kurdish rights but also
         his having insulted the Iranian regime and leading figures in it.
         This is reasonably likely to be regarded not only as having
         'crossed the line' in terms of political views or activity, but
         also in terms of religious dissent.

11.  Given these paragraphs, the judge was required to provide more  by  way
    of explanation as to why he rejected the likelihood of the  appellant's
    Facebook activities being discovered by the Iranian  authorities,  when
    relatively similar Facebook  activity  by  the  appellant  in  HB,  was
    considered to raise a real risk of discovery.

12.    Secondly,   in   relation   to   the   appellant's   involvement   in
    demonstrations, there is nothing to indicate the basis of  the  judge's
    assessment that these activities would not make  it  more  likely  than
    otherwise that the Iranian authorities would question the appellant  on
    return.

13.  A further difficulty is that there is  nothing  to  indicate  that  the
    judge considered  cumulatively  the  fact  that  there  was  sur  place
    activity of two different types: online (via Facebook)  and  in  person
    (in attendance at demonstrations).  There was also the additional  fact
    that the respondent had accepted the appellant was a KDP supporter when
    in Iran. If the Iranian authorities did come to know of  his  past  KDP
    support and/or his Facebook and/or his demonstration activities through
    questioning, then, even if they considered his activities low  profile,
    this might still result in adverse treatment - see HB at paragraph 9:

         "Even 'low-level' political activity, or activity that is perceived
         to be political, such as, by way of example only,  mere  possession
         of leaflets espousing or supporting Kurdish rights, if  discovered,
         involves the same risk of persecution or Article  3  ill-treatment.
         Each case however, depends on its own facts and an assessment  will
         need to be made as to the nature of the material possessed and  how
         it would be likely to be viewed by the Iranian authorities  in  the
         context of the foregoing guidance."

14.  An additional difficulty is that the judge made no specific finding  as
    to whether or not the appellant should be considered as someone who had
    exited Iran illegally. He  could  not,  therefore,  discount  that  the
    appellant had exited illegally. Yet the only treatment  of  this  as  a
    possible factor was at paragraph 89 where the judge simply stated  that
    "even if" the appellant had exited illegally he would not  be  at  risk
    (but that was on the basis that he was merely  a  returnee  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity).

15.  For the above reasons I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  judge  for
    material error of law.

16.  I conclude that the case should be remitted  to  the  FtT  (not  before
    Judge Hatton).

17.  Mr Azimi submitted that I should preserve the  positive  findings  made
    by the judge  regarding  his  involvement  in  demonstrations  and  his
    Facebook activity.  I am not prepared to do so.   It  would  amount  to
    picking and choosing.   Subject  to  one  proviso,  the  case  requires
    assessment of the appellant's account as a whole and needs to be  heard
    de novo.  The proviso concerns the  respondent's  acceptance  that  the
    appellant was a KDP supporter. Given that Mrs Aboni did not seek before
    me to resile from that position, I  consider  that  the  next  Tribunal
    should treat that as an accepted fact.

18.  An anonymity direction is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 15 January 2020
              [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

