
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04155/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|on 4 September 2019.                 |On 12 September 2019                 |
|Typed, corrected, signed and sent to |                                     |
|promulgation on 10th September 2019. |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                               mariwan khasraw
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Evans, Solicitor, WTB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity  who  was  born
    there on 1 June 1982.  He travelled from Iraq in May 2018 to Turkey and
    then from Turkey he travelled by sea to Greece.  His fingerprints  were
    taken in Greece, but he did not claim asylum there.  He then  travelled
    to Italy where he was detained and again fingerprinted  but  again  did
    not claim asylum.  He then arrived in the United Kingdom on  3  August,
    2018 when he did claim asylum.

2.   The respondent concluded that the appellant was not entitled to  asylum
    and refused his claim on 15  April  2019  as  a  result  of  which  the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   His appeal was heard in Manchester on 7 June this  year  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andrew Davies.  The basis of the appellant's  claim  was
    set out at paragraphs 5 and 6 of the judge's determination  and  is  as
    follows:-

         "5.  The basis of the claim is well-founded fear of the Iraqi anti-
             terror police.  The appellant  worked  as  a  bus  driver  and
             claims that on more than ten occasions he  was  hired  by  the
             Iraqi government to transport prisoners to and from Chamchamal
             Prison, Sulaymaniyah.  On the  appellant's  account,  a  fight
             broke out between the family of Kadir Abdulla Kwekha Mubarek's
             family and the anti-terror forces outside the prison Mubarek's
             brother was killed and others  were  injured.   The  appellant
             claims that the family are related to his wife  [omitted]  the
             appellant stated that he fled as soon as  fighting  broke  out
             and saw nothing.

         6.   According to the appellant, in April,  2018,  the  anti-terror
             forces contacted him and asked him to  be  a  witness  in  the
             trial related to the prison shooting.  He was warned to lie in
             court and state that the victim died from a  bullet  fired  by
             his own side and not by the anti-terror forces.  They paid the
             sum of $5,000 to him and warned him that he would be killed if
             he did not co-operate.  He signed a witness statement but  was
             not given a copy.  However, a few days later the appellant was
             approached by the Mubarek family who threatened to kill him if
             he did not contact the court and retract  his  evidence.   The
             appellant fled Iraq shortly afterwards."

4.   The judge found that the appellant  was  generally  consistent  in  his
    account of occasionally transferring prisoners  and  also  that  during
    transfers there would be several security officers on the bus and there
    was an escort by security vehicles both  preceding  and  following  the
    bus.  The judge found that such an arrangement had appeared to  him  to
    be entirely credible.  The judge said at paragraph 36,

         "The  incident  at  the  prison  occurred  in  January  2018.   The
         appellant claimed that his problems started from that date.   There
         is no dispute that an incident occurred at the  prison  in  January
         2018.  The appellant did  not  witness  what  happened.   He  heard
         gunshots and fled immediately.  In the course of his oral  evidence
         the appellant stated that he was outside the prison at the time  of
         the incident.  There  was  a  lot  of  shooting  and  he  ran  away
         immediately.  He did not know whether there  were  other  civilians
         around.  He did not know how many people were present.  During  the
         asylum interview on the other hand he stated that he was  the  only
         civilian around which is why he was approached."

5.   The judge recorded that there was no dispute about the  incident  which
    was reported in articles in the appellant's bundle. The judge found, at
    paragraph 41 of the determination, that  the  appellant  from  his  own
    account did not witness the battle, because he fled as soon as he heard
    gunfire and was up to 50 metres away.  According to  the  appellant  he
    was not approached for more than three months after  the  incident,  by
    which time the matter had already gone to court.   The  judge  accepted
    that the proceedings  may  have  continued.   According  to  the  press
    report, the dead man's  brother  had  confirmed  that  the  matter  was
    subject to an appeal in court and the judge also accepted that the dead
    man's brother made veiled references to a potential blood feud  in  his
    remarks directed towards the family of Talabani.

6.   The judge recorded that the appellant had no knowledge of any  problems
    being caused by his family in Iraq by either of the parties and he  did
    not know whether a trial had taken  place.   The  judge  recorded  that
    there was no dispute about the facts, namely  that  the  heavily  armed
    security forces were overpowered by a smaller group and  that  one  man
    was killed and several others injured.  The dispute,  the  judge  said,
    appeared more to concern the cause of the problem in the  first  place,
    namely the reason for the transfer of prisoners,  property  issues  and
    disputes within the PUK.  The judge recorded at  paragraph  45  of  the
    determination that although the appellant has  produced  press  reports
    relating to the incident and comments on it, he has  not  produced  any
    further reports relating to the outcome of any court proceedings.   The
    judge did note at paragraph 46 of the determination that there appeared
    to be no dispute about the cause of death.

7.   The article at page 29 of the appellant's bundle referred to an  attack
    by a group of armed men on a prisoner transfer.  The  forces  responded
    and hence the death occurred of one person with several injured.  There
    was no denial or any claim that the man was killed by  his  own  group.
    For his part, the judge could see no  reason  why  the  special  forces
    would arrange a  cover  up  more  than  three  months  later  with  the
    assistance of someone who was some 500 metres away  and  who  had  fled
    immediately he heard gunfire and who did not witness the  clash  as  it
    unfolded.  He also found that the appellant had not established that he
    was approached and bribed as he claimed.

8.   If the judge was wrong in that conclusion, he found in the  alternative
    that the appellant would in any  event  have  been  able  to  seek  the
    protection of what were clearly powerful and well-armed special  forces
    if they were indeed prepared to  bribe  the  appellant  to  give  false
    evidence.  The appellant denied that there would have  been  protection
    available to him and stated  that  the  family  of  the  dead  man  was
    powerful enough to take on the anti-terrorist security forces the judge
    rejected the claim.  He  noted  that  the  press  reports  confirm  the
    superiority that would be expected of  special  anti-terror  forces  no
    doubt trained to deal with threats from the likes of ISIS.

9.   The judge dismissed the appellant's appeal. He was not  satisfied  that
    the appellant would be at any real risk of serious harm  on  return  to
    the Iraqi Kurdish region from either parties  that  he  now  claims  to
    fear.  He considered the question of the return of  the  appellant  and
    concluded that the appellant would have no difficulties in obtaining  a
    CSID card with the help of male members of his family in the IKR.   The
    appellant knows where his family live and he and they were resident  in
    the IKR.  He was satisfied that the appellant would be able  to  return
    directly to the IKR without difficulty and  dismissed  the  appellant's
    claim.

10.  It was asserted in grounds relied upon by  Ms  Evans,  that  the  judge
    erred by making findings based on a misunderstanding of the  facts  and
    that the reasons given by the judge for not accepting  the  appellant's
    account of subsequent events after the battle at the prison, was  based
    on an incorrect interpretation of the evidence and  a  misunderstanding
    of the facts.  The grounds pointed out that there was no dispute as  to
    the facts of the battle which took place outside the  prison,  contrary
    to what the judge said at paragraphs 45 and 46.  It asserted  that  the
    evidence had been misinterpreted by the judge the  special  forces  had
    not claimed responsibility for the  death  of  the  individual  or  the
    injury of the others who suffered injuries in the  battle  and  it  was
    claimed that the findings of the judge at paragraphs 45 and 46 were not
    borne out of the evidence and are contrary to the evidence  before  the
    Tribunal.

11.  The second challenge suggested  that  the  findings  of  the  judge  at
    paragraph  48  of  the   determination   that   the   appellant   could
    realistically have sought protection from the special  forces  was  not
    based on any evidence, but appears to have been based on  an  unfounded
    assumption of the judge.  The third challenge asserted that  the  judge
    appeared to be calling for corroboration  where  at  paragraph  49  the
    judge says in relation to the court case,

         "I have seen no evidence produced as to how the matter  played  out
         and I am satisfied that given the press extracts relied upon by the
         appellant that there was  some  interest  in  this  issue  and  the
         positions taken by the protagonists.  I  am  satisfied  that  there
         would  have  been  further  publicity  as  the  case  reached   its
         conclusion but nothing has been put forward."

12.  Ms Evans argued that that was an error of law  because  the  judge  was
    calling for corroboration and I deal with that point first.

13.  I am satisfied that the judge was not calling  for  corroboration.   He
    noted the press articles produced by the appellant in relation  to  the
    battle itself and it was reasonable to assume that if  the  matter  was
    subsequently litigated upon in the courts there would have been further
    publicity as the case reached its conclusion.  The judge  was  entitled
    to say, as was the case, that no further evidence  was  produced;  that
    was a statement of fact.

14.  For the respondent Mr McVeety submitted that this was obviously a high-
    profile case the courts in Iraq had apparently opened a  case  but  the
    appellant had not actually seen anything.   There  has  since  been  no
    attempt by either party to contact the appellant via his family.  There
    are clearly lawyers in Iraq and a functioning  legal  system.   If  the
    appellant were to attend court and claimed that  he  witnessed  special
    forces killing someone, he would soon be exposed as a liar  because  he
    admitted that he had not actually seen anything and was some 500 metres
    away.  That is quite apart, of course, from the fact that his  evidence
    would be contradicted by forensic evidence.  Mr McVeety suggested  that
    the judge had not erred in law. The appellant had  received  the  bribe
    according to him and only disappeared after its payment to him.  It was
    only then that he was approached by the victim's family  and  following
    that, that he fled.  Ms Evans suggested that there was an error in  the
    reason given as to  why  the  claim  lacks  plausibility  in  that  the
    appellant was asked to give full testimony.  But what the judge said at
    paragraph 47 was that he could see no reason  why  the  special  forces
    would arrange to cover up more than three months after the  event  with
    the assistance of someone who was 500 metres  away  and  who  had  fled
    immediately he heard gunfire and did not actually witness the clash.

15.  I agree with Mr McVeety that this does not disclose any error  of  law.
    Ms Evans suggested that there could be any number of reasons  why  they
    wanted the appellant's testimony.  She said  that  the  judge  said  in
    paragraph 46 that there was no dispute as to the facts surrounding  the
    death of the deceased, but  the  reports  are  silent  as  to  who  was
    responsible for the killing.  The security forces had not  denied  that
    they were responsible, equally, but there  was  no  admission  by  them
    either. The reports were silent as to who was responsible.  Mr  McVeety
    did not believe there to be any inconsistency in the reports of the two
    attacks the security forces neither denied nor admitted killing anyone.
     There was a dispute as to who started the event, but he suggested that
    the judge was correct to ask why the  security  forces  would  want  to
    blackmail the appellant when he had denied witnessing the  battle.   He
    had fled as soon as he heard gunfire and  was  some  500  metres  away.
    According to the appellant the security forces wanted the appellant  to
    say that they had not killed the person who died, but when the articles
    are looked at, it is clear that  they  had  made  no  denial  of  being
    responsible for the man's death.  Ms Evans asked me  to  bear  in  mind
    that the reports were  silent  as  to  who  was  responsible,  but  the
    security forces do not deny that they are  responsible.   Finally,  she
    submitted that there was no evidence that  the  security  forces  would
    offer the appellant any protection.

16.  I have concluded that the determination does not disclose any  material
    error on a point of law.  I am satisfied that by what the judge said at
    paragraph  49,  he  was  not  seeking  evidence  to   corroborate   the
    appellant's account, he was merely pointing out that there was no  such
    evidence in relation to the court hearing.  According to the  appellant
    he had been paid a $5,000 bribe to give false evidence and he signed  a
    statement which was presumably submitted to the  court.   It  was  that
    which prompted the dead man's family to approach the appellant and seek
    to have its retraction under fear of death.  If the appellant genuinely
    had been approached by the security forces and taken  $5,000  of  their
    money and made a statement then it would have been in  their  interests
    to arrange the appellant's safety.  I do not believe that the judge was
    wrong to suggest that the appellant could have sought the protection of
    the security forces given that they had  been  prepared  to  bribe  the
    appellant to give false evidence.  I do not believe that the judge  has
    misunderstood the evidence  at  all.   There  was  no  dispute  in  the
    articles adduced on behalf of the appellant as to the shooting and  the
    result of the attack.  It was not admitted that the security forces had
    killed a man and injured several others, but neither was it denied that
    they had if in fact these men were attacking the security  forces  then
    one would have expected the security forces  to  have  returned  force.
    The judge was correct in saying he could see no reason why the  special
    forces would arrange a cover up more than three months after the  event
    and if they were going to arrange a coverup why on earth would they  do
    it with someone who on his own evidence was some 500  metres  away  and
    who fled immediately he heard gunfire and had not witnessed  the  clash
    as it unfolded.  I believe that the judge  was  entitled  to  make  the
    findings he did and I uphold his determination.  The appellant's appeal
    is dismissed on asylum grounds, on humanitarian protection grounds  and
    on human rights grounds.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley                                     Date  10
    September 2019
