

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: PA/04015/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17 November 2017                |On 18 December 2017               |
|Prepared 17 November 2017          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                            MR shahadot chowdhury
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearances
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh,  date  of  birth  1  November
    1984, appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 11 April  2017,
    to refuse his asylum and protection claim as well as rejecting a  claim
    to be in need of Humanitarian Protection or protection under Articles 2
    and 3 ECHR.  In addition, the Appellant had raised  Article  8  private
    life issues.

2.    The centrepiece of the Appellant's claim is  that  he  is  gay,  in  a
    relationship in the United Kingdom and were he to return to  Bangladesh
    he would, by reason of his sexuality, be at risk of persecution and  he
    would wish to conceal his sexuality only because he feared  persecution
    back in the home country.

3.    His appeal  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  P  S  Aujla,  in  his
    decision [D] on 6 June 2017, was dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

4.     The  Appellant  attended  the   hearing   in   the   FtT   with   his
    representative, a Mr Miah of counsel, instructed by solicitors  who  it
    seems may not be those who are currently on record under  the  name  of
    Sony Sadaf Haroon Solicitors of St Albans, Hertfordshire.

5.    Permission to appeal was given by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on 20 September 2017 on the basis that  the  judge  may  have  made  an
    arguable material error of law in refusing an application to adjourn so
    that a material witness could attend.  The Respondent provided  a  Rule
    24 response that in general terms argued that the judge had given  full
    and cogent reasons for refusing the adjournment  application  and  that
    there had been nothing unfair in proceeding  with  the  hearing.    The
    Secretary of State also  made  the  point  in  the  response  that  the
    Appellant had had two weeks notice  of  the  hearing  date  before  the
    judge, and even now no clear reasons had  been  given  as  to  why  the
    witness,  the  Appellant's  claimed  partner,  was   unable   to   make
    arrangements to attend the hearing.  Indeed,  it  is  less  than  clear
    where the Appellant's partner was at the material times.  I decided  to
    proceed for there was no explanation of absence  or  ......attempts  to
    contact on record but received no reply.

6.    The Judge heard an application for an adjournment  from  Mr  Miah  and
    set out the matter [D12] and the Secretary  of  State's  opposition  to
    that application.  The Judge fairly set out the consideration  he  gave
    to the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 and noted when notice of the hearing had been given
    and he was satisfied ample time had been available to arrange  for  the
    witness to return to the UK for the hearing.  Nothing had been provided
    to indicate in advance of the hearing that  the  intended  witness,  Mr
    Sohel Ahmed, would not be able to attend, nor seeking a postponement of
    the hearing of the appeal, nor it seems was there any explanation given
    as to why he had arranged matters so that he did not attend.

7.    The Judge gave reasons why he refused that application and  those  are
    more than sufficiently set out in the decision.  The judge  recites  at
    [D15 and 16] the somewhat  unusual  circumstances  and  the  fact  that
    counsel decided, when it was clear that there was not going  to  be  an
    adjournment, that he would not appear for the Appellant.  The Appellant
    attended the hearing and he chose not to participate in  it,  at  least
    after the refusal of the adjournment application, the decision had been
    made.  The Judge said in the decision he intended to proceed  with  the
    hearing, but it seems in the face of the decision for Mr Miah  and  the
    Appellant decided not to take part.  He was left with the  position  of
    dealing with this matter  on  the  documents  that  were  provided  and
    hearing the  submissions  from  the  Respondent  who  remained  at  the
    hearing.  The appeal was not dealt with on the papers.

8.    The Judge then set out, having  considered  the  papers,  the  adverse
    conclusions which he reached on the Appellant's claim to be a gay  man,
    said he  had  been  so  since  the  age  of  15,  and  who  feared  the
    consequences of his gay sexuality on a return to Bangladesh.  The Judge
    concluded, having considered the Appellant's case that the  Appellant's
    credibility was wholly damaged.  He  concluded,  for  reasons  that  he
    gave, that the Appellant was not a gay man, nor in such a  relationship
    as claimed with Mr Sohel Ahmed.   He  took  into  account,  as  he  was
    properly entitled to, the fact that  the  Appellant  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom for a significant number of years, and the  lateness  of
    the claim, ultimately been made, to need  protection.   The  Judge  was
    entitled to reach the views he did.  If the  reasoning  is  brief  that
    perhaps reflects the limitations of the matter being unable to hear any
    evidence from and cross-examination of the Appellant, and the  lack  of
    submissions made by the Appellant or Mr  Miah.   There  is  nothing  to
    suggest through the grounds that had there been  representations  made,
    any different decision would have been reached.

9.    The grounds of  appeal  do  not  argue  that  the  Judge  has  ignored
    material evidence or misapplied such evidence as he took into  account.
    In the circumstances it seemed to me that  the  judge  proceeding  with
    this matter neither acted unfairly, nor made any  procedural  error  of
    law, nor caused an unjust decision to be arrived at, and it is  notable
    that the grounds which are settled it appears by  the  representatives,
    Sony Sadaf Haroon, Solicitors, do not highlight any evident failure  to
    consider evidence submitted on behalf of the Appellant or his  intended
    witness.


NOTICE OF DECISION

10.   For these reasons I am satisfied that the original  Tribunal  made  no
    material error of law.

11.   The appeal is dismissed.

ANONYMITY

12.   No anonymity order was sought, nor is one required.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been lost and therefore no fee award is appropriate.

Signed      Date 24 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
