
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04961/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12 December 2017             |On 21 December 2017             |
|Prepared on 12 December 2017    |                                |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    N. M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1.  The  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Iraq  who  entered  the  UK
           unlawfully, and then claimed asylum on 27  November  2015.  That
           claim was refused on 3 May 2016. The appeal against the decision
           to refuse him protection status was then  dismissed  on  asylum,
           humanitarian protection and human  rights  grounds  but  allowed
           under the Immigration Rules by decision of First  tier  Tribunal
           Judge Caskie, promulgated on 7 June 2017.

        2. The Respondent was granted permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
           Tribunal by decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Osbrone of  27
           September 2017 on the basis the Judge  had  arguably  failed  to
           accurately  apply  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  the   guidance
           thereon to be  found  in  Treebhawon  (compelling  circumstances
           test) [2017] UKUT 13.

        3. Thus the matter comes before me.

      Error of law?

        4. The Appellant was handicapped in answering the Respondent's case
           because he was without legal representation. He told me that  he
           has a lawyer, but they have never come on record as  acting  for
           him, and he accepted that they had refused to represent  him  at
           the hearing before me. In the circumstances I ensured  that  the
           Appellant could  say  all  that  he  wished  to  say,  and  then
           considered the Respondent's arguments for myself.

        5. It is clear, when read as a  whole,  that  this  is  a  confused
           decision. The Judge begins by accepting the Appellant's evidence
           and stating baldly that his appeal  must  therefore  be  allowed
           [17]. However, as he then analysed the Appellant's case, and the
           evidence relied upon, he found in terms that the  Appellant  was
           never at risk from the Ba'ath Party, and had never been targeted
           personally for harm by anyone in Iraq in the past, and  that  he
           faced no real risk of being targeted for a Convention reason  in
           the future [27]. Thus the asylum appeal fell to be dismissed.

        6. The Judge also concluded that the Appellant no longer faced  any
           general risk of harm in his home area from either the state,  or
           from non state agents, because the circumstances  prevailing  in
           that area had changed dramatically. He found that there  was  no
           internal armed conflict in the Appellant's home  area.  Thus  he
           also concluded that the Appellant could not  succeed  in  either
           his Article 3, or humanitarian protection grounds of appeal.

        7. There is no  cross  appeal  from  the  Appellant  against  those
           conclusions.

        8. The Judge also dismissed in terms  the  Article  8  appeal,  but
           allowed the appeal on the  basis  of  his  conclusion  that  the
           Appellant satisfied the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
           of the Immigration Rules,  reasoning  that  notwithstanding  the
           failure of the Article 8 appeal the appeal could nevertheless be
           allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  because  the  terms  of
           paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) were more generous  than  a  traditional
           assessment  of  Article  8  would  allow  [29].  He  offered  no
           jurisprudence to support this approach, or that reasoning.

        9. It is clear that the decision contains no finding that Article 8
           was engaged by the Appellant's circumstances.  Indeed  it  could
           reasonably be inferred from the way in  which  the  decision  is
           phrased that the Judge accepted that Article 8 was not  engaged.
           Having considered the matter for myself,  I  am  satisfied  that
           this was indeed in reality the only conclusion that was open  to
           the Judge. There was no evidence before  the  Judge  that  would
           have allowed him to conclude that the  Appellant  had  formed  a
           "family life" in the  UK  with  any  individual.  There  was  no
           evidence before him that would have allowed him to conclude that
           the Appellant had formed  a  "private  life"  whose  nature  and
           quality were such as to engage  Article  8.  In  this  case  the
           Appellant relied upon no more than his mere presence in  the  UK
           illegally for eighteen months. He had  offered  no  evidence  to
           explain how his lifestyle and  friendships  meant  that  he  had
           established a "private life" whose nature and quality  would  be
           sufficient to engage Article 8.

       10. As rehearsed in Treebhawon, and earlier jurisprudence, the first
           step for the Judge to take in deciding an Article 8 appeal,  was
           to consider whether Article 8 was engaged on the evidence.  Only
           in the event that he did so, and concluded that it was, could he
           go on to consider both the provisions of  s117A-D  of  the  2002
           Act, and the ability of the individual to meet the  requirements
           of the Immigration Rules, as the context  within  which  he  was
           required to undertake the assessment of proportionality.

       11. However,  even  if  the  Judge  did  reach  this  stage  of  the
           consideration of the Article 8 appeal, then he still  needed  to
           bear in mind the guidance to be found in Treebhawon  and  Hesham
           Ali [2016] UKSC 60, and Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 upon the true
           nature of the two  limbs  of  the  test  set  out  in  paragraph
           276ADE(1)(vi);   of   "integration"   and   "very    significant
           obstacles".

       12. In this case it is extremely difficult to see how the Judge came
           to  the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  would  be  unable  to
           "integrate"  himself  in  Iraq,  having  left  that  country  so
           recently, especially when the Judge had concluded that it  would
           be possible for him to return  to  his  home  area  of  Iraq  in
           safety.

       13. Within that home area, it was the Appellant's own case  that  he
           had left his mother, and his  three  married  sisters  (each  in
           their own households), and the paternal uncle who had  paid  for
           his journey to the UK. Whilst he denied any  contact  with  them
           since he had left Iraq, the prospect  clearly  remained  of  his
           being reunited with them upon his  return.  The  Judge  made  no
           finding upon this prospect one way or the other.

       14. Moreover the elevated threshold of "very significant  obstacles"
           to integration required far more than mere hardship,  difficulty
           or upheaval and inconvenience; the test is instead comparable to
           (albeit not identical to) the "unduly harsh" test.  If,  indeed,
           the Appellant could return to his home area in  safety,  as  was
           the Judge's finding, then it is extremely difficult to  see  why
           his position should be equated to one who found  himself  in  an
           unknown area as an internally displaced person, as the Judge did
           [22]. The mere fact that he had no  work  experience  in  either
           Iraq, or the UK, would not be enough of itself to permit such  a
           conclusion.

       15. In the circumstances I am satisfied that  the  Judge  fell  into
           material error, and that his decision to allow the appeal  under
           the Immigration Rules must be set aside and remade. Even  making
           all due allowance for  the  low  threshold  of  engagement,  the
           Appellant did  not  establish  that  his  circumstances  engaged
           Article  8.  Nor,  did  he  establish  that  his   circumstances
           demonstrated a compelling case to displace the  public  interest
           in his removal; he did not establish that there  would  be  very
           significant obstacles to his integration in Iraq if removed from
           the UK.

       16. Accordingly the  Judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on
           asylum, and humanitarian protection grounds,  and  human  rights
           grounds is confirmed. I set aside  the  decision  to  allow  the
           appeal under the Immigration Rules, and remake that decision  so
           as to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

   DECISION

      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  7
      June 2017 did involve the making of an error of law that requires  the
      decision to allow the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  to  be  set
      aside and remade, so as to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 12 December 2017


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.

Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 12 December 2017

