
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04014/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 April 2018                              |On 23 October 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                     SD
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
& Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Aziz promulgated on 24 August 2017 dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against a decision of the  Respondent  dated  11  April  2017  refusing
    asylum in the UK.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 18 September 1985.  She
    is married to 'H'.


3.   The Appellant  and  her  husband  made  joint  applications  for  entry
    clearance on 27 January  2011:  the  Appellant  applied  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) student, and her husband  applied  as  her  dependant.  Entry
    clearance was granted; the Appellant arrived in the UK on  24  February
    2011. An application for further leave to remain as a student was  made
    on 30 October 2014. The application was refused.


4.   On 27 November 2014 H claimed asylum; the  Appellant  was  included  in
    the application as H's dependant. H's asylum application was refused on
    15 May 2016. H appealed to the IAC (ref AA/09833/2015): his appeal  was
    heard on 5 May 2016; the Appellant gave  evidence  in  support  of  H's
    appeal. H's appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Duff in a
    decision promulgated  on  10  May  2016.  Subsequent  applications  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal were refused.


5.   On 13 October 2016 the Appellant claimed asylum.


6.   The basis of the  Appellant's  claim  for  protection  is  briefly  and
    helpfully summarised at paragraphs 11-16 of the  Respondent's  'reasons
    for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 11 April 2017. The Appellant claimed
    to have been detained and questioned by the CID in Sri Lanka for 2 days
    regarding her husband's involvement with  the  LTTE.  Her  release  was
    obtained pursuant to an agreement to pay money after her  release;  the
    agreement had been made  through  the  Appellant's  father-in-law  (H's
    father). However, notwithstanding  the  agreement,  once  released  the
    Appellant did not make the agreed payment because, she claims, she  was
    afraid that she would be detained again. By this time the Appellant had
    already applied for a visa to come to the UK to study and so she stayed
    at a friend's house from 18 February 2011 until she flew to the UK with
    her husband on 24 February 2011. It was also said  that  the  Appellant
    had attended a protest in London regarding disappearances in Sri  Lanka
    for about an hour.


7.   During her asylum interview on 24 March 2017 the Appellant referred  to
    having been assaulted during her detention: she stated she was  punched
    in the face (question 60), and  also  referred  to  being  punched  and
    grabbed and having a hand put over her mouth (question 78).


8.   Subsequently the Appellant claimed  to  have  been  sexually  assaulted
    during her detention. This aspect of the claim  appears  to  have  been
    disclosed for the first time during  an  interview  with  a  Consultant
    Clinical Psychologist in June  2017:  see  report,  Appellant's  bundle
    before the First-tier  Tribunal  Tab  14.  It  is  a  feature  of  this
    disclosure that the Appellant had not told her  husband  that  she  had
    been sexually assaulted and did not wish him to know now.


9.   Irrespective of the nature of the  Appellant's  claimed  ill-treatment,
    it may be seen that it was the Appellant's case that  the  events  that
    had befallen her in Sri Lanka - and the potential risk on return - were
    inextricably linked with the claim of suspicion in respect of H on  the
    part of the authorities in Sri Lanka.


10.  Judge Aziz - in my judgement uncontroversially -  expressly  recognised
    this: "The basis of the appellant's claim cannot therefore be  divorced
    from the factual matrix of her husband's claim. The very reason she was
    detained was in connection with her husband's alleged connections  with
    the LTTE" (paragraph  77);  "The  appellant  is  reiterating  the  same
    factual basis of her husband's claim with the added factor that she was
    also arrested, detained  and  tortured  by  the  authorities  in  their
    enquiries about links between her husband and the LTTE" (paragraph 88).


11.  In this regard it is to be noted that H's  case  was,  in  summary,  to
    this effect: he was an employee of DHL in Sri Lanka; he  surmised  that
    in the process of his employment he had possibly handled contraband  or
    otherwise directed goods to the LTTE at a time when  prohibitions  were
    in place; on 21 July 2010 he was abducted from outside a nightclub  and
    held for 4 - 5 days during which he was interrogated about links to the
    LTTE and raped; he subsequently escaped; he returned home  and  resumed
    his employment; however he then received calls and letters from the CID
    who also came looking for him on one occasion before he left Sri Lanka.


12.  H's application for asylum was refused for reasons set out  in  a  RFRL
    dated 14 May 2015 (included in  Annex  I  of  the  Respondent's  bundle
    before the First-tier Tribunal herein). As noted above, H's  appeal  to
    the IAC was dismissed on all grounds.


13.  Judge Duff heard evidence from H and also from  the  Appellant  herein.
    H's account was found to be false:

    "Having considered all of the matters raised, the evidence both  orally
    and in writing and the documents I am satisfied that this appellant has
    failed to discharge the burden upon him,  to  the  lower  standard,  of
    establishing that he is a refugee or entitled  to  other  international
    protection. I am satisfied that this appellant's  claim  is  false  and
    designed to attempt to gain status in the UK following the rejection of
    the application further leave to remain by the appellant and  his  wife
    on 30 October 2014" (paragraph 24).

    Necessarily such a finding involved a rejection of the testimony of the
    Appellant herein, as well as that of H.


14.  Further to this, and of even greater significance  in  the  context  of
    the current proceedings, no reference was made  at  any  stage  of  H's
    application or appeal that his wife - the Appellant herein -  was  ever
    arrested.


15.  In this context it is to be noted that there was every chance for H  to
    raise any issues in respect of his wife in the  course  of  his  asylum
    interview (which is reproduced at Annex I of  the  Respondent's  bundle
    herein).  It may be seen from question 74 et seq. of the interview that
    H was asked  about  any  adverse  interest  shown  by  the  authorities
    following his abduction; whilst he made reference to  a  visit  to  the
    house on one occasion by the CID (question 89) nothing is mentioned  of
    his wife being arrested. When asked at the conclusion of the  interview
    if there were any other reasons he wished to remain in the UK (question
    99) he made reference to his wife in  the  context  of  continuing  her
    studies in the UK, but did not make any reference to  any  difficulties
    that she might have experienced in Sri Lanka or might face on return.


16.  H applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. I  note  that
    it is apparent that there was a  change  of  representative  after  the
    First-tier Tribunal  hearing,  but  no  complaint  was  raised  in  the
    challenge to the decision of Judge  Duff  as  to  the  conduct  of  the
    previous representatives in presentation of H's appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek commented that Judge Duff
    had given  "several  reasons  for  rejecting  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's claim. His reasons are clear and comprehensive and  do  not
    reveal any arguable error of law".


17.   In  considering  the  Appellant's  application  for   protection   the
    Respondent had regard to the fact and circumstances of H's  appeal  and
    the decisions in Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR -  Extra-territorial
    effect) Sri Lanka* [2002] UKIAT 00702 and TK  (Consideration  of  Prior
    Determination - Directions) Georgia [2004] UKIAT  00149:  see  RFRL  at
    paragraphs 26 and 27 , where relevant extracts are helpfully set out.


18.  At paragraph 40 of the RFRL the decision-maker,  cross-referencing  the
    Appellant's asylum interview record, made the following comments:

    "In the AIR you were asked why your husband didn't mention your  arrest
    in his asylum interview (AIR Q103-Q105). Your reason for  your  husband
    not mentioning your arrest in his Asylum interview was  that  maybe  he
    didn't want to expose  me.  ...  Your  reasons  for  your  husband  not
    mentioning your arrest in his asylum claim are not reasonable  as  this
    was a big event which affected both of your lives and therefore  should
    have been disclosed during your husband's asylum claim."


19.  For completeness I set out the relevant exchanges from the  Appellant's
    asylum interview:

    "Q103: Why didn't your husband mention your arrest in his asylum claim?
    A: I'm not sure why he didn't mention it.

    Q104: Can you give a reasonable explanation why he wouldn't  mention  a
    big incident like you being arrested and detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    CID?
    A: Maybe he didn't want to expose me.

    Q105: Surely with it being a part of his claim that you  were  arrested
    he would mention it in his interview?
    A: He only mentioned what happened to him during the interview  because
    we were doing it separately."


20.  In my judgement it is manifestly the case that the Appellant's  answers
    here do not offer anything by  way  of  explanation  for  the  supposed
    omissions of H in his interview. Far less do they offer anything by way
    of explanation for the claimed circumstance of the  Appellant's  arrest
    and interrogation by the CID in  connection  with  H's  activities  not
    featuring in either his or her testimony in H's appeal.


21.  In these circumstances - and for other reasons set out in the RFRL  the
    Respondent rejected the Appellant's claim for protection.


22.  The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


23.  The Appellant's appeal  was  dismissed  for  reasons  set  out  in  the
    Decision of Judge Aziz.


24.  The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    was refused in the first instance  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McCarthy on 7 November 2017. However, permission  to  Appeal  was
    subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman on 11 January 2018
    - essentially on the basis that it was considered arguable  that  Judge
    Aziz had not set out adequate reasoning for on the one  hand  accepting
    that the Appellant had been the victim of sexual  trauma,  but  on  the
    other  hand  not  accepting  that  such  trauma  had  arisen   in   the
    circumstances claimed.


25.  The appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz took  place  over  two
    days (11 July and 2 August 2017). Judge Aziz treated both the Appellant
    and her husband as vulnerable witnesses (see paragraphs 32, 54 and 74).


26.  Judge Aziz set out at paragraphs 39-41 what the Appellant  had  to  say
    about the omission of her claimed detention from  the  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal in her husband's appeal; the Judge also set out
    what the Appellant had to say about the failure to  relate  her  sexual
    assault during her own asylum interview (paragraphs 42-44).  The  Judge
    also set out H's testimony before him in respect of his own omission of
    his wife's arrest during the course of his asylum claim (paragraph 58).


27.  Further to these particular matters the Judge set out  in  considerable
    detail over a number of pages the background to the appeal  under  sub-
    headings  'Immigration  history',  'The  appellant's   case...',   'The
    respondent's case', and 'Evidence', before setting out a section headed
    'The Law'. Against this context the Judge then set out over  a  further
    seven pages and approximately 30 paragraphs 'Findings of Fact'.


28.  As noted above the Judge identified the link to  H's  claim  (paragraph
    77); he then referred to Devaseelan (paragraph 78), before going on  to
    consider  aspects  of  Judge  Duff's  decision  (paragraph  79-87).  At
    paragraph 88 the Judge identified that the Appellant  was  "reiterating
    the same factual basis of her husband's claim  with  the  added  factor
    that she was also arrested, detained and tortured by the authorities in
    their enquiries about the links between  her  husband  and  the  LTTE",
    before setting out the submissions made on the Appellant's behalf.


29.  The Judge then stated the following at paragraphs 89 and 90:

    "89. What I am prepared to accept is that the appellant  has  been  the
    victim of extreme sexual trauma. Having heard  from  her  it  was  very
    clear from the manner in which she gave evidence that she continues  to
    be enormously affected by what has happened to her.  The  question  for
    the Tribunal is whether sexual trauma  occurred  in  the  circumstances
    detailed by the appellant.


    90. Having considered the matter at length, I am not persuaded that the
    sexual trauma which the appellant has suffered in the  historical  past
    occurred in the circumstances in which she says."


30.  Necessarily it is the supposed tension between these two  paragraphs  -
    paragraph 89 and paragraph 90 - which lie at the heart of the grant  of
    permission to appeal.


31.  In my judgement I do not consider that there is inevitably any  tension
    between the notion of accepting that  a  witness  or  appellant  has  a
    history of sexual trauma but rejecting the claimed circumstance of  the
    trauma. Accordingly what is at the crux of the challenge is whether the
    Judge has adequately reasoned  his  finding  that  the  sexual  assault
    suffered by the Appellant did not take place in the claimed context  of
    a detention consequent upon enquiries being made into the activities of
    her husband on suspicion of involvement with the LTTE.


32.  It seems to me that Judge Aziz set out with  adequate  clarity  why  he
    was "prepared to accept" the fact of  the  Appellant  having  been  the
    victim of a sexual assault. Crucially, it also seems to me  that  Judge
    Aziz has set out with adequate clarity, and sustainably, why he did not
    accept that any  such  event  occurred  as  claimed,  i.e.  whilst  the
    Appellant was detained in February 2011 in connection with her  husband
    being suspected of links with the LTTE.


33.  In the  premises  I  entirely  understand  and  acknowledge  that  very
    considerable caution needs to be exercised before rejecting a claim  of
    sexual assault on the basis of late disclosure. It is  well  understood
    in this jurisdiction - as elsewhere -  that  there  may  be  many  good
    reasons for late disclosure of a sexual assault, including such matters
    as a sense of shame, or an uncertainty in  respect  of  those  to  whom
    disclosure might be made. I also take into account that  reluctance  to
    disclose such an incident to a partner is also plausible.


34.  However, it is to be noted that Judge Aziz does not place  any  adverse
    reliance upon the late disclosure of sexual  assault  per  se,  or  the
    absence of disclosure of sexual assault  to  the  Appellant's  husband.
    Instead what is particularly damaging to the Appellant's claim  is  the
    failure of both her and her husband to mention the fact of  her  arrest
    and detention in the context of her husband's  claim.  Although  it  is
    said that H is unaware of the sexual assault, it has never been claimed
    that he was unaware of the fact of the detention, or that the detention
    had arisen as a consequence of suspicion about his activities. Even  if
    - which is not claimed - it might be said that the Appellant would have
    been reluctant to mention the  detention  to  the  authorities  or  the
    Tribunal in the UK because  she  did  not  want  to  discuss  what  had
    happened to her during detention, there could have been no reason -  on
    her case - for her husband not to bring to the  Respondent's  attention
    and in turn the Tribunal's attention  in  his  appeal,  the  fact  that
    continuing suspicion in him had been demonstrated by the authorities in
    the act of arresting and detaining his wife.


35.  This is the substance of Judge  Aziz's  observation  at  paragraph  98:
    "The failure to mention the arrest is a material omission (even if  the
    appellant's husband  is  ignorant  as  to  what  the  appellant  claims
    happened to her during her detention)".


36.  Judge Aziz fully engaged with this and  the  submissions  made  on  the
    Appellant's behalf. I can identify no error in his analysis.


37.  Judge Aziz had regard to Judge Duff's  findings  (e.g.  paragraph  95),
    and  rejected  the  Appellant's  reliance  upon  previous  poor   legal
    representation and the suggestion that  she  was  unfamiliar  with  the
    witness statement that she had been required to sign (paragraph  92-94,
    96), instead concluding "it was poor witness  testimony  that  was  the
    main reason for the anomalies" (paragraph 96).


38.  See similarly at paragraphs  98-101,  in  which  the  Judge  adequately
    articulates the basis upon which he rejected the  Appellant's  and  H's
    evidence for  the  failure  to  mention  her  arrest  in  the  previous
    proceedings. In my judgement the following is of particular note:

    "I found both witnesses to be intelligent and articulate people and  it
    would have been obvious to  them  both  that  the  appellant's  arrest,
    detention and interrogation just  a  few  days  before  they  fled  the
    country would be a key part of their asylum claim if such an event  had
    indeed occurred. Especially since the appellant alleges that during the
    detention she was asked questions about her husband's LTTE connections.
    It is simply not credible that they would  not  have  been  forthcoming
    about this key incident if it had indeed occurred." (paragraph 101).


39.  This was essentially a finding  of  fact  open  to  the  Judge  on  the
    evidence, adequately reasoned, and sustainable. It is not vulnerable to
    being impugned on the basis of an allegation of error of law.


40.  Further and in any event it is to be noted that the inability  of  both
    the Appellant and H to offer a cogent explanation for the omission of a
    core event in the context of H's application and  appeal  was  not  the
    only basis of the rejection of the Appellant' claim.


41.  In the premises Judge Duff had reached an  adverse  assessment  of  the
    credibility of H's claim, inter-alia, on the basis that elements lacked
    plausibility,  discrepancies  in  the  account,  and  the  conduct   in
    remaining in Sri Lanka for several months after H escaped.  Judge  Aziz
    also found that the Appellant's account of  the  circumstances  of  her
    release from detention lacked credibility (paragraph 102), and accorded
    adverse weight to the delay in claiming asylum (paragraph 103).


42.  In my judgement nothing in the written grounds  of  appeal,  the  issue
    identified in the grant of permission to  appeal,  or  the  submissions
    articulated before me, undermine the essential  conclusion  that  there
    has been no adequate explanation for the sustained omission of a  vital
    element of H's claim during the course of his application  and  appeal,
    such that the claim that the Appellant had been arrested  and  detained
    was not credible.


43.  In his submissions Mr Bandegani to a very great extent  sought  to  lay
    out the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal and argue that
    it justified a different conclusion, and to submit that in  so  far  as
    Judge Aziz failed to reach that conclusion he cannot  have  had  proper
    regard to the evidence. This  was  essentially  to  reargue  the  case.
    Considerable emphasis was placed on  the  sensitivities  surrounding  a
    sexual assault and the Appellant's continuing  reluctance  to  disclose
    such a matter even to her husband.  However,  as  identified  by  Judge
    Aziz, nothing in such  sensitivities  offers  an  explanation  for  the
    failure of both the Appellant and  H  to  raise  the  arrest  with  the
    Respondent or the Tribunal at all during the course of his  application
    and appeal. Although the report of the Consultant Clinical Psychologist
    in June 2017 addressed the reluctance to disclose sexual  trauma  (e.g.
    at paragraph 74 of the report), it does not in  any  part  address  the
    failure  to  refer  to  the  arrest  and  detention  in   the   earlier
    proceedings.


44.  I do not accept submissions to the effect that the Judge either  failed
    to take into  account  evidence  -  in  particular  supporting  medical
    evidence - or otherwise failed to relate that evidence to  the  context
    of the Appellant's claim. On the contrary, it seems to  me  clear  that
    the Judge did have regard to the medical evidence and did  consider  it
    in the context of the specific submissions being advanced on behalf  of
    the Appellant: e.g. see paragraph 88.


45.  The Judge accepted that both the Appellant and H were to be treated  as
    vulnerable  witnesses.  The  Tribunal's   Presidential   Guidance   was
    applicable. The objective of the guidance is to ensure a  fair  hearing
    and proper participation: there is no suggestion that the Appellant and
    her husband were not able adequately and properly to participate in the
    hearing of the appeal. Whilst it  may  be  that  there  is  no  express
    analysis within the Decision of how the Appellant's vulnerability might
    have impacted upon her testimony, I  am  not  remotely  persuaded  that
    either her or H's present vulnerability offers some sort of explanation
    for  the  crucial   omission,   somehow   overlooked   by   the   Judge
    notwithstanding his  recognition  of  the  witnesses'  vulnerability  -
    particularly bearing in mind that it is plain that the Judge  did  have
    regard to the clinical findings and diagnosis in the expert report.


46.  The grounds of challenge also raise issues under the ECHR on the  basis
    of medical grounds.  These  were  not  the  subject  of  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal, the reasons for which were confined to the  issue
    of the credibility of the narrative account advanced in support of  the
    claim for protection from persecution.


47.  Be that as  it  may  I  observe  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    addressed such matters at paragraphs 106-109 of his Decision. The Judge
    essentially concluded that the supporting evidence was  not  adequately
    cogent as to what might happen upon return: the  clinical  psychologist
    relied upon by the Appellant conceded in her report that she  was  "not
    an  expert  on  the  provision  of  psychological  therapy  or  medical
    intervention in Sri Lanka" (FTTJ Decision at paragraph 107); the  Judge
    observed "the report is silent as to what impact [it] would  have  upon
    any deterioration in mental  health  [if  mental  health  services  are
    accessed  immediately  upon  arrival  in  Sri  Lanka]";  leading  to  a
    conclusion "I do not find that the report or any of the other pieces of
    evidence relied upon is cogent enough to persuade the Tribunal that the
    high threshold in this area is met".


48.  Although before me there was a discussion as  to  the  modification  of
    the 'high threshold' in  Article  3  medical  cases  in  light  of  the
    decision in Paposhvili, it seems to me that  this  cannot  in  any  way
    avail the Appellant on the basis of  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge. The lack of cogency of the evidence is not in  any  way
    remedied by the suggestion  that  there  is  now  understood  to  be  a
    modified threshold compared to that previously understood.


49.  I find no substance in the challenge to the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

50.  The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    accordingly stands.


51.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the Appellant or a member of her family. This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 17 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

