
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04595/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, Belfast     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 April 2019                               |On 25 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                    [s m]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S McTaggart, instructed by Killen Warke
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who was born in 1978, is a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe.   She
    appeals the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Handley  who  for
    reasons given in his decision dated 7 August 2018 dismissed her  appeal
    on grounds under the Refugee Convention,  humanitarian  protection  and
    Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  The appellant  had
    lived in Zimbabwe until 2000 when she moved to South Africa  where  she
    has  immigration  status  described  as  "work  permit  for   permanent
    resident" until her return to Zimbabwe in April 2016.  This is when she
    claims to have encountered the difficulties that led to her  flight  to
    the United Kingdom and application for asylum.  Her  sister  [SMM]  was
    recognised as a refugee following a successful appeal on 10 June  2005.




 2. The basis of the appellant's claim was that, whilst  in  Zimbabwe,  she
    had been taken for her sister when living with her  cousin.   This  has
    led to her detention from which she escaped.  The appellant also is HIV
    positive.  The judge  did  not  consider  the  appellant  had  given  a
    credible account and did not consider  the  appellant's  health  status
    would give rise to a breach of Article 3  or  that  there  would  be  a
    breach of Article 8 were she to be returned to Zimbabwe.


 3. The grounds of challenge argue:


   i) Irrationality;

  ii) A failure to give reasons.

 4. The grounds focus on the judge's finding that neither  the  appellant's
    sister nor her cousin had been involved in politics.  It is argued that
    this finding was irrational because the appellant's  sister  had  given
    uncontested evidence to the fact that  she  had  been  awarded  refugee
    status in the United Kingdom having fled Zimbabwe due to her work  with
    the MDC, supported by documentation provided.   The  appellant  herself
    had "identified" her sister as having been involved in the MDC but  she
    had not asked her about details of that.  The appellant had  also  been
    specific about her cousin's involvement politically.  No reasoning  had
    been by the judge why he had found the appellant's  account  of  escape
    implausible.


 5. In granting permission First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson  considered
    each of the grounds had arguable merit.


 6. At the outset of the hearing Mr Matthews explained that  he  had  first
    thought that the argument based on the challenge to the judge's finding
    of implausibility might be sufficient to  save  the  decision  but,  on
    reflection, considered that  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the
    judge's conclusion in paragraph [31] which is in the following terms:


         "31. Having carefully considered all the available  evidence  I  do
             not  accept  that  the  appellant's  cousin  and  sister  were
             involved in politics.  I  find  that  the  appellant  had  not
             engaged in any political activities in  Zimbabwe.   I  do  not
             accept that she would be at  risk  on  return  on  account  of
             imputed political opinion."

 7. In his submission, a reasonable inference from  the  grant  of  refugee
    status to the appellant's sister in 2005 would have been on  the  basis
    of her political opinion and it appears  that  the  judge  had  made  a
    factual error in concluding otherwise.  Mr Matthews was less  persuaded
    in respect of the finding by the judge as to the  appellant's  cousin's
    involvement.  He confirmed that the judge did not have a  copy  of  the
    determination relating to the appellant's sister's appeal in  2005  but
    nevertheless considered the expectation  that  it  had  been  based  on
    political activity was not "too much of a stretch".  He  had  conferred
    with Mr McTaggart and both agreed for the decision to be set aside  and
    for the case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  re-
    hearing.


 8. Neither party required me to give detailed reasons for my decision  and
    so I shall only do so briefly. This remains an adversarial jurisdiction
    and it was open to Mr Matthews to  concede  matters.   Nevertheless,  I
    reminded Mr McTaggart of my concern over the use of irrationality as  a
    peg on which to hang a challenge when, in reality the  concern  was  an
    absence of reasoning or evidential support for a particular conclusion.
     This practice was addressed by Brooke LJ in R  (Iran)  and  Another  v
    SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.   At  paragraphs  [11]  and  [12]  Brooke  LJ
    expressed a view which remains equally valid today:


         "11. It may be helpful to comment quite briefly  on  three  matters
             first of all.  It is well known that "perversity" represents a
             very high hurdle.  In Miftari v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 481,  the
             whole court agreed that the word meant what it said: it was  a
             demanding concept.  The  majority  of  the  court  (Keene  and
             Maurice Kay LJJ) said that it  embraced  decisions  that  were
             irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury  sense  (even  if
             there was no wilful or conscious departure from the rational),
             but it also  included  a  finding  of  fact  that  was  wholly
             unsupported by the evidence, provided always that this  was  a
             finding as to a material matter.

         12.  We mention this because far too often  practitioners  use  the
             word  "irrational"  or  "perverse"  when  these  epithets  are
             completely inappropriate.  If  there  is  no  chance  that  an
             appellate tribunal will categorise the matter  of  which  they
             make complaint as irrational  or  perverse,  they  are  simply
             wasting time - and, all too often, the taxpayer's resources  -
             by suggesting that it was."

 9. The gap in the judge's reasoning arose out of a failure to indicate the
    weight if any he gave  to  the  likelihood  bearing  in  mind  the  low
    standard of proof of the appellant's sister having been recognised as a
    refugee because of political activity in 2005.  His conclusion  appears
    to have been that because of the absence of knowledge by the  appellant
    of her sister's activity indicated that she had  not  been  politically
    active.  Whilst this was mistaken, it  cannot  be  said  to  have  been
    irrational.


10.  Furthermore,  the  challenge  relating  to  the  appellant's  cousin's
    activities was rationally open to the judge with reference to an answer
    given in response to question 104 in the asylum interview:


         "Question:    Did you know your cousin was?

         Response:     Not at that time no I just use  to  see  her  wearing
                    kaki [sic] uniform  and  she  said  she  was  going  for
                    cleaning the town and giving food, so I  used  to  think
                    she was working for NGO."

11.  The  challenge  based  on  an  absence  of  reasons  for  the  judge's
    plausibility findings needs to be considered  in  the  context  of  the
    evidence as whole and the detail provided by the appellant how  it  was
    she was able to escape.  It was open  to  the  judge  to  question  the
    plausibility of that on the basis  of  the  likelihood  of  the  events
    having occurred as claimed.


12. Subject to these points, I accept the concession  by  Mr  Matthews  and
    therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I  direct
    that  the  appeal  be  remitted  for  consideration  by  a  differently
    constituted tribunal with  none  of  the  findings  previously  reached
    preserved.  It will be open to the First-tier Tribunal to  nevertheless
    have regard to the evidence that was before First-tier Tribunal Handley
    in deciding the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed
                                                 Date 18 April 2019
UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

