
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04242/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 January 2020                   |On 23 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    A- N-
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, Counsel instructed by Simman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because the Appellant is an asylum seeker and is entitled to
    anonymity.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on 27
    September 2019 dismissing the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State on 17 April 2019 refusing him asylum  and/or
    humanitarian protection.  The short point, and in my  judgment  a  very
    good one, is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  conspicuously
    failed to show that she was dealing with a child.   The  appellant  was
    born in April 2002.  It follows  that  he  has  not  yet  achieved  his
    majority but nowhere in the decision is there any  recognition  of  the
    fact that the judge was dealing with a person who was a minor  when  he
    appeared before her and was a much younger person, aged 14 and then  15
    years, when he was interviewed by the Respondent.

 3. I am very aware  that  young  people  vary  enormously  and  some  have
    considerable sophistication and maturity but there are  proper  reasons
    for taking extra care where young people are involved and there  is  no
    evidence that extra care was taken here.  In fact the  evidence  points
    in the other  direction  because  the  judge  says,  unequivocally,  at
    paragraph 37 of the Decision and Reasons, that the appellant  was  aged
    between 18 and 25 years when he was not.   As I have already indicated,
    he has not yet achieved his 18th birthday.

 4. I am also startled by paragraph 25 of the Decision  and  Reasons  where
    the  judge  relied  upon  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 to support and finding that  it
    was a proper reason to disbelieve the appellant that he did  not  claim
    asylum when he was in Belgium.  He was then a boy aged about  14  years
    and clearly under the  guidance  of  his  father.   I  doubt  there  is
    anything at all in the point taken by the judge. If there is it is  not
    explained.

 5. Mr Tufan, doing the best that could be expected of  him,  asked  me  to
    reflect on whether the appeal was capable of succeeding.  I  appreciate
    why he said that but this appellant has not had a proper hearing.   The
    case has not been determined as it ought to have been  in  a  way  that
    reflected his minority and the decision on  his  claim  for  protection
    must be made against a proper  sustainable  factual  matrix  about  his
    circumstances.

    Notice of Decision

 6. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I allow the appeal and set aside
    the decision.   As  it  is  set  aside  for  a  fundamental  procedural
    irregularity I direct that the case be heard again  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  No findings are preserved.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 17 January 2020                |



