
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04416/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28 November 2016                       |On 14 December 2016               |
|Extempore                                 |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Meilin Huang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Demello, Counsel, instructed by David Tang & Co


                    NOTICE OF INVALID APPEAL AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert promulgated on 28 September  2016  in
    which he allowed the appeal of Mr Meilin Huang against  a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State made on 4 April 2016 to  revoke  his  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  The judge concluded that  there
    was a right of appeal against that despite submissions to the  contrary
    being made by the Secretary of State's representative at the appeal.

 2. There is a long history to this appeal, which is set out in significant
    detail in the immigration history and in the respondent's  case  as  an
    appellant's claim as summarised by Judge Herbert.   Neither  party  has
    submitted to me that  that  is  incorrect  or  inaccurate  and  in  the
    circumstances of the issue in front of me, that is whether or  not  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  had  jurisdiction  to  entertain  the
    appeal, there is no need to rehearse it at this point.

 3. It does, however, require it just to be  briefly  mentioned  that  this
    matter had previously resulted in an application  for  judicial  review
    which was determined by Mr Justice Collins in November 2015.

 4. The question which arises in this case is  whether,  as  Judge  Herbert
    concluded, there was a right of appeal to the  Tribunal  or  not.   The
    question of whether there is  a  right  of  appeal  is  dependent  upon
    Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended.  It is not contended that this  case  invokes  anything  other
    than the possibility of the Secretary of State having decided to refuse
    a human rights claim made by the applicant.  That is a decision  within
    Section 82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act.

 5. This requires, in my view, first for a human rights claim to have  been
    made and second for that to have been  refused.   I  am  not  satisfied
    within this case that there has been any human  rights  claim  refused.
    There does not for that matter appear to have been a human rights claim
    made.  Mr Demello made  no  submissions  to  that  effect  and,  having
    examined the papers for myself that  were  put  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, I am unable to conclude that there was  any  operative  human
    rights claim made.

 6. Further, the terms of the decision made by the Secretary of  State  are
    clearly to revoke a grant of indefinite leave to remain  made  earlier.
    I do not consider that that decision could in any way be construed as a
    refusal to make a human rights claim.  It is clearly headed as  "notice
    of a decision to revoke leave" and the applicant is advised that he may
    be removed.  It is also note that he is being given the opportunity  to
    make a relevant application, that is,a human rights application.

 7. In the circumstances I am satisfied  that  this  decision,  which  also
    includes details as to how the applicant should state how he wishes  to
    stay  in  the  United  Kingdom  including  inviting  him  to  make   an
    application on the relevant form, that the notice in question is not  a
    refusal of a human rights claim.  Accordingly, there is no  immigration
    decision in this case and accordingly the First-tier Tribunal  did  not
    have jurisdiction to consider the appeal.

 8. It follows, therefore, that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did
    involve the making of an error of law in that it proceeded on the basis
    that it had jurisdiction when it did not. I therefore set it aside  and
    substitute a decision that there is no valid appeal.

    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law in that  it  wrongly  concluded  that  it  had  jurisdiction  to
    determine the appeal. I set it aside

 9. I substitute a decision that there is no valid appeal.


Signed                                  Date: 13 December 2016

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
