
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04136/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2019                           |On 04 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     HS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Naz, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, HS, was born in 1979 claims to be an undocumented Bidoon
    from Kuwait. The appellant claims that he arrived in the United Kingdom
    in 2017 when he made a claim for asylum. By decision dated 28  February
    2018, respondent refused is application. The appellant appealed to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Arullendran)   which,   in   a   decision
    promulgated on 10 May 2018, dismissed the  appeal.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. First, the grounds of appeal assert that the judge wrongly  refused  an
    application for an adjournment  of  the  hearing.  Shortly  before  the
    hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  had  changed  his
    solicitors.  The  appellant  claims  that  there  were  errors  in  the
    transcription of his asylum interview  and  he  sought  extra  time  to
    obtain the recording of that interview in order that he might  be  able
    to provide full particulars of the errors in translation. Ms  Naz,  who
    appeared for the appellant before the Upper Tribunal, told me that  the
    recording had now been made available.

 3. At [8], the judge records that the appellant's  'main  complaint'  with
    the transcription of the interview was the  use  of  the  word  'census
    'rather than  'committee'.  The  judge  wrote  that  she  'advised  the
    appellant that I would take into account all he has to  say  about  the
    discrepancies in order to ensure a fair hearing. I also note that there
    is no dispute that the word committee should  have  been  used  by  the
    interviewing officer, rather than census, and all parties are aware  of
    this error.' The judge also recorded the application for an adjournment
    was not made 'particularly forcefully.' The judge also noted  that  'Ms
    Naz accepted that the appellant had  replied  to  all  the  matters  he
    disagreed with in his interview and the refusal letter in the  response
    statement ... She was unable  to  say  what  would  be  gained  by  the
    adjournment at this late stage.'

 4. Having read the judge's decision carefully, I find  that  she  has  not
    erred in law. She  considered  the  adjournment  application  carefully
    recording the submissions made  and  applying  the  relevant  procedure
    rules [8]. She was aware that the principle of fairness  was  paramount
    and was careful to note the discrepancies between the transcription and
    what the appellant claims that he had said. It  is  puzzling  that  the
    appellant was aware of the problems regarding the transcription of  the
    word 'census'  but  does  not  appear  to  have  been  aware  of  other
    mistranslations (see decision, at  [55]).  The  judge  was  also  fully
    entitled  to  take  account  of   the   fact   that   the   appellant's
    representative was unable to tell her how an adjournment  would  fulfil
    the requirements of the  overriding  objective.  Even  now,  after  the
    recording has been made available to the appellant, details of  alleged
    discrepancies have not been provided.

 5. Secondly, the appellant complains that the judge failed to take account
    of his medical condition. At [64], the judge recorded  the  appellant's
    claim that he suffers from epilepsy but notes also that  the  appellant
    not been formally diagnosed with that condition and that there  was  no
    evidence of any diagnosis of epilepsy whilst the appellant  was  living
    in Kuwait. Accordingly, the judge did not accept that the appellant had
    a medical condition which might cause him to suffer lapses  in  memory.
    In my opinion, that finding was available to the judge on the  evidence
    before her. Even at this stage, the appellant has  only  been  able  to
    produce an appointment letter which pre-dates the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing but which provides no evidence at all of diagnosis and a letter
    from Bradford District Care dated 30 January 2019  which  records  that
    the appellant 'presents as having poor memory and requires considerable
    support  to  remember  appointments  and  organise  himself  to  attend
    appointments.' In essence, the letter consists  of  nothing  more  than
    self-reporting by the  appellant;  there  is  no  formal  diagnosis  of
    epilepsy or any other condition or any indication how  such  conditions
    might affect the appellant's memory. In any event, the judge cannot  be
    criticised for failing  to  have  regard  to  evidence  which  was  not
    available to her at the time of the promulgation of her decision.

 6. I consider that the judge has produced a very detailed and  even-handed
    decision. She has had  proper  regard  to  relevant  evidence  and  has
    excluded from her analysis irrelevant matters. I find  that  the  judge
    has not erred in law for the reasons asserted in the grounds of  appeal
    or at all.

Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 28 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

