
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04732/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 February 2018                          |On 6 March 2018               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     HO
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. M. Moriarty, Counsel, instructed by Luqmani
                    Thompson & Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mozolowski, promulgated on 17 July 2017,  in  which  she
    refused the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse a grant of asylum.


 2. As this is an asylum appeal, I have made an anonymity direction.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "In the decision the Judge did not refer to the Practice  Direction
         on  Child,  Vulnerable  and  Sensitive  Witnesses.   Following   AM
         (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123, this can amount to  a  material
         error of law."

 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


 5. Mr. Moriarty relied on the grounds of appeal.


 6. Mr. Clarke submitted that the factual matrix of the appeal was  not  as
    in AM.  The grounds referred to what was set out in 19(c)  of  AM,  but
    the Judge had engaged  wholly  with  the  medical  evidence.   She  was
    critical of it, but she had engaged properly with it.  She had borne in
    mind that the Appellant was a minor [22], and referred to  section  55.
    She had considered the medical evidence [25].  Her criticisms  of  this
    evidence were set out at [26] to [32].  In relation to [26], an  expert
    should include  cultural  references.   At  [27]  she  found  that  the
    Appellant had not attended further counselling as it clashed  with  his
    college studies.  At [28] she noted that the Appellant was not able  to
    give evidence.  At [29]  she  considered  fight  or  flight.   She  was
    entitled to find in relation  to  the  Appellant  meeting  Pashtuns  in
    London that it required a greater leap of faith to get onto the  coach.
    It was not credible that he was prepared to go  to  a  greater  unknown
    given his reasons for leaving his foster carers as set out at [12].


 7. The Appellant had used his second ID for a sustained  period  of  time.
    The Judge considered the plausibility of  the  Appellant's  account  in
    line with  the  medical  evidence.   At  [30]  she  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had PTSD.  The Appellant had had the opportunity  of  further
    medical treatment.  There was no other evidence before the Tribunal bar
    the referral to the psychiatrist in 2017.  The medical evidence  before
    the Judge was the result of only a two hour assessment.


 8. The Judge's treatment of the medical evidence was  entirely  consistent
    with the caselaw.  Credibility was a matter for the  Judge.   Expertise
    in medical matters is for the expert.  The expert was not there to test
    credibility or cross-examine.  It was difficult to criticise the  Judge
    given that the expert had had a limited window of only two hours.


  9. Mr. Clarke referred to [32].  It was well known from deportation  cases
     that it was traumatic to be separated from parents.  I was referred  to
     [37] and [44].  The causation of the mental illness had  been  examined
     by the Judge.  The expert  had  not  considered  attribution  to  other
     causes.  At [33] no reasons had been given for why the  Pashtuns  would
     finance his coach trip.  It made no sense that they would have  advised
     him to take another name.  At [34] the Judge found that  the  Appellant
     had demonstrated cognitive ability, assuming a  second  identity.   The
     grounds were merely a disagreement with the Judge's findings.


 10. In relation to ground 2 this was an argument of  substance  over  form.
     There was no need to refer expressly to the guidance.   The  Judge  had
     accepted the Appellant's vulnerability.


 11. In relation to ground 3, irrationality was a very high threshold.   The
     grounds misrepresented the Judge's findings.  Her finding at  [24]  was
     nowhere near to the threshold required for perversity.  At [33] she did
     not find as was stated in the grounds at 4(ii).  At [26]  she  had  not
     made a finding that there was a deep seated belief in the spirit  world
     in his culture, but was asking why the expert had not considered  this.
     The cultural context could  be  taken  into  account.   It  was  not  a
     perverse finding and, in any event, it was not material.


 12. In relation to [30], she had  not  found  that  there  was  a  cultural
     phenomenon of education taking a higher priority.   If  anything,  this
     was a favourable finding for the Appellant -  there  may  have  been  a
     cultural explanation for why he had not attended counselling.


 13. Mr. Clarke accepted that it was wrong for the Judge to make the finding
     at [38] regarding women only households as no reference had  been  made
     to any evidence in support  of  this  finding.   However,  it  was  not
     material.  The Judge was considering why the Appellant and  his  mother
     had gone to live with their cousins.  It made no sense that they  would
     have gone to live there.  This was not a material error.


 14. In relation to  [39],  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  ask  whether  the
     Appellant's cousins would  really  let  him  stay  overnight.   It  was
     unusual behaviour in the context of departure from a Taliban home.


 15. In relation to [40], the Judge was considering the coincidence  of  the
     Appellant's absence at the time of the raid.  The cousins  were  fierce
     supporters of the Taliban and it could  be  expected  that  the  police
     would check neighbouring homes.  The Appellant's claim was that he  was
     at risk from the Taliban.  The Judge was entitled to find that  it  was
     not plausible that the police would not check neighbouring  homes  when
     looking for someone they perceived as a terrorist.  It was a reasonably
     drawn inference that the police would not just knock on  one  door  and
     then leave the area.


 16. At [43] it was not just the sale of a piece of  land  that  would  take
     five days.  It was all of the matters  which  the  Appellant  had  said
     would take just five days.  It was not  a  perverse  finding  when  the
     logistics of the whole issue were considered.


 17. It was open to the Judge to make findings in [38] regarding the sharing
     of information in families given that the Appellant had  lived  in  the
     same village as his cousins and the association with  the  Taliban  had
     gone on for a long time.  It was not perverse for  the  Judge  to  make
     these findings.  At [34] regarding the journey to London, this was  not
     all that the Judge was looking at - there were other  factors  in  play
     including the use of the false name.


 18. In relation to the finding at [32] that  the  expert  medical  evidence
     raised more questions than it answered, this was based on a  number  of
     factors.  The  Appellant  was  receiving  no  ongoing  treatment.   The
     assessment had only lasted two hours.  He had chosen to attend  college
     rather than receive more treatment.  He had had a traumatic journey  to
     the United Kingdom and had witnessed his father's death.  In any event,
     the Judge had accepted the diagnosis.


19. In response Mr. Moriarty submitted that all  three  grounds  were  made
    out.  He referred to paragraph [30] of AM.   There  was  no  indication
    that the Practice Direction had been followed.  It had been provided to
    the Judge in the Appellant's bundle.  The decision must  identify  that
    the Appellant is vulnerable and there was no indication that the  Judge
    had done that.


20. I was referred to paragraphs [40] to [42] of the medical  report.   The
    expert had considered other possible causes.   She  was  better  placed
    than the Judge to  reach  her  conclusions.   She  had  not  based  her
    assessment on only two hours with the Appellant, but she had  read  the
    documents and had used her extensive experience.  She was able properly
    to diagnose the Appellant.  There was no authority from  the  Judge  to
    show that two hours was not long enough to make a  diagnosis.   It  was
    not open to the Judge to find that a diagnosis could not be made.


21. In relation to ground 3 he referred only to  one  specific  finding  at
    [40].  The Appellant's case was that he was  only  looked  for  by  the
    authorities after they had raided his cousins' house.  I  was  referred
    to [10] of the decision.  When the police raided the  house  they  were
    not looking for the Appellant.  The Judge was not entitled to make  the
    finding at [40].  All  of  the  findings  set  out  in  ground  3  were
    unsupported.


22. The Judge had started out with her own case theory, and had set out  to
    disprove the Appellant's case based on her theory.  The Judge had found
    that the Pashtuns who met him should immediately  have  identified  his
    mental health issues, but equally found that two  hours  was  not  long
    enough for an expert to diagnose them.

Error of law


 23. In relation to ground 2, as the grant of  permission  made  clear,  the
     case of AM held that  failure  to  follow  the  Practice  Direction  in
     relation to child, vulnerable adult and sensitive witnesses  can  be  a
     material error of law.  AM states at [30] "Failure to follow them  will
     most likely be a material error of law."


 24. Paragraph 33 of AM sets out [13] to [15] of the guidance as follows:

         "Given the emphasis on the  determination  of  credibility  on  the
         facts of this appeal, there is particular force in the Guidance  at
         [13] to [15]:


             "13. The weight to be placed upon factors of vulnerability may
             differ depending on the matter under appeal,  the  burden  and
             standard of proof and whether the individual is a  witness  or
             an appellant.


             14.  Consider the evidence, allowing  for  possible  different
             degrees of understanding by witnesses and  appellant  compared
             to those [who] are not vulnerable,  in  the  context  Judgment
             Approved by the court for handing down.  AM  (Afghanistan)  of
             evidence from others associated with  the  appellant  and  the
             background  evidence  before  you.  Where  there  were   clear
             discrepancies in the oral evidence,  consider  the  extent  to
             which the age, vulnerability or sensitivity of the witness was
             an element of that discrepancy or lack of clarity.


             15.  The decision  should  record  whether  the  Tribunal  has
             concluded the appellant (or a witness) is a child,  vulnerable
             or  sensitive,  the  effect  the   Tribunal   considered   the
             identified vulnerability had in assessing the evidence  before
             it and this whether the Tribunal  was  satisfied  whether  the
             appellant had established his or  her  case  to  the  relevant
             standard of proof. In asylum appeals, weight should  be  given
             to objective indications of risk rather than necessarily to  a
             state of mind."

 25. The Judge has failed to refer to the Practice Direction  at  all.   She
     has made reference  to  section  55  reflecting  an  awareness  of  the
     Appellant's age, and has referred to the Appellant's mental health, but
     she has not referred to the guidance.  Having carefully considered  the
     decision, it is not clear either that she has  followed  the  guidance.
     This is linked with the Judge's treatment of the medical evidence,  and
     the findings made, as referred to in ground 3.


 26. I have given careful consideration to the points made  in  relation  to
     the medical report.  I find that the Judge has erred in  her  treatment
     of this report.  First I find that  she  has  erred  in  placing  undue
     weight on the finding  that  the  expert  produced  the  report  having
     assessed the Appellant for only two hours.  At [30] she states:

         "I also note from the psychology report that the psychology  report
         was based on a two hour interview with the  Appellant.   I  do  not
         consider that to be sufficient although I do accept that there were
         concerns that the Appellant may  have  PTSD  as  expressed  by  the
         Appellant's present children's services department and in fact  the
         Appellant was offered counselling which he  declined.   This  again
         could be for cultural reasons and because it could well be that the
         Appellant considered education to have a higher priority.  However,
         I accept that the Appellant has PTSD and a depressive illness,  the
         level of which has not been fully assessed, as a two hour interview
         would not be likely to give  a  full  picture  to  a  psychologist,
         especially when there is an overlay of  credibility  concerns  with
         the Appellant's narrative."

 27. At [31] she states:

         "Therefore although the psychology  report  clearly  flags  up  the
         Appellant having a mental illness, the degree and the  full  nature
         of the mental illness cannot, to my mind be established after  only
         a two hour interview."

 28. There are no reasons given, and no  authority  cited,  to  justify  the
     finding that an assessment lasting two  hours  is  insufficient  for  a
     medical expert to assess an individual's mental state.  Further,  there
     is no acknowledgment of the documents that the psychologist  had  taken
     into account in making her assessment and diagnosis.  I find  that  the
     Judge has given weight to her finding  that  two  hours  was  not  long
     enough to make an assessment without giving any reasons or  citing  any
     evidence to justify this finding.


 29. Further, I find that no reason or supporting evidence is given for  the
     assertion that the  Appellant  may  not  have  taken  counselling  "for
     cultural reasons".


 30. The finding that two hours is insufficient for  an  expert  to  make  a
     diagnosis is at odds with the finding at [33] that it would  have  been
     "more natural" for the Pashtuns who the Appellant met to have suggested
     that he seek medical advice rather than advise him as they  did.   This
     implies that she considered that they should have been able  to  assess
     him as having mental health problems which required  medical  attention
     after only just meeting him.


 31. In relation to the finding at [32] that the expert had  not  considered
     that  the  traumatic  cause  of  the  Appellant's  PTSD  could  be  the
     "horrendous  journey"  from  Afghanistan,  the  expert  had  considered
     causation at [40] to [42] of her report.  She states:

         "It is my opinion that the current psychiatric  symptoms  displayed
         by Mr O relate  entirely  to  his  traumatic  past  experiences  in
         Afghanistan and en route to the UK, together with his fears for his
         safety and future if forcibly returned to his  native  country,  as
         described above.


         Mr O reported no other traumatic events of significance,  prior  to
         the deaths of his father and siblings, previous difficulties in his
         earlier life atypical for his  cultural  context  or  any  familial
         history of mental illness which would have  indicated  a  different
         underlying cause to his psychiatric illness (such as  a  biological
         disposition).


         The current severity and chronicity of Mr O's psychiatric condition
         is too serious, in my view, to have been caused simply by  ordinary
         issues relating to displacement, even for a minor."

 32. I find that the expert's opinion of the cause of the  Appellant's  PTSD
     was "his traumatic past experiences in Afghanistan and en route to  the
     UK" (my emphasis).  At [42] she expressly states that his condition  is
     "too serious, in my view, to have been caused simply by ordinary issues
     relating to displacement, even for a minor".  She  had  considered  his
     journey to the United Kingdom, and had found that this  alone  was  not
     enough to have been the cause for his trauma.   It  is  wrong  for  the
     Judge to state that the expert had not discounted  the  effect  of  the
     journey.

 33. A further criticism of the report is at [26] where the Judge states:

         "The  Appellant  described  symptoms  which  the  writer   of   the
         psychology report  has  referred  to  as  hallucinatory  phenomenon
         because the Appellant believed that  he  saw  the  spirits  of  his
         father, brother and sister.  Those could be psychotic  features  in
         the form of visual hallucinations (it is entirely  unclear  whether
         auditory hallucinations exist).  However what has  not  been  ruled
         out by the psychology report is a possible cultural explanation  of
         a deep seated belief in the spirit world within the Appellant's own
         culture expressed in concrete terms.  I am not satisfied  with  the
         psychology report's analysis regarding the possibility of psychotic
         features."

 34. The expert considered this at [26] and [27] of her report.  I find that
     the Judge has failed to provide any evidence to corroborate  her  claim
     that there is a "possible cultural explanation of a deep seated  belief
     in  the  spirit  world  within  the  Appellant's  own  culture".    The
     psychologist has referred to the psychotic symptoms and has  given  her
     opinion "based upon the evidence-based literature in the  field".   She
     has described them as "hallucinatory phenomena", based on her expertise
     and the evidence in her field.  The Judge has criticised her for  this,
     without giving any supporting evidence for her own claim  that  Afghans
     have such a deep seated belief in the spirit world.  I find  that  this
     is an error,  and  her  criticism  of  the  report  on  this  basis  is
     unfounded.


 35. At [32] the Judge states:

         "In the circumstances although I accept that the  Appellant  has  a
         mental illness, the full nature and severity of it to my  mind  has
         not  been  established  and  the  psychology  report  raises   more
         questions than it answers."

 36. No details are given of the questions the Judge considers to be  raised
     by the report, or how she is qualified to find that it  raises  further
     questions.  It is also not clear whether  the  Judge  is  querying  the
     diagnosis, given that she accepts only that the Appellant  has  "mental
     illness".  Considering the decision as a whole I find that  it  is  not
     clear that she does accept that the Appellant has PTSD.  While at  [30]
     she states "I accept that the Appellant has PTSD", at [31]  she  states
     "he may in fact have PTSD but this requires further  assessment".   She
     has not explained what expertise she has to enable  her  to  find  that
     further assessment is necessary to  make  a  diagnosis.   At  [37]  she
     refers to his "symptoms of PTSD" and at [44] states "I accept that this
     may have caused PTSD", but she is not consistent in her  findings.    I
     find that this adds weight to the submission that she has failed in not
     taking account of the Practice Direction, and in her  approach  to  the
     Appellant's vulnerability on account of his mental health.


 37. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the Judge  has  erred
     in her treatment of the expert medical evidence.  I find that this is a
     material error.

 38. I have considered above the finding referred to in ground 3,  paragraph
     4(iii) where the Judge failed to  support  her  finding  of  the  "deep
     seated belief in the spirit world" [34].


 39. I have also stated above that it was accepted by Mr.  Clarke  that  the
     Judge had erred at [38] when she stated "I am aware of  the  phenomenon
     of women only households  in  Afghanistan"  without  reference  to  any
     evidence to support this.  I find that this is a material  error  given
     that it goes to the issue of why the  Appellant  was  living  with  his
     paternal cousins, and therefore  his  perceived  association  with  the
     Taliban.


 40. At [40] the Judge states when considering the raid on  the  Appellant's
     cousins' home when the cousins were taken by the Taliban:

         "Further, I would have also expected that in any raid,  the  Afghan
         police would have searched other houses if the Appellant  were  not
         present and if the police were looking for him.  I  do  not  accept
         ... that any police raid took place."

 41. At [9] and [10] the Judge set  out  the  Appellant's  account  that  he
     believed his cousins had given his name to the police in interrogation,
     and that the police only searched  for  him  thereafter.   However,  at
     [40], when considering the evening on  which  the  Appellant's  cousins
     were taken, the Judge finds that it  casts  doubt  on  the  Appellant's
     claim that the police did not search further for  him  on  that  night.
     The Appellant has never claimed that the police were interested in  him
     prior to the raid on his cousins' house.  I find  that  the  Judge  has
     failed to give proper attention to the  Appellant's  account,  and  has
     erred in finding that no raid took place partly due to  the  fact  that
     the police did not search further for the Appellant.

 42. I have considered the finding at [43] regarding the amount of  time  it
     took the Appellant's mother to sell  the  land  and  arrange  a  people
     smuggler.

         "To have followed the timeline of the  Appellant's  narrative,  the
         Appellant's  mother  sold  this  land  without  reference  to   the
         Appellant within the five days that the Appellant was hiding in the
         neighbour's house.  I do not consider it to be credible  that  such
         large amounts of money sufficient to pay a people smuggler would be
         so readily available and the land transfers  would  go  through  as
         quickly as the Appellant claimed.  People smugglers require time to
         make arrangements and their fees are substantial."

 43. The Judge has not referred to any evidence to support her finding  that
     land transfers would take a longer period of time  in  Afghanistan,  or
     that it would take longer to find  a  people  smuggler,  and  for  that
     person to make the arrangements.  Without giving any reasons or  citing
     any authority to support her finding that it would take longer, I  find
     that the Judge has erred in making an adverse  credibility  finding  on
     this basis.


 44. I find that the decision involves the making of material errors of law.
      I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February 2010,
     paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
     First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
     party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
     opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
     First-tier Tribunal.  The errors all go to the issue of the Appellant's
     credibility.  Given the nature and extent of the fact-finding necessary
     to enable this appeal to be remade, having  regard  to  the  overriding
     objective, I find that it is appropriate to  remit  this  case  to  the
     First-tier Tribunal.


Decision


 45. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
     material error of law and I set the decision aside.


 46. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.


 47. The appeal is not to be heard by Judge Mozolowski.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 2 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

