
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04930/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2018                           |On 12 April 2018              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Iain Palmer, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT) has made an anonymity order and for  the
    avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.  SS is granted  anonymity
    throughout these proceedings.  No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction  applies  both  to
    the appellant and to  the  respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to  proceedings  being  brought  for  contempt  of
    court.


 2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan who appealed to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal ("FtT") against a decision of the respondent  dated  17th
    May 2017 refusing his claim for asylum.  His appeal was  dismissed  for
    the reasons set out in the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")
    Judge Oliver promulgated on 25th July 2017.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT  Judge  Page  on  30th  October
    2018.  At the conclusion of the hearing before me, I announced that  in
    my judgement, the decision of the FtT is not  infected  by  a  material
    error of law and the appeal is dismissed.  I said that I would give the
    reasons for my decision in writing.  This I now do.


 4. The appellant is a single Afghan male who arrived in the United Kingdom
    on 28th July 2015 and made his claim for asylum the following day.  The
    appellant fears being persecuted because he  would  be  killed  by  the
    Taliban after refusing to be recruited by them.


 5. The background to the appellant's  claim  for  asylum  is  set  out  at
    paragraphs [12] to [17] of the decision of the FtT Judge.  At paragraph
    [13], the Judge records the account of events that  was  given  by  the
    appellant during his screening interview that was completed in December
    2015.  At paragraphs [14] to [17], the  Judge  sets  out  the  relevant
    parts of the appellant's evidence as set out in the appellant's witness
    statement of 12th January 2016.  The Judge refers  to  the  appellant's
    evidence as to the death of the appellant's father and brother,  noting
    in particular that the appellant had not been present when  his  father
    and older brother were killed by masked men in 2012.  The  Judge  noted
    that the appellant had heard from  others  that  the  masked  men  were
    probably linked to the Taliban.  At paragraphs [15], [16] and [17], the
    Judge sets out the appellant's evidence of the numerous occasions  upon
    which the appellant and his friends were approached by the Taliban, and
    how the appellant had been caught by them on at  least  two  occasions.
    The Judge sets out the appellant's evidence  about  the  last  occasion
    when the appellant claimed to have been playing with friends  and  five
    masked men and  armed  members  of  the  Taliban  approached  them  and
    surrounded them.  The Judge records the appellant's account of  how  he
    had got away from the  Taliban,  his  account  of  his  departure  from
    Afghanistan and arrival in the United Kingdom.  At paragraphs  [20]  to
    [25], the Judge sets out the evidence that was given by  the  appellant
    during the hearing of the appeal.


 6. The findings and conclusions of the Judge are to be found at paragraphs
    [27] to [29] of the decision.  The Judge found that the  appellant  has
    failed to show, even to the lower standard, that he has a genuine well-
    founded claim to  fear  persecution  on  return  because  he  would  be
    recruited by the Taliban. The Judge found  that  the  Taliban  have  no
    interest in the appellant and they would not be looking for him  either
    in his home village or if he moved to Kabul, in the capital. The  Judge
    found, at [28], that the appellant came to the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    better life.


The appeal before me


 7. In the grounds  of  appeal,  the  appellant  claims  that  the  Judge's
    treatment of the risk upon return  and  the  appellant's  human  rights
    claim, fails to engage with the evidence and arguments that were relied
    upon by the appellant.  The appellant claims that the Judge  failed  to
    consider the substantial volume of evidence that was put before the FtT
    including background material as to the conditions that  the  applicant
    would face upon return, and in particular, failed to assess the  degree
    to which the appellant has absorbed "western culture" and the  risk  to
    which "westernisation" might expose the appellant to, upon return.


 8. Before me, Mr Palmer reminds me that when the appeal was heard  by  the
    FtT, the appellant was a minor.  The appellant had given an explanation
    of how the problems with the Taliban were avoided.  He submits that the
    Judge failed to make any finding as to whether the appellant's  brother
    and father had in fact been murdered,  as  the  appellant  claims.   Mr
    Palmer submits that the Judge refers to some of the evidence but  fails
    to make findings upon relevant matters.  Findings upon matters such  as
    whether the appellant's father and brother were killed, were  necessary
    for the Judge to properly assess the risk upon return. He submits  that
    the issue in the appeal before me, is whether the Judge's finding  that
    the appellant is not at risk  upon  return  to  his  home  village,  is
    sustainable.  He accepts that the question of whether the appellant  is
    at risk because of "westernisation", only becomes  relevant  if  it  is
    established that the Judge's reasoning as to  the  risk  posed  to  the
    appellant by the Taliban, is flawed.


 9. In reply, Mr Avery submits that the Judge correctly notes at  paragraph
    [27] of the decision that the appellant was a minor at the time when he
    arrived in the  UK,  and  that  is  plainly  taken  into  account  when
    approaching the account of the appellant. He submits that although  set
    out briefly, the Judge gives adequate  reasons  for  his  findings  and
    conclusions and that it was open to the Judge to dismiss the appeal for
    the reasons that he has given.  Mr Avery submits  that  the  fact  that
    there is no finding as to whether the appellant's  father  and  brother
    were murdered, is  immaterial.   The  Judge  carefully  considered  the
    account being advanced by the appellant and it was open to the Judge to
    find that the Taliban have no interest in the appellant, and would  not
    be looking for him either in his home village, or elsewhere.


Discussion


10. The appellant challenges  the  findings  made  by  the  Judge  and  the
    adequacy of his reasons for dismissing the appeal.  I remind myself  of
    the observations made by Mr. Justice Hadon-Cave in Budhathoki  (reasons
    for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);


         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate approach to deciding cases. It is, however, necessary
         for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the  evidence
         and explain in clear and brief terms their  reasons,  so  that  the
         parties can understand why they have won or lost."


11. I have also had regard to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Shizad
    (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 IAC where it  was
    stated in the head note that:


         "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of  the
         conclusions on the central issue on which the appeal is determined,
         those reasons need not be extensive if the  decision  makes  sense,
         having regard to the material accepted by the judge."


12. It is in that context that I have considered the grounds of appeal  and
    the submissions that have been advanced on  behalf  of  the  appellant.
    The core of the appellant's account was not particularly complex. It is
    set out at paragraphs [13] to [17] of the decision of  the  FtT  Judge,
    and at paragraphs [22] to [25] of the decision.


13. As  to  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the  appellant's  account,  at
    paragraph [27] of his judgment the Judge states "I bear  in  mind  when
    approaching the account given by the appellant that on any view he  was
    a minor at the time when he arrived in the United  Kingdom  and  claims
    that before arrival he was not provided with an interpreter in  any  of
    the countries that he passed  through".   In  my  judgment,  the  Judge
    plainly acknowledged that the appellant was a minor when he arrived  in
    the UK and that previously, the appellant had not been provided with an
    interpreter in any of  the  countries  that  he  passed  through.   The
    hearing before  the  FtT  was  conducted  with  the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter and the Judge records at [21], that  no  difficulties  were
    encountered in the interpretation of the proceedings.


14. Mr Palmer submits that the Judge does not expressly make a  finding  as
    to whether the appellant's  father  and  brother  were  killed  by  the
    Taliban.   At paragraph [14] of his decision, the Judge noted that  the
    appellant's own account is that he was not present when his father  and
    older brother were killed.  The appellant had heard from  others,  that
    they were killed by masked men and the masked men were probably  linked
    to the Taliban. The Judge notes at paragraph [22], that in his evidence
    before the Tribunal, the appellant was unable to substantiate  that  it
    had been the Taliban that had killed his father and brother.


15. The lack of a finding as to whether the appellant's father and  brother
    were  killed  is,  in  my  judgement,  immaterial.   The  core  of  the
    appellant's  account  was  not  concerned  with  the  killing  of   the
    appellant's father and brother, but those that were trying  to  recruit
    the appellant and his friends.  The appellant's claim was that he  knew
    it was the Taliban that was trying to recruit  him  because  they  were
    teaching him about Jihad and they dressed as the Taliban do.  The  core
    of the appellant's claim was not that he was being recruited after  the
    Taliban had killed his father and brother, but that he was at  risk  of
    being recruited because he was now the same age as his brother when his
    brother had been killed.


16. The Judge of the FtT, rightly in my judgement, focused  upon  the  risk
    upon return based upon the  appellant's  account  of  how  he  and  his
    friends had been approached by the Taliban.  The  focus  was  upon  the
    threats that were specific to the appellant, in particular, the  threat
    of being recruited to the Taliban.  It was  in  my  judgement,  on  the
    evidence, open to the Judge to find that the appellant  has  failed  to
    show, even to the lower standard, that he has  a  genuine  well-founded
    claim to fear persecution on return because he would  be  recruited  by
    the Taliban for  the  reasons  identified  at  paragraph  [27]  of  the
    decision.


17. In light of the prior findings, the Judge went on to  consider  whether
    the appellant would be at risk upon return.   The Judge found that  the
    Taliban have no interest in the appellant and would not be looking  for
    him either in his home village  or,  if  he  moved  to  Kabul,  in  the
    capital.


18. At paragraph [28], the Judge referred to the expert report relied  upon
    by the appellant.  The Judge noted that the "..expert report relied on,
    deals largely with the position of those who are  of  interest  to  the
    Taliban.".  The appellant could gain little  support  from  the  expert
    report in light of  the  Judge's  finding  that  the  Taliban  have  no
    interest in the appellant.


19. I reject the claim that the Judge did not have proper regard to all  of
    the material that was before him.  The judge refers in his decision  to
    the  expert  report  and  notes  that  the  difficulties  described  on
    relocation to Kabul, do not reach the level  triggering  the  need  for
    humanitarian protection.  The decision of the FtT Judge should be  read
    on the assumption that, unless he has demonstrated  the  contrary,  the
    Judge knew how he should perform his functions  and  which  matters  he
    should take into account. Here, the Judge  found,  at  [28],  that  the
    appellant does not need to relocate.  The Judge noted, at [28] that  in
    coming to his conclusions he had considered all  the  evidence  in  the
    context of the guidance in AK (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
    UKUT 00163.


20. In my judgment, the conclusions that were reached by  the  Judge,  were
    open to him on the facts as he found them.   Overall, in  my  judgment,
    the Judge's finding that the appellant is not at risk  upon  return  to
    his home village, is sustainable,


21. Although the Judge's consideration of the Article 8 claim is brief,  in
    my Judgement, it was open to the Judge, on  the  evidence  to  conclude
    that the appellant's family life remains in Afghanistan.  At  paragraph
    [23] of his decision, the Judge set out the  evidence  of  the  contact
    that the appellant had with his maternal uncle and  mother  whilst  the
    appellant has been in the UK, albeit the appellant claims that  he  has
    now lost the mobile phone on which he had spoken to his family. It  was
    in my judgement open to the Judge to conclude overall, that the private
    life that the appellant will have developed in the  UK  cannot  compare
    with the extent of the private and family life that the  appellant  has
    in Afghanistan.  In light of the findings previously made, it was in my
    judgement open to the Judge to  find  that  there  are  no  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's return to Afghanistan.


22. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  does  not  disclose  a
    material error of law and I dismiss the appeal


23. An anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date          16th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date          16th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

