
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04763/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|On 8 November 2016                   |On 16 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                BEHNAM VEISI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr D Byrne, Advocate, instructed by Quinn, Martin &
                    Langan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         DETERMINATION AND REASONS)

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mays, promulgated  on  25  August  2016,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against refusal of asylum.  The submissions on his behalf by  Mr  Byrne
    were along the lines of the grounds.

 2. Ground one is that the judge stated erroneous and confusing  thresholds
    for the risk  of  persecution  of  a  Kurdish  Sunni  Muslim  in  Iran,
    suggesting that the threshold might be  promotion  of  religion  or  of
    Kurdish rights, whereas risk may arise from  mere  peaceful  expression
    and association.

 3. Ground two is  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  appellant's
    explanation that he was scared to take part in political activities  in
    the context of the principle established in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon)
    v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.

 4. Ground three  maintains  that  the  judge  appellant  thought  that  an
    individual's manifestation of belief or ethnic identity required to  be
    radical for protection can be engaged, a misconception of the principle
    in HJ and HT.

 5. Ground four criticises paragraph 60, where the judge concluded that the
    fact that the applicant "had not been  involved  in  any  political  or
    religious activities in the UK seriously undermines the credibility  of
    his claim to be someone who wishes to actively  express  his  political
    and religious dissent". That finding is said to leave  out  of  account
    that while in the UK the appellant is not subject to the strictures  of
    the Iranian regime, so that there is no imperative on to challenge  the
    authority of the estate, and the tribunal again posits  a  too  high  a
    threshold to give rise to harm, being public activism.

 6. The grounds as a whole are said to raise a general point of  importance
    in relation to the threshold at which persecution may arise  for  Kurds
    and Sunni Muslims.

 7. Mr Byrne referred to paragraph 50 of the decision:

         "... someone who is a political activist or who openly espouses the
         Sunni religion and proselytises against the tenets  of  Shia  Islam
         would be liable to persecution..."

 8. He said this showed the threshold being set too high and  although  the
    judge did refer elsewhere to a lower standard, in effect he applied the
    higher one.  It was  nothing  to  the  point  that  the  appellant  was
    inactive in the UK, there being nothing to oppose.  The  judge  reached
    his overall conclusion for bad reasons and the case should be  reheard,
    either in the FtT or in the UT.

 9.  Mr Matthews pointed out that the judge found at paragraph 63 that  the
    appellant in Iran would live as he did previously, attending his mosque
    occasionally, praying at home, doing nothing to bring  himself  to  the
    attention of the authorities  and  not  involving  himself  in  Kurdish
    political activities.  Mr Matthews said that the nub  of  the  decision
    followed at paragraphs 64 and 65:

         "I do not find that the appellant would continue to  live  in  this
         way ... as a result of fear that  if  he  did  involve  himself  in
         political or religious activities he would  be  persecuted  ...  he
         would continue to live in this way as while he holds political  and
         religious views these are not so strong that he feels the  need  to
         become involved in ...  promoting  his...  political  or  religious
         views.

         I find that the appellant would continue to live the way he did ...
         as a matter of his own choice as opposed to the fact that if he did
         undertake these activities he would be at real risk..."

10. Mr Matthews said those conclusions followed the principles of HJ and HT
    and were justified both by reference to the background evidence and  to
    the facts of the appellant's case.

11. I prefer the submissions for the respondent, and I find no error of law
    in the decision.

12. The grounds take paragraph 50 out of context, and they  do  not  fairly
    reflect the decision as a whole.  The judge's statement at paragraph 50
    is the correct result of examination of the background evidence.  It is
    not a statement of what the appellant must prove to make his case.

13. The judge goes on to conduct an analysis of  the  appellant's  personal
    situation within the principles  of  HJ  and  HT;  in  particular,  the
    approach explained  by  Lord  Rodger  at  paragraph  82,  although  not
    directly cited.  The judge's conclusions at paragraphs 64  and  65  are
    exemplary in terms of that authority.

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


         [pic]


         14 November 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




