
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04003/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 9 January 2018                    |On 18 January 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                    [K A]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Nnamani, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Turkey.  He  has  appealed  with  the
    permission of the First-tier Tribunal against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Lucas, dismissing his appeal against a decision
    of the respondent to refuse his protection and human rights claims. The
    appellant claimed to be of Kurdish ethnicity and to have been an active
    support of the HDP (People's Democratic Party)  in  his  home  town  of
    Gaziantep. He said he came to the UK because he feared  persecution  on
    account of his political opinion.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal declined to make an anonymity direction. I  was
    not asked to make a direction and saw no reason to  make  one  at  this
    stage.

 3. The appeal was heard at Taylor House on 24 May 2017. The appellant  was
    represented by counsel and gave oral evidence. He supported his  appeal
    with medical evidence showing he  was  suffering  from  depression  and
    PTSD.

 4. Judge Lucas set out a number of reasons for rejecting the  entirety  of
    the claim, including the  claim  that  the  appellant  is  Kurdish.  At
    paragraph 42 of his decision, he stated as follows:

         "It is accepted that it is stated that the Appellant  suffers  from
         PTSD and that his injuries  are  consistent  with  his  account  of
         having been beaten in custody. However, it is not accepted that the
         appellant was in fact detained and ill-treated at all.  This  being
         the case, it is obvious that his psychiatric  issues  and  scarring
         must have an alternative causation. It is not for the  Tribunal  to
         second guess these issues, but they  do  not  add  weight  to  this
         appellant's claim."

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Robertson. She found it was arguable that  Judge  Lucas  had  erred  in
    rejecting the medical evidence on the basis of his credibility findings
    rather than considering the evidence  as  a  whole  before  making  his
    credibility findings.

 6. The respondent filed a rule  24  response  opposing  the  appeal.  This
    argues the Judge considered all the evidence and gave adequate  reasons
    for rejecting the core of the claim.

 7. However, at the haring, there was general agreement  that  the  Judge's
    decision was flawed in that he had failed to follow  the  approach  set
    out by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367.

 8. I set aside the decision of Judge Lucas for the following reasons.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted to argue both the grounds set  out  in
    the application for permission to appeal but it is  only  necessary  to
    consider one of them.

10. In paragraph 24 of the judgment in Mibanga, Wilson J stated as follows:

         "It seems to me to be axiomatic that a fact-finder must  not  reach
         his or her conclusion before surveying all  the  evidence  relevant
         thereto. Just as, if I may take a banal  if  alliterative  example,
         one cannot make a cake with only one ingredient, so also frequently
         one cannot make a case, in the sense  of  establishing  its  truth,
         otherwise than by combination of a number of pieces of evidence".

11. It is clear the Judge in this case fell precisely into  this  error  in
    that he reached a conclusion  on  the  appellant's  credibility  before
    looking at the medical evidence. The correct approach was  to  look  at
    the evidence in the  round,  including  the  medical  evidence,  before
    reaching a conclusion on credibility. The error is material because  it
    cannot be ruled out that, had he  applied  the  correct  approach,  the
    Judge might have come to a different conclusion.

12. The parties were not prepared for the appeal to be re-heard at the same
    hearing.  As  a  fresh  hearing  is  necessary,  I   agree   with   the
    representatives that the appeal must  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in line with paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Direction.

13. The appeal must be heard de novo by a different Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal. To assist with that task I make the following directions:



  DIRECTIONS

    (1)  The appeal will be heard by any Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    except Judge Lucas on a date and at a place to be notified;

    (2)  None of the findings made by Judge Lucas are preserved;

    (3)  A Turkish interpreter will be provided;

    (4)  If either party wishes to file additional evidence not  previously
    filed, a consolidated bundle should be prepared  containing  the  fresh
    evidence and all the evidence previously filed, which  bundle  must  be
    filed at the Tribunal and served on the other party no  later  than  14
    days before the hearing.



NOTICE OF DECISION

    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    his decision dismissing the appeal is set aside.  The  appeal  will  be
    heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity direction has been made.




    Signed   Date 9 January 2018


    Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Froom


