
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04938/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford UT                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22nd May 2017                         |On 26th June 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   A.M.A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person.

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    a First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Duff)  allowing  the  appeal  of  A.M.A.
    against the Secretary of State's decision of 26th April  2016  refusing
    his claim to asylum/humanitarian protection/human rights.

 2. For the sake of clarity, I shall throughout this decision, refer to the
    Secretary of State as "the Respondent" and to A.M.A. as "the Appellant"
    reflecting their respective positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq,  born  1994.   He  originates  from
    Dohuk  City  in  Iraqi  Kurdistan.   He  arrived  in  the   UK   around
    24th November 2016 and was arrested by immigration enforcement officers
    in Banbury.  He claimed asylum on arrest.  His claim was refused by the
    Respondent and the Appellant appealed that refusal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT").

FtT Hearing

 4. When the Appellant's appeal came before the FtT  the  judge  took  oral
    evidence from him and noted that the core of the claim centred  on  the
    Appellant's sexual relationship with his girlfriend.  When  the  girl's
    family became aware of the relationship they threatened to kill him and
    therefore he had to leave his home and travel abroad.

 5. The Respondent disbelieved the Appellant's account altogether.  However
    it is right to say that the FtT found the Appellant to  be  a  credible
    witness so far as the account of the relationship with  his  girlfriend
    is  concerned.   What  the  judge  did  not  accept  however  was   the
    Appellant's claim that the widespread influence of  the  girl's  family
    meant that they would have the means to seek  retribution  against  him
    throughout the whole of the Kurdish Autonomous Region.

 6. The judge made findings at [29] and [30] that he could  see  no  reason
    why the Appellant could not return  to  Iraq  and  relocate  safely  to
    another part of Kurdistan, notably Sulemeiya.

 7. The judge then concluded his decision by setting out at  [37]  under  a
    heading entitled Notice of Decision

         "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds,  humanitarian  protection
         grounds and human rights grounds."

Onward Appeals

 8. Both the Respondent and the Appellant sought permission to appeal.  The
    Appellant's application was on the basis that the FtT had described him
    as "a citizen of Afghanistan" and because he disagreed with the judge's
    findings on the safety or otherwise of relocation in Iraq.   Permission
    was refused in the Appellant's case and suffice to  say  he  has  taken
    that decision no further.

 9. The Respondent sought permission to appeal on the basis that the  FtT's
    decision contained material error because

     . the factual findings set out in the substantive part of the decision
       did not tally with the Notice of Decision allowing the appeal

     . in accordance with Katsonga (Slip Rule: FtT's general powers) [2016]
       UKUT 228, this error meant that the decision must be  set  aside  in
       its entirety and the matter remitted to the FtT for a fresh  hearing



10. Permission having been granted by DJ Woodcraft, the matter comes before
    me to decide whether the decision of the FtT contains a material  error
    of law requiring it to be remade.

Error of Law

11. Before me, Mr  Diwyncz  appeared  for  the  Respondent.  The  Appellant
    appeared in person.  Difficulties arose at the  start  of  the  hearing
    because the Appellant was not represented nor was there an  interpreter
    available to assist.  However the Appellant did have  some  command  of
    English and I was satisfied that it was sufficient  to  enable  him  to
    understand the purpose of the hearing.

12. Mr Diwyncz's  submissions  relied  upon  the  written  grounds  seeking
    permission.  The Appellant in his submission sought  to  say  that  the
    judge had decided matters wrongly and to point out that he was not from
    Afghanistan but came from Iraq.  He said that his life  was  in  danger
    and he could not return to any part of the Kurdish  region  because  it
    was a small area and he would be found.

Consideration

13. I find I am satisfied that  the  decision  of  Judge  Duff  contains  a
    material error of law as identified in the Respondent's grounds seeking
    permission.  It is clear from reading the  decision  as  a  whole  that
    either the judge's Notice of Decision is recorded in error or that  the
    findings in the substance of the decision are perverse given the  final
    outcome.  Whichever of those alternatives is the correct one however is
    not clear.

14. Added to this, there is a clear  finding  at  [14]  that  there  was  a
    concession by the Appellant's counsel who appeared at the FtT  hearing,
    that it was not contended that  the  Refugee  Convention  was  engaged.
    Counsel sought humanitarian  protection  only  for  the  Appellant.  In
    apparent disregard of that, the judge's Notice of Decision  allows  the
    appeal on asylum grounds.

15. As matters have now gone so far as to come before this Tribunal, I find
    that there is no alternative but to  set  aside  the  decision  in  its
    entirety; no findings can be preserved.  The decision will have  to  be
    remade. This finding is in accordance with the  decision  in  Katsonga.
    The matter will now be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh
    decision to be made by that Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The  matter  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing,  before  a  judge
other than Judge Duff.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   C E Roberts                         Date         26 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

