
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04171/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 December 2020 via Skype for Business |On 23 February 2021              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     TA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D. Forbes, Lifeline Options (OISC Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to were,  in  addition  to  the  materials
already in the bundle for the  First-tier  Tribunal,  additional  background
materials provided by the appellant and her updated  witness  statement.  In
addition, the Secretary of State relied on her Response  to  an  Information
Request Ethiopia:  Conflict  in  Tigray,  Reference  Number:  11/20-042,  25
November 2020.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said  this  about  the  process:  they  were  content  that  the
proceedings had been conducted fairly in their remote form.


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated  3
    April 2019 to refuse the appellant's asylum and humanitarian protection
    claim.  TA is a citizen of Ethiopia  born  in  1989.   Her  appeal  was
    originally dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan in a decision
    promulgated on 12 July 2019. On 15 November 2019, I found the  decision
    of Judge O'Hagan to have involved the making of an error of law and set
    it aside insofar as it related to a  general,  humanitarian  protection
    risk faced by the appellant on grounds of her claimed ethnicity.  Judge
    O'Hagan made substantive findings  concerning  the  appellant's  asylum
    claim which were not subject to a challenge by the appellant, and which
    I did not set aside. I directed that the  appeal  be  re-heard  in  the
    Upper Tribunal, taking into account the preserved findings of fact.

 2. My error of law decision may be found in the Annex to this decision.

 3. Regrettably, it took some time to rehear the case due to the  pandemic.
    The original remaking hearing had to be postponed,  and  the  postponed
    resumed hearing to be adjourned on account of  Mr  Lindsay  not  having
    access to any of the respondent's papers.  The matter was finally  able
    to resume on 9 December 2020.

Factual background

 4. By way of a preliminary observation, in this case there  are  different
    spellings of Amharic terms. For example, the term "Qemant", features in
    some of the materials as "Kemant" or "Qimant".   Similarly,  "Agew"  is
    rendered  "Agow",  or  "Agaw".   Nothing   turns   on   the   different
    transliterations in use.

 5. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 24 November  2013.   She
    was initially listed as a dependent to her husband's claim for  asylum,
    made on the day of the family's arrival.  That claim was refused on  11
    February 2015, and  her  husband's  appeal  against  that  refusal  was
    dismissed by Judge Butler on 9 November 2015.  On 10 October 2018,  the
    appellant made a claim in her own capacity.  A screening interview took
    place on 10 October 2018.  A substantive asylum interview took place on
    19 February 2019.

 6. At paragraphs 2 and 3 of my error of law  decision,  I  summarised  the
    background to the appellant's asylum claim in the following terms:

         2. The appellant claimed that she was at risk of  being  persecuted
            on account of the political opinion that would be imputed to her
            as the wife of a former sergeant  in  the  Ethiopian  army.  She
            claimed her husband had been forced to vote  in  favour  of  the
            ruling party, in breach of a prohibition against members of  the
            military voting.  She also claimed he  was  suspected  to  be  a
            supporter of Ginbot 7, an opposition  party  who  maintained  to
            have won the disputed presidential elections in  2005  but  were
            corruptly prevented from taking power by the ruling EPRDF Party.
             The appellant claimed  that  her  husband  had  been  arrested,
            detained and mistreated on account of his perceived  association
            with Ginbot 7.




         3. The second strand to the appellant's claim was that she  was  at
            risk as a member  of  the  Agew  tribe,  which  was  engaged  in
            extensive inter-tribal conflict with the Amhara tribe,  and  had
            led to mass internal displacement in Ethiopia.

 7. The respondent accepted the  appellant's  claim  to  be  Ethiopian  but
    rejected the other aspects of her claim.  While  she  was  "given"  the
    benefit of the doubt in respect of her claim to be a member of the Agew
    tribe, pursuant to paragraph 339L of the  Immigration  Rules,  she  was
    found not to have been "consistent" with her claims that the members of
    the tribe were suffering increased persecution, on the basis she failed
    to mention those developments in her screening interview.  Her  husband
    did not raise the points at  his  appeal,  considered  the  respondent,
    thereby further depriving the appellant of credibility in this respect.
     In any event,  the  background  materials  do  not  suggest  that  the
    appellant's membership of the Agew people would place her at  increased
    risk upon her return: see [46] of the respondent's refusal letter dated
    3 April 2019.

 8. The focus of this appeal is the second strand to the appellant's claim,
    namely whether she is entitled to humanitarian protection on account of
    the humanitarian situation in Ethiopia.

Legal framework

 9. The appellant must demonstrate to the lower standard that she meets the
    criteria in paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules to secure  a  grant
    of humanitarian protection, and/or that returning her to Ethiopia would
    breach the United Kingdom's obligations under the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights.  To the extent the appellant relies on Article 8 ECHR,
    the balance of probabilities standard applies.

Documentary evidence

10. The appellant relied on the materials she relied upon before the First-
    tier Tribunal, plus additional material  served  pursuant  to  my  case
    management directions in these proceedings.  She relies on  an  updated
    witness statement, and a range of  background  materials,  the  salient
    contents of which I outline below.

The hearing

11.  The  appellant  participated  in  the  hearing  through   an   Amharic
    interpreter.  At the outset,  I  established  that  the  appellant  and
    interpreter could understand one another and communicate  through  each
    other.

12. The appellant gave evidence.  She adopted both of  her  statements  and
    was cross-examined. I will outline the contents of her evidence to  the
    extent necessary to reach my decision and give reasons.

Discussion

13. I reached the following findings having considered the entirety of  the
    evidence, in the round, to the applicable standard of proof.

Background materials

14.  The  context  in  which  the  appellant  advances  her  case  is   the
    significant, and increasingly prominent  conflict  and  unrest  in  the
    north of Ethiopia.    Details  pertaining  to  earlier  stages  of  the
    conflict were before Judge O'Hagan, and the background materials before
    me confirm that  the  situation  is  dynamic,  and  that  the  conflict
    continues to escalate.

15. I am grateful to Mr  Lindsay  for  serving  on  the  tribunal  and  the
    appellant the respondent's document Response to an Information  Request
    Ethiopia: Conflict in Tigray, 25 November 2020.  It is an  up  to  date
    collation of background materials.  I have also based  my  analysis  on
    the background materials provided  by  Mr  Forbes  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and this tribunal, in  particular  the  International  Crisis
    Group's report Bridging the Divide in Ethiopia's North, dated  12  June
    2020, which necessarily pre-dates the recent  escalation  in  conflict,
    but sets out some of the longer-term context in more depth,  and  is  a
    source  document  for  the  respondent's  Response  to  an  Information
    Request.

16. The Tigray region is a mountainous area in the north  of  the  country,
    with a distinct, but not uniform, ethnic  identity.   It  has  its  own
    forces and a regional capital.   It lies immediately  adjacent  to  the
    Amhara region, the appellant's home location.

17. The Tigray people  were  one  of  the  dominant  tribal  influences  in
    Ethiopian politics and governance for the 27 years leading up to  2018.
    The current Prime Minister, Abiy Ahmed, took office  in  2018,  and  is
    said to have "purged" from his governing coalition many Tigrayans.   Mr
    Abiy is a member of the Oromo tribe.  This set in  train  the  disputes
    leading to the current conflict.  The  provenance  of  the  dispute  is
    complex, relating to the many tribal and ethnic tensions  in  Ethiopia,
    and the full details are beyond the scope of this decision.   But  what
    is clear is that the situation is very sensitive, and volatile.

18. Mr Abiy recently postponed national  elections,  ostensibly  on  safety
    grounds due to the pandemic.  The result is that he continues  to  hold
    office, despite his term having expired.  The  Tigray  people  consider
    his rule to lack legitimacy.  Against the orders  of  the  Abiy  ruling
    coalition, the Tigray region  organised  its  own  regional  elections,
    which have been deemed to be  illegal  by  the  government.   The  Abiy
    government accordingly views those "elected" in the Tigray elections to
    be illegitimate.  Both sides consider the other to be illegitimate.  On
    4 November 2020, Mr Abiy is reported to  have  ordered  his  forces  to
    strike Tigray, triggering the  mass  displacement  of  persons  in  the
    northern region from which  the  appellant  claims  to  originate,  and
    retaliatory conflict by Tigray forces.  Both sides to the conflict have
    extensive armed forces.  The media have recognised the difficulty  they
    have  experienced  in  documenting  what  is  taking  place,   due   to
    information blackouts and difficulties accessing the territory, but the
    conflict has been described as the early stages of a descent into civil
    war.  A six-month state of emergency in  Tigray  was  declared  by  the
    Addis-based government.  Rocket strikes and  heavy  fighting  has  been
    reported across large swathes of northern Ethiopia: see  [3.3.1].   Air
    strikes and artillery fire over a large area in the Tigray  region  has
    been  reported,  as  have  retaliatory  rocket  strikes  against  large
    Ethiopian cities  by  Tigrayan  forces.   See  [3.2.2]  and  [4.1.1.6].
    Forces loyal to Mr Abiy are reported to be being aided by the  Eritrean
    military.

19. There are reports of extensive civilian casualties, not  all  of  which
    are readily attributable  to  collateral  damage.   See  [3.4.1]  which
    documents a reported massacre of Tigray people in the town of Mai-Kadra
    on 9 November 2020: see  the  Amnesty  International  report  Ethiopia:
    Investigation reveals evidence that scores of civilians were killed  in
    massacre in Tigray state, dated 12 November 2020,  relied  upon  by  Mr
    Forbes.   The  media  have  recorded  reports  that  both   sides   are
    responsible for atrocities against civilians: see [3.4.5].

20. There reports that the humanitarian situation  in  Tigray  is  becoming
    urgent, with around 100,000 people displaced [4.1.1.8].   France24  has
    reported  a  "full-scale"  humanitarian  crisis,   and   the   Sudanese
    government estimates that 200,000 displaced Ethiopians could cross  the
    border [4.2.2].  Some reports recorded 30,000 fleeing to Sudan  in  the
    initial two weeks alone [4.2.3],  and  the  UNHCR  recorded  that  over
    40,000 had fled to Sudan by 24 November 2020.

21. The Amhara tribe are distinct from the Tigray  people,  and  the  Oromo
    people, of which the prime minster is a member, but it is by  no  means
    clear that the general tribal conflict taking place at the present time
    can  readily  be  distinguished  on  simple  tribal  terms.   The  Abiy
    government has used forces from  the  Amhara  region  in  the  conflict
    [2.1.1.], [3.2.3], [3.2.3-1.1.6].  The Amhara region has  long-standing
    disputes with the Tigray over land, reports suggest.

22. The International Crisis Group's June 2020 report documents the  Amhara
    and Tigray conflict, which takes place in the adjacent north  Ethiopian
    territory.  The report states at page 5 that, "the [Amhara] dispute has
    mainly translated into a proxy conflict between the Amhara and  Qemant,
    an ethnic minority community  who  were  formerly  widespread  but  now
    reside only in patches of north-western Amhara [the adjacent region  to
    Tigray], and who are believed by many Amhara to be backed by  the  TPLF
    [Tigray People's  Liberation  Front]."    In  March  2019,  the  United
    Nations Office for the Coordination of  Humanitarian  Affairs  ("OCHA")
    issued  a  "Flash  Update",  reporting  that  over  90,000  had  become
    displaced in the Amhara region following tensions  between  the  Amhara
    and Qemant communities.

23. Against  that  background,  the  appellant  claims  that  she  faces  a
    heightened personal risk of indiscriminate violence as a result of  the
    internal armed conflict in Ethiopia,  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
    339C(iii)  and  339CA(iv)  of  the  Immigration   Rules   (humanitarian
    protection).  She draws on Elgafaji  v  Staatssecretaris  van  Justitie
    Case C-465/07 at, for  example,  [39],  contending  that  her  personal
    characteristics as a member of the Agew  tribe,  of  which  the  Qemant
    people are a subset, places her at a heightened risk.  The  appellant's
    case is that, in the context  of  the  evolving  conflict,  her  tribal
    identity increases her risk profile in the face of  the  indiscriminate
    violence taking place in Ethiopia.

The appellant's ethnicity

24. First, as I identified at [24] of my  error  of  law  decision,  it  is
    necessary to  identify  whether  the  appellant  is  a  member  of  the
    Qemant/Agew tribe, as she claims.

25. Judge Butler's decision of 27 October 2015 found the appellant to  lack
    credibility: see [45].  That finding was made in  the  context  of  the
    appellant's husband's claim arising from his claimed status as a member
    of the Ethiopian military; the appellant was found to have given  false
    evidence to assist her husband's claim.  The decision  is  my  starting
    point, but several observations are relevant.

        a. First, my role is to reach a decision based on the  entirety  of
           the evidence in the case, taking the Judge Butler decision as my
           starting point but not necessarily the finishing point.

        b. Secondly, the appellant was  not  a  party  to  the  proceedings
           before Judge Butler.  She was a witness.  She lacked the ability
           to make submissions in her own capacity concerning her evidence.



        c. Thirdly, the basis of the appellant's claim in these proceedings
           is wholly distinct  from  her  husband's  in  the  Judge  Butler
           proceedings.  It is, as Mr Forbes  noted  in  a  letter  to  the
           respondent dated 22 February 2019, a sur place claim.  It  is  a
           claim based on recent  events,  all  of  which  post-date  Judge
           Butler's findings.

        d. Fourthly, people lie for a variety of reasons.  It would  be  an
           error to conclude that, just because a person may have  lied  in
           one context, they are  incapable  of  uttering  any  (reasonably
           likely) truth in another.  Mr Lindsay relied on MA  (Somalia)  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2010]  UKSC  49  as
           authority for the proposition that the appellant's previous lies
           deprive her of all credibility, but as held by  Sir  John  Dyson
           JSC at [32], it would be to fall  into  a  trap  to  dismiss  an
           appeal merely because an appellant has told lies.

26. Turning to the evidence in these proceedings, in a screening  interview
    conducted on 18 October 2018, the appellant reported at  question  1.13
    that she was a member of the "Agow" tribe. At question 4.1, upon  being
    asked "BRIEFLY" (emphasis original) to explain the reasons she would be
    unable to return to her home country, the appellant gave an account  of
    being beaten and tortured by  the  Ethiopian  police,  "because  of  my
    husband". She also said that she feared "the government... I fear  them
    because  of  my  husband  problem  [sic]".   At  question  27  of   her
    substantive asylum interview, the appellant gave further detail of  the
    tribal problems with the Agew tribe and the Amhara people.

27. In her statement prepared for the hearing  before  Judge  O'Hagan,  the
    appellant used the following phrase:

         "We, the Agaw people, and especially those of  us  termed  "Kemant"
         ... have been like hostages in  Amhara...  We  are  a  people,  who
         without doing anything, can be blamed by  Amhara  nationalists  for
         their  failure  to  gain  territory  and  increase   power   within
         Ethiopia."  (Emphasis added)

28. Her husband's statement outlines his own Agaw  ethnicity,  adding  that
    the term refers to a coalition of ethnic groups,  including  the  "Awi,
    Kemant and Hamra".  See the third unnumbered paragraph of his statement
    dated 19 June 2019.  The husband did not give evidence, so  the  weight
    his written evidence attracts is limited.

29. In her oral evidence, the appellant said that she was a member  of  the
    "Awa" people, maintaining that she was  not  a  member  of  the  Qemant
    people directly.   That  is  consistent  with  the  expression  of  her
    identity in her second witness statement as coming from "Agaw  Awi"  in
    Amhara state.  She explained that the Agew people  in  and  around  the
    Gondar region are Qemant, and that the Agew in Gojjam  are  called  the
    Hamra.  She stressed that she was not Qemant herself.

30. Mr Lindsay submitted that the appellant's evidence lacked  credibility;
    whereas in her statement, she contended that she was "Qemant",  in  her
    oral evidence she adopted a different approach, as set out above.  That
    was consistent with her performance before Judge Butler,  submitted  Mr
    Lindsay, where at [45], the judge documented the tribunal's  view  that
    the appellant had changed her  evidence  under  cross-examination.   Mr
    Lindsay also highlighted the  appellant's  assertions,  in  her  second
    witness statement and under  cross-examination,  that  certain  of  her
    husband's family have been arrested  and  imprisoned,  contending  that
    those assertions lacked credibility.  I accept that  the  details  were
    light, and that the appellant may well have exaggerated that aspect  of
    her case.  However, in the context of the unrest in Ethiopia, I  cannot
    say with complete confidence that the appellant would not at least know
    of friends and relations who have been impacted in that way.  I  accept
    that the appellant's evidence in this regard is light  and  so  do  not
    accept it, but I  do  not  find  that  it  deprives  her  testimony  of
    credibility overall.

31. I find that, properly understood, in  light  of  the  number  of  other
    occasions the appellant has  consistently  maintained  that  she  is  a
    member of the Agew people, the appellant was not  purporting  to  be  a
    member of the Qemant in her statement.  The phrase I have emboldened in
    paragraph  27,  above,  could  bear  several  meanings.  It  does   not
    necessarily mean that the appellant was purporting to be  a  member  of
    the Qemant people herself.  From the appellant's oral evidence, and the
    background materials concerning the  composition  of  the  Agew,  which
    includes Qemant, I find she was referring to a subset within  her  own,
    broader, Agew people who identify as Qemant.  Under  cross-examination,
    the appellant said that she was referring to the  problems  experienced
    by the Agew people overall, and not just the Qemant.   Nothing turns on
    her having not mentioned the (then only recent) escalation in  conflict
    in her screening interview: she was specifically  exhorted  to  outline
    her case "BRIEFLY".  Applying the lower standard of proof, and  bearing
    in  mind  the  difficulties  with  translation,   and   the   different
    grammatical constructions of the  sentence  in  question,  I  find  the
    appellant was not purporting to be a member of the Qemant  people,  but
    was merely referring to  their  existence  within  the  broader  ethnic
    subgroup of which she is also a member.

32. While Mr Lindsay submitted that the appellant lacked  credibility,  for
    the reasons I have set  out  above  I  find  no  inconsistency  in  the
    appellant's evidence. I find the appellant has not  sought  to  mislead
    the tribunal on this point. Of course, Judge Butler found the appellant
    to lack  credibility.  However,  those  findings  merely  represent  my
    starting point, and must be viewed subject to the observations outlined
    in paragraph 25, above. Whereas the appellant may well have  sought  to
    exaggerate in order to bolster her husband's asylum claim,  and  indeed
    has not challenged Judge O'Hagan's findings that her own  asylum  claim
    was not credible, this issue is a far more  straightforward  assessment
    of her own claimed ethnicity, assessed  against  the  wider  background
    materials and her own consistent account of the same.

33. I find that the appellant is a member  of  the  Agew  people  from  the
    Amhara region.   There  is  clearly  a  high  level  of  indiscriminate
    violence taking place in the adjacent Tigray region.  Large numbers  of
    people  have  been  displaced  from  Tigray  by  the  recent  conflict,
    augmenting the humanitarian problems arising from the existing conflict
    in the Amhara region, and the conflict between the  Amhara  people  and
    the Qemant: see the OHCR Flash Update,  and  the  International  Crisis
    Group report at page 5.    As  Mr  Lindsay  realistically  accepted  in
    submissions,  the  respondent's  Response  to  an  Information  Request
    outlines extensive armed disputes  and  unrest  in  the  north  of  the
    region: see pages 9 and 10.

34. I find that the appellant's status as a member of the Agew  people,  of
    which the Qemant are  a  member,  enhances  her  risk  profile  in  the
    northern region.  I find that there has been indiscriminate violence in
    the area, and that it is reasonably likely  that  the  appellant  would
    face a real risk of serious harm in the region.  This finding is  based
    on her ethnicity alone and not due to the claimed links  she  has  with
    detained persons.

35. However, there is no evidence that the appellant would not be  able  to
    relocate internally to the south of the country.  The  conflict  is  in
    the north, and I have not been taken to any evidence demonstrating that
    internal flight elsewhere in Ethiopian would not be an option. I accept
    that large numbers of people from the  Tigray  region,  and  some  from
    Amhara,  have  become  internally  displaced,  with  many  fleeing   to
    neighbouring Sudan and Eritrea. However, in the absence of  further  or
    detailed background materials concerning the availability  of  internal
    flight within Ethiopia, there is no  evidence  that  it  is  reasonably
    likely that the appellant would not be able to locate  elsewhere.   The
    appellant would not have to be returned directly to  her  home  region.
    She could be returned to Addis Ababa.  I accept that large  numbers  of
    internally displaced persons from the north of the country  are  likely
    to place additional hurdles before the appellant and  her  family  when
    seeking to establish a home elsewhere in the country. However, there is
    no evidence before me that it would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
    family to relocate internally.

Article 8

36. Plainly, the appellant's removal would  be  an  interference  with  her
    private life and her family life.  Although the family would be  likely
    to be removed as a single unit, for the  reasons  set  out  below,  the
    impact on the nature and quality of family life  would  be  such  that,
    although family life would continue, it would nevertheless  be  subject
    to an interference.  The interference would be of the gravity to engage
    the operation of Article 8.  It would be in accordance  with  the  law,
    and, in  principle,  capable  of  being  regarded  as  necessary  in  a
    democratic society.  The essential question is whether the interference
    in the appellant's private and family life that  removal  would  entail
    would be proportionate to  the  legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be
    achieved.

37. The appellant has three children.  Her eldest daughter was born  on  15
    March 2013 and accompanied the appellant and  her  husband  upon  their
    arrival here on 24 November 2013.  By the time  of  the  hearing  on  9
    December 2020, she  had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  period
    exceeding seven years.  She is a "qualifying child" for the purposes of
    section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    That subsection provides:

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

    There is no suggestion that the appellant  is  not  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with any of her children.

38. The appellant's son and younger daughter were born  here  on  12  April
    2014 and 23 December 2016 respectively.

Best interests of the children

39. When determining the best interests of a child,  all  relevant  factors
    must  be  taken  into  consideration.   Children  should  not  be  held
    responsible for their immigration status, nor should the actions of  an
    adult be held against  them.  Ordinarily,  when  determining  the  best
    interests of children in the position of those  in  these  proceedings,
    one would consider the nationality of their parents, and ask the  "real
    world" question of where should the  children's  parents  be?   In  the
    present matter, neither the appellant nor her  husband  hold  leave  to
    remain in this country. They are Ethiopian, and lived there  for  their
    entire lives before moving here. The children are Ethiopian,  too.  The
    appellant had to give evidence through an interpreter, suggesting  that
    she is more comfortable  speaking  Amharic  than  English,  although  I
    accept that she speaks some English.  It is more likely than  not  that
    the children speak Amharic at home with  their  parents.  But  for  any
    considerations to the contrary, the  best  interests  of  the  children
    would be to return to Ethiopia, with their parents.

40. However, any assessment of the best interests of the  child  must  take
    into account all  relevant  circumstances  and  entail  a  personalised
    assessment of the facts applicable to  the  children.  In  the  present
    matter,  there  is  extensive  conflict  in  Ethiopia,  preventing  the
    appellant and her children from returning to  their  home  area,  where
    there is a real  risk  of  indiscriminate  violence.  There  are  large
    numbers of  internally  displaced  persons,  and  thousands  have  fled
    abroad. Returning to Ethiopia at the present time is likely to  present
    particular challenges to a family in the position of this appellant and
    her  children,  even   though,   from   the   humanitarian   protection
    perspective, her relocation would not be unduly harsh;  the  thresholds
    are not the same. I find that  it  is  not  compatible  with  the  best
    interests of the children in these proceedings for them to be  expected
    to return to Ethiopia at the present time. Two  of  the  children  were
    born here and have only known life in this country.  The  eldest  child
    came here as a very young baby and has lived here for over seven years.
    In those circumstances,  their  best  interest  to  remain  with  their
    parents in this country. It is not in their best interests to return to
    Ethiopia at this time.

Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

41. What is "reasonable" for the purposes of section 117B(6) in relation to
    the eldest child must be construed by reference to her best  interests,
    which are to remain here.  Accordingly, I find that it is  not  in  the
    eldest child's best interests for her mother to be removed, as it would
    not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United  Kingdom  for
    Ethiopia.

42. Pursuant to section 117B(6), the public interest does not  require  the
    appellant's removal, and it would, therefore, be  disproportionate  for
    the purposes of Article 8 ECHR to remove her.  The appeal is allowed on
    Article 8 grounds.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith                     Date 18 January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to  make  no  fee  for
the following reason.  The appellant has succeeded on a different  basis  to
that originally advanced to the respondent.


Signed   Stephen H Smith                     Date 18 January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith



                                  1. [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04171/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 October 2019                            |15 November 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     TA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D. Forbes, OISC Representative, Lifeline Options
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 2. The appellant, TA, is a citizen of Ethiopia, born 28 November 1989. She
    appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Hagan
    promulgated on 12 July 2019, dismissing her appeal against  a  decision
    of the  respondent  dated  3  April  2019  to  refuse  her  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection claim.



Factual background

 3. The appellant claimed that she was  at  risk  of  being  persecuted  on
    account of the political opinion that would be imputed to  her  as  the
    wife of a former sergeant  in  the  Ethiopian  army.  She  claimed  her
    husband had been forced to vote in  favour  of  the  ruling  party,  in
    breach of a prohibition against members of the  military  voting.   She
    also claimed he was suspected  to  be  a  supporter  of  Ginbot  7,  an
    opposition party who maintained to have won the  disputed  presidential
    elections in 2005 but were corruptly prevented from taking power by the
    ruling EPRDF Party.  The appellant claimed that her  husband  had  been
    arrested,  detained,  and  mistreated  on  account  of  his   perceived
    association with Ginbot 7.

 4. The second strand to the appellant's claim was that she was at risk  as
    a member of the Agew tribe, which was engaged in extensive inter-tribal
    conflict  with  the  Amhara  tribe,  and  had  led  to  mass   internal
    displacement  in  Ethiopia.   She  provided  a  number  of   background
    materials to support this aspect of her case.  She claimed the security
    situation was such that, combined with the absence of  effective  State
    protection, she faced a risk of being persecuted on this account.

 5. The judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  the  basis  that  her
    husband's own asylum claim had been refused,  and  his  appeal  against
    that refusal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Butler  in  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 27  October  2015.  Judge  Butler's
    decision provided the starting point for the findings of  fact  reached
    by the judge, he found, and the appellant  had  provided  no  basis  to
    depart from those earlier findings (see [37]).  There is  no  challenge
    to those findings of this judge.

 6. The judge found there was nothing to demonstrate that the appellant was
    personally at risk on account of her Agew  ethnicity.  He  noted  there
    were no country guidance cases concerning the risk faced  by  the  Agew
    tribe in Ethiopia; the most recent Country Policy and Information  Note
    issued by the respondent dealt with the Oromo community, not  the  Agew
    tribe: see Oromos including the 'Oromo Protests' -  Ethiopia,  November
    2017. The appellant contended that the Oromo note was out of date,  and
    that the Oromo were now the dominant group in the  federal  government.
    The judge said at [41] that that he had considered whether the:

         "objective evidence supports the claim that  members  of  the  Agew
         tribe are at  risk  in  Ethiopia.  Having  checked,  there  are  no
         reported country guidance cases which would support this claim..."

    He went on to conclude, "no CPIN has been issued by the  respondent  to
    support the claim that she would be at risk as a  member  of  the  Agew
    tribe."

 7. At [42], the judge stated that the background material provided by  the
    appellant was of "little merit for the most part." He found  that  some
    of the background materials were from "obviously  unreliable  sources",
    including Wikipedia and articles from the BBC. He added:

         "what is wholly lacking is any report from a reputable source  such
         as the UNHCR or a qualified  country  expert  which  addresses  the
         overall position of the Agew in Ethiopia."

Permission to appeal

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott
    Baker  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  had  arguably  overlooked  and
    misinterpreted some of the  background  materials  in  the  appellant's
    bundle.  Judge  Scott  Baker  considered  that,  although  the  judge's
    analysis of some of the background materials was open  to  him  on  the
    evidence before him, he arguably failed to have regard to the UN Office
    for the Coordination of Humanitarian  Affairs  ("OCHA")  report,  which
    featured at page 42 of the appellant's bundle.

Discussion

 9. There has been no challenge to the judge's findings in relation to  the
    appellant's risk profile on account of her  husband's  claimed  imputed
    political opinion.

10. The focus of Mr Forbes' submissions related to the judge's analysis  of
    the background materials concerning the risk of  inter-tribal  violence
    in Ethiopia. He submitted that  there  are  more  internally  displaced
    persons in Ethiopia than in any other country in the region,  and  that
    the materials before the judge  demonstrated  that  there  had  been  a
    recent and  significant  deterioration  in  the  situation.  He  relied
    specifically on the  contents  of  the  OCHA  report  at  page  42  and
    following of the bundle.   The grounds of appeal were also critical  of
    the judge's dismissal of  the  reliability  of  certain  of  the  other
    background materials, on essentially rationality-based grounds.

11. Mr Lindsey submitted that the judge reached a decision that was open to
    him on the facts.  He accepted  that  the  judge  did  appear  to  have
    overlooked the OCHA report but  maintained  that  any  errors  on  that
    account were not such that the decision should be set aside.

12. I find the judge erred in his consideration of the background materials
    for the following reasons.

13. First, the  judge  appeared  to  consider  that  his  analysis  of  the
    background materials was something that he was to conduct on the  basis
    of his own, pre-existing knowledge or impression  of  those  materials.
    The judge stated that he had little awareness of some of the  materials
    in question and, accordingly, did not engage  with  their  detail,  and
    ascribed minimal weight to them.  The judge commented that some of  the
    materials were from "obviously unreliable  sources."   He  added  that,
    "there were few [background materials] of which  I  have  any  existing
    experience or knowledge..."  Even articles by the BBC  ("those  few  of
    which I have some experience"), "can contain  errors",  he  said.   See
    [42].

14. Judges should not perform their fact-finding  roles  on  the  basis  of
    their  pre-existing  knowledge  or  impressions  of  the   sources   of
    information.  Of course, personal knowledge of the  judge  can  play  a
    part in such analysis, although fairness is likely to demand that if  a
    judge has particular knowledge of an area, that he or she reveals  that
    to the parties at the hearing, if that  pre-existing  knowledge  is  to
    form part of the tribunal's later operative  reasoning.   Indeed,  many
    judges  develop  particular  expertise  in  the  factual  matters  that
    frequently arise  in  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber,  and  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 expect the specialist expertise of the tribunal  to
    be used appropriately when dealing with cases fairly  and  justly:  see
    rule  2(2)(d).   However,  the  task  of  the  tribunal  in   analysing
    background materials should not be based primarily  upon,  and  is  not
    limited to, the personal knowledge the judge may happen to have of  the
    factual issues under consideration.

15. The proper approach to the  analysis  of  background  materials  in  an
    unfamiliar area  includes  steps  such  as  the  consistency  of  their
    contents with other materials, their internal consistency, and rigorous
    scrutiny of their contents.  Often statements in  background  materials
    which are obviously opinion can be  distinguishable  from  those  which
    purport to be made in reliance on some form of evidential basis.  Where
    an evidential basis is proffered or cited by the materials in question,
    the weight to be ascribed to the analysis depends on the nature of  the
    evidence citied, and an assessment of the document in the round.

16. That some articles or materials "can contain errors" is, of  course,  a
    reality  of  the  lower  standard  of  proof   applicable   to   asylum
    proceedings.  The possibility of reaching positive findings of fact  on
    the basis of documents that "can contain errors" is embedded within the
    reasonable likelihood standard  of  proof.   The  mere  possibility  of
    errors in articles is not a reason  to  refuse  to  engage  with  those
    materials, still less a reason to find them to  be  wholly  unreliable.
    To aspire to the omission of errors would be to  apply  a  standard  of
    proof which greatly exceeds the lower standard applicable to protection
    appeals.

17. The second reason why the decision involved the making of an  error  of
    law is because the judge failed to  have  regard  to  material  factual
    matters that were actually before  him.   Having  said  that  what  was
    "wholly lacking" was a report from a  "reputable  source  such  as  the
    UNHCR", the judge overlooked that there was precisely such  a  document
    in the bundle: the OCHA Flash Update concerning the Qemant people.

18. Central to Mr Forbes' submission is the proposition that the appellant,
    as a member of the Agew tribe, would also be regarded as  a  member  of
    the Qemant people.   In her statement, the appellant describes how,  as
    a member of the Agew tribe, she also may be described as  a  member  of
    the "Kemant" [sic] community.  See the fifth unnumbered paragraph:

         "In paragraphs 43-46 of the  reasons  for  refusal  the  caseworker
         seems to be saying that he does not believe  that  I  am  Agew  and
         that, even if I were, I would not be at risk as  I  have  not  been
         involved in protests. But, this does  not  take  into  account  the
         events  which  happened  in  Ethiopia  since  I  left  in  2013  in
         particular from 2015 to today (2019). We, the  Agaw  [sic]  people,
         and especially those of us termed "Kemant"... [sic] have been  like
         hostages in Amhara... We are a people, who without doing  anything,
         can be blamed by Amhara nationalists  for  their  failure  to  gain
         territory and increase power within Ethiopia." (Emphasis added)

19. In his statement at page 6  of  the  bundle,  the  appellant's  husband
    describes his tribal identity, and that of his wife as being the "Agaw-
    Kemant" people.  See the first unnumbered paragraph:

         "...there is an ongoing border dispute between the Amhara  and  the
         Tigrayans with our ethnic group, the Agaw-Kemant people, who  claim
         our own separate identity, caught in  the  middle  [of  the  inter-
         tribal conflict described elsewhere in the statement]..." (Emphasis
         added)

    Similarly, in the second paragraph, the appellant's husband writes:

         "Some terrible atrocities have happened to Agaw-Kemant,  especially
         in February this year when hundreds of our families were burned  to
         death inside their houses and thousands of others became internally
         displaced peoples."  (Emphasis added)

20. The significance of  the  appellant  and  her  husband  identifying  as
    members of the Qemant community is that it  links  the  claimed  ethnic
    status of the appellant with background material from a  well-respected
    international organisation which featured in the appellant's bundle.

21. The OCHA Report dated 1 March 2019 is titled Amhara Flash  Update.   It
    summarises humanitarian disturbances in the Amhara region of  Ethiopia,
    and difficulties between the Amhara and Qemant communities,  which  are
    described as having "spiked" in September 2018.

22. The document begins with the following executive summary:

         "More than 90,000 people are currently displaced in Amhara  region,
         the majority since September 2018. The IDPs are  living  with  host
         communities (70%) and in temporary, sub- standard settlement  sites
         (30%).

         The IDPs lack adequate access to basic services such as food, water
         and sanitation, education, health,  shelter  and  livelihoods.  The
         most pressing need articulated by IDPs is security and  protection,
         followed by food, shelter and household items.

         Nearly all IDP sites in central Gondar are accessible,  while  some
         sites in West Gondar remain inaccessible due to  security  concerns
         on the road. Basic social  services  (schools,  health,  and  other
         government services) were suspended due to insecurity.

         NDRMC started dispatching food  and  non-food  relief  supplies  to
         Central and West  Gondar  since  12  February,  but  needs  surpass
         resources available.

         Central and West Gondar zones are  historically  less  affected  by
         climate variability (drought/flood)  and  the  smallholder  farmers
         are, for the most  part,  able  to  sustain  themselves.  For  this
         reason, there is absence of humanitarian  partners  in  the  areas,
         which is posing a significant challenge in the current situation."

    The remainder of the document expands upon the above summary.

23. Mr Lindsay realistically accepted that the judge appeared to fall  into
    error by failing to consider the OCHA report.   Given  the  appellant's
    association of her ethnic identity with the Qemant people, the  judge's
    dismissal of the race-based persecution limb of the appellant's  asylum
    claim for a lack of background materials was irrational, I find.   That
    is not to say the judge would have been bound to accept the appellant's
    case.  But it is to say that it was necessary for the judge  to  engage
    with those materials.

24. The judge accordingly fell into error by basing  his  analysis  of  the
    documents on his own pre-existing knowledge (or lack of  knowledge)  of
    their contents and provenance, which was an  irrelevant  consideration.
    The judge also failed to engage with the contents of the documents, and
    so fell into error by failing to give sufficient (i.e. any) reasons for
    dismissing the race-based limb of the appellant's case.   These are not
    simply disagreements of fact; they were errors of law arising from  the
    judge's irrational reasoning.  The  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to
    relevant considerations.

25. I find that the above errors were such that the decision  needs  to  be
    set aside.  Taken together,  the  news  reports  and  the  OCHA  report
    demonstrate that there has been considerable tribal unrest and conflict
    in the Amhara region.  Further  findings  of  fact  are  necessary,  to
    explore the impact of that conflict upon the likely risk profile of the
    appellant upon her  return,  in  the  context  of  the  well-documented
    existing internal displacement in Ethiopia.  In turn, that will  inform
    consideration of whether  there  will  be  effective  state  protection
    available to the  appellant  and  her  husband,  and  whether  internal
    relocation would be reasonable.  It may be necessary  to  find  whether
    the appellant is a member of the Qemant/Agew subgroup, as she claims.

26. The above matters will be determined by the Upper Tribunal.

27. This appeal is allowed to the extent set out above.


Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge O'Hagan involved the making of an error of law and  is
set aside.

The findings of Judge O'Hagan concerning the  appellant's  claimed  risk  of
persecution on account of her imputed political opinion are preserved.

The appeal will be re-heard in the Upper Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith                         Date 14 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

