
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/04018/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23 October 2018                       |On 01 November 2018               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Daley-Medlock, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is  made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

    1.   The appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT')  Judge  Watt  dated  4  July  2016,  in  which  he
         dismissed his appeal against a decision dated 7  December  2015  to
         refuse to grant him asylum.



Summary of asylum claim

    2.   The appellant, a citizen  of  Ethiopia,  fears  that  he  will  be
         persecuted upon  return  to  Ethiopia  because  of  his:  (i)  past
         involvement in the Oromo Liberation Front ('OLF')  and  his  arrest
         and detention for this reason whilst in Ethiopia in 2013 and;  (ii)
         sur place activities in the UK with the OLF.

Appeal proceedings


    3.   The FTT regarded the appellant as  an  incredible  and  unreliable
         witness and did not accept that he supported the OLF or that he was
         arrested as claimed when in Ethiopia.  The FTT  was  not  satisfied
         that  the  appellant  is  genuinely   Oromo   and   notwithstanding
         supporting evidence from Dr Berri, the leader of the OLF in the UK,
         did not accept that he was  a  supporter  of  the  OLF.    The  FTT
         therefore dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.


    4.   In renewal grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')  it  was
         submitted that in rejecting the appellant's sur  place  claim,  the
         FTT erroneously considered the genuineness  of  his  claimed  Oromo
         ethnicity to be relevant and failed to apply the  country  guidance
         in MB (OLF & MTA -  risk)  Ethiopia  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00030.  The
         headnote includes the following:


             "(1) As at February 2007, the situation in  Ethiopia  is  such
         that, in general:-


             (a) Oromo Liberation Front members and sympathisers;
             (b) persons perceived to be OLF members or sympathisers; and
             (c) members of the Maccaa Tulema Association;


             will, on return, be at real risk if they fall within the scope
             of paragraph (2) or (3) below.


             (2)  OLF  members  and  sympathisers  and  those  specifically
             perceived  by  the  authorities  to   be   such   members   or
             sympathisers will in general be at real risk if they have been
             previously  arrested  or  detained   on   suspicion   of   OLF
             involvement. So too will those who have a significant history,
             known to the  authorities,  of  OLF  membership  or  sympathy.
             Whether any such persons are to be excluded  from  recognition
             as refugees or from the grant of  humanitarian  protection  by
             reason of  armed  activities  may  need  to  be  addressed  in
             particular cases.


             (3) Given the proscription of the MTA and the current state of
             tension on the part of the Ethiopian authorities, the Tribunal
             considers that MTA members will also be at real risk on return
             if they have previously been arrested or detained on suspicion
             of MTA membership and/or of OLF membership  or  are  known  or
             suspected of membership of the MTA. Despite the banning of the
             MTA, the Tribunal does not consider that the evidence is  such
             as to show a real risk where the extent  of  the  authorities'
             knowledge  or  suspicion  about  an  individual   relates   to
             something less than membership of the MTA."


    5.   On 25 August 2016 the UT granted permission to appeal on the basis
         that the FTT did not arguably address prospective risk in light  of
         the  appellant's  sur  place  activities  and  did  not  adequately
         consider whether he would be perceived as  an  OLF  sympathiser  in
         accordance with MB.  Permission to appeal was  neither  sought  nor
         granted in relation to  the  FTT's  disbelief  of  the  appellant's
         account whilst in Ethiopia.  That means there has  been  no  appeal
         against the factual finding that  the  appellant  was  not  an  OLF
         member or sympathiser.


    6.   On 27 January 2017 UT Judge Latter heard the appeal, but there was
         no  appearance  by  the  appellant  or  his  representatives.    He
         dismissed the appeal in a decision dated 17 February 2017. However,
         as  the  Rt.  Hon.  Sir  Stephen  Silber  observed  when   granting
         permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal on 20  June  2018,  the
         appellant and his representatives did not receive notice of the  UT
         hearing.  In the circumstances, in an order dated 3 August 2018 the
         matter was remitted by consent to the UT, for the  decision  to  be
         remade.


UT hearing


    7.   Mr Daley-Medlock relied upon the renewal grounds.  He focussed his
         attention on the FTT's failure to consider the prospective risk  to
         the appellant in light of his sur place activities,  even  if  they
         were not genuinely  undertaken.   I  invited  Mr  Daley-Murdock  to
         address me on Judge Latter's observation that  this  failure  could
         not be said to be material because there was insufficient  evidence
         that  these  activities  would  become  known  to   the   Ethiopian
         authorities.  Mr Daley-Medlock submitted  that  it  was  inevitable
         that  the  appellant  would  be  questioned  about  his   political
         activities as an undocumented returnee and his sur place activities
         would therefore reach the attention of the  Ethiopian  authorities.
         He was unable to take me to  any  country  background  evidence  to
         support this submission.


    8.   Mr Tan relied on a rule 24 notice  and  the  reasons  provided  by
         Judge Latter to support the SSHD's position that any error was  not
         a material one.


    9.   After hearing from both representatives, I  reserved  my  decision
         which I now provide with reasons.

Discussion


    10.  The FTT did not accept the credibility of the appellant's  account
         that  he  had  been  arrested  in  Ethiopia  on  suspicion  of  OLF
         involvement.  In addition, there was no credible  evidence  of  the
         appellant having a "significant history" of OLF  involvement.   The
         FTT found an absence of any involvement in Ethiopia.   The  limited
         evidence of sur place OLF activities summarised by the FTT at  [11]
         could not on any legitimate view be described as giving rise  to  a
         "significant history" of OLF involvement, particularly when the FTT
         found that the appellant was unable to speak the language  used  by
         the organisation and was not an Oromo.


    11.  Paragraphs 1 and 2 of  the  head  note  in  MB  provide  that  OLF
         sympathisers and those perceived as such, are  at  risk  "if"  they
         "have been previously arrested or  detained  on  suspicion  of  OLF
         involvement"  or  have  "a  significant  history,  known   to   the
         authorities, of OLF membership or sympathy".  The FTT clearly found
         that the appellant had not been arrested or detained  on  suspicion
         of OLF involvement.  Although the FTT did not clearly  address  the
         possible risk posed to the appellant by reason  of  his  sur  place
         political  activities,  the  FTT  adequately  reasoned   that   the
         appellant was not a genuine supporter or sympathiser of the OLF.  I
         entirely agree with Judge Latter's reasoning at [18] in this regard
         and the proposition at [19] that the FTT would have erred in law if
         it took the view that only genuine activities would  enable  a  sur
         place claim  to  succeed.   As  Judge  Latter  observed  activities
         undertaken in bad faith can found a sur  place  claim  but  careful
         attention must be given to whether those activities are  likely  to
         come to the attention of  the  authorities  on  return  -  see  the
         reasoning in YB (Eritrea) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 360 and MB.  There
         was  no  evidence  of  any  credibility  or  substance   that   the
         appellant's limited sur place activities would  be  "known  to  the
         authorities".  Mr Medley-Daley's submission that  this  information
         would be revealed upon questioning is unsupported by  any  evidence
         and constitutes mere speculation.


    12.  Although the FTT did not consider as clearly as it should have the
         risk by reason of the appellant's sur place activities and did  not
         direct itself to the country guidance decision of MB, the  FTT  did
         not commit any material error of law.  The appeal could not succeed
         on any legitimate view given the absence of any evidence  that  the
         appellant had a "significant history" of OLF sympathy or even if he
         did, that this would be "known to the authorities".

Decision

    13.  The FTT decision did not involve the making of a material error of
         law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

UTJ Plimmer
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
23 October 2018
