
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
PA/04121/2015

                                                      PA/04148/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27 March 2018                           |On 18 April 2018               |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FLA
                                     SAA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr. T. Gaisford, Counsel instructed by Sriharans
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Khawar, promulgated on 20 July 2017, in which
    he allowed FLA and SAA's  appeals  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to grant asylum.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent, and to FLA and SAA as the Appellants, reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. I have made an anonymity direction, continuing on from that made in the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "It is arguable that the Tribunal's approach to section  8  of  the
         Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act  2004  was
         flawed because, amongst other reasons, (i) it failed to  treat  the
         first appellant's immigration history as operating adversely to her
         credibility as required by that section, (ii) despite what is  said
         in the final sentence of paragraph 58, it only had  regard  to  her
         immigration history after it had already found her to  be  credible
         (see,  especially,  paragraph  42),  and  (iii)  in  accepting  the
         appellant's explanation for her immigration history, it had  regard
         to knowledge derived  from  other  appeals  rather  than  from  the
         evidence that was before it.  It is also arguable that the Tribunal
         failed to give adequate (or any) reasons for finding that the first
         appellant was still at risk from her  husband  notwithstanding  the
         absence of contact between them during  an  intervening  period  of
         approximately 12 years as at  the  date  of  the  hearing.   It  is
         arguable that the Tribunal skirted round this  issue  at  paragraph
         51, by finding that the appellant's husband would harm her  "if  he
         was minded to do so" and, at paragraph 52, by  stating  that  there
         was "no reason to believe that ... he would behave differently than
         he did in the past".   Permission to appeal is accordingly  granted
         on both grounds."

 5. The Appellants attended the hearing.  I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.

Error of law

 6. I have carefully considered the grounds and the decision.  In regard to
    the Judge's approach to section 8, taking into account the decision  as
    a whole, I find that the Judge  considered  matters  which  fell  under
    section 8 in  his  overall  assessment  of  credibility,  and  did  not
    consider them only after  he  had  found  the  first  Appellant  to  be
    credible.

 7. Ms Isherwood stated at the hearing that, while she continued to rely on
    both grounds, having considered the Appellants' Rule 24  response,  she
    could see the argument that section 8 had been considered in the round.
      She agreed that this was the weaker  ground  when  the  decision  was
    considered as a whole.

 8. I find  that  it  is  clear  from  the  decision  that  the  Judge  was
    considering the evidence in the round.  At [39] he states:

         "It is necessary to make a finding of  credibility  concerning  the
         evidence of  the  Appellants  after  mature  consideration  of  all
         relevant and material circumstances which are detailed  below.   In
         making my findings I have taken  into  account  all  the  available
         evidence, in the round, and have attached such weight after anxious
         scrutiny to be properly attributable including  country  background
         evidence and the extent to which the Appellants'  accounts  may  or
         may not be consistent with this evidence."

 9. At [53] he states:

         "Accordingly, on the totality of evidence before me I am  satisfied
         that the Appellants are entitled to be recognised  as  Refugees  in
         the United Kingdom".

10. At [55] he states:

         "In coming to the aforesaid conclusions I bear in mind the delay in
         the Appellants asylum claims under Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004. [....] In any event,
         in the circumstances of this appeal,  I  treat  the  delay  in  the
         asylum claim as evidence in the round."

11. I find that the decision clearly indicates that  the  Judge  considered
    all  the  evidence  in  the  round,  including  the  behaviour  of  the
    Appellants which fell under section 8.  At [55]  he  explicitly  states
    that his section 8 considerations were borne in mind when  he  came  to
    his conclusions as a whole.  He made findings  contrary  to  the  first
    Appellant's evidence at [43], indicating that he did  not  just  accept
    everything that she said.

12. I am mindful of the case of SM (Section 8: Judge's process) Iran [2005]
    UKAIT 00116 which states in the headnote:

         "Even where section 8 applies, an Immigration Judge should look  at
         the evidence as a whole and decide which parts are  more  important
         and which less. Section 8 does not require the behaviour  to  which
         it applies to be treated as the starting-point of the assessment of
         credibility."

13. At [35] the Judge correctly set out the onus and standard of proof, and
    what he had to consider in relation to the asylum claim.   At  [39]  he
    correctly set out how the assessment of  credibility  and  findings  of
    fact would be made.  He was aware of the delay in claiming asylum,  and
    he took this into account in his consideration of  the  evidence  as  a
    whole.  While it might have been better to have referred to  section  8
    prior to his conclusion in [53], taking into account the decision as  a
    whole, it is clear that he  bore  section  8  behaviour  in  mind  when
    assessing the evidence as a whole.  I find there is no error of law  in
    the Judge's approach to section 8, and consequently no error of law  in
    his credibility findings.

14. In relation to future risk, the majority of the Judge's  findings  have
    not been challenged in the grounds of appeal, for example the  position
    of Mr. C and Mr. S.  Further, the grounds state that the only  evidence
    is the Appellants' story, but I find that this is not  the  case.   The
    Judge referred to the scarring report at  [41].   This  is  independent
    evidence.  He found that this supported the Appellants' case  and  that
    it would be speculative to suggest that the second Appellant's injuries
    had been caused in circumstances other  than  those  described  by  the
    Appellants.  At [42] he states:

         "Therefore I find as a fact that the First Appellant was the victim
         of domestic violence by her husband, assessed to the lower standard
         of proof required, that of a reasonable  likelihood.   In  addition
         that the Second Appellant was also the victim of domestic  violence
         on occasions when he attempted to protect his mother."

15. The Judge has made a clear finding that the  Appellants  have  suffered
    previous ill treatment at the hands of the first Appellant's husband in
    Sri Lanka.  His findings are not based on the "Appellant's word  alone"
    as stated in the grounds of appeal, but  also  on  independent  medical
    evidence.   There  was  also  the  unchallenged  independent   evidence
    regarding the activities of Mr. C and Mr. S (see below).  It  is  wrong
    for the grounds to state that the  only  evidence  was  the  Appellants
    story.

16. In accordance with paragraph 339K, previous ill treatment is a "serious
    indication" of a well-founded fear  of  persecution  or  real  risk  of
    suffering serious harm, "unless there are good reasons to consider that
    such persecution  or  serious  harm  will  not  be  repeated".   It  is
    incumbent on the Judge to take this into account.

17. The Judge considers at [47] to [52] whether there are any such  reasons
    by  way  of  his  consideration  of  the  first  Appellant's  husband's
    connections and position.  At [52] the Judge is entitled to  find  that
    there was no reason to believe that "he would  behave  any  differently
    towards the Appellants than he did in the past".

18. The finding at [48] that the first Appellant's husband is linked to two
    criminals has not been  challenged.   The  independent  evidence  which
    supported this which was provided in the  Appellants'  bundle  for  the
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal has not been challenged.  The  Judge
    refers to the loss of the photographs by the  Respondent  which  showed
    the Appellant's husband together with Mr. C and  Mr.  S,  but  resolved
    this issue in the Appellants' favour.  At [48] he found:

         "I resolve in favour of the Appellant  the  issue  of  whether  the
         Appellant's husband is connected with Mr. C and Mr. S."

19. At [49] he states:

         "In addition, there is no issue that Mr. C and Mr. S have allegedly
         in the past been accused  of  such  nefarious  activities  as  drug
         dealing, prostitution, extortion, intimidation and murders."

20. At [50] the Judge finds that  "the  likes  of  Mr.  C  and  Mr.  S  are
    political individuals who are able to operate  with  "impunity"  having
    regard  to  the  corruption  of  the  authorities  within   Sri   Lanka
    generally".   This finding was not challenged.  It was submitted by Mr.
    Gaisford that, as stated at [12] of his skeleton  argument  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, the Respondent had not contested  the  Appellant's
    claim that, if her husband was politically connected as stated  in  her
    evidence, she would be at real risk of  further  ill-treatment  in  Sri
    Lanka.  He submitted that there had been no contest to this element  of
    the Appellant's claim, and that the reasons for refusal letter had  not
    addressed it.  The reasons for refusal letter  does  not  consider  the
    Appellant's  claim  at  its  highest.   It  does  not  state  that  the
    Appellants will not be at risk if their claim is found to be  credible.
    There is no consideration of the position  for  the  Appellant  if  her
    husband is politically connected as claimed.

21. Given the unchallenged finding that the first  Appellant's  husband  is
    connected with criminals who are able to operate with impunity  in  Sri
    Lanka, and given the finding that both Appellants have been the victims
    of domestic violence in the past at the hands of the first  Appellant's
    husband, the Judge was entitled to find that the Appellants would be at
    risk on return.  He adopts the correct standard of proof at  [52]  when
    finding "in my judgment there is at least a reasonable likelihood  that
    his attitude towards the Appellants will be the same as it was  in  the
    past."

22. I find that the Judge has not "skirted round" the issue of whether  the
    first  Appellant's  husband  would  still  have  an  interest  in   the
    Appellants.  I find that he gave adequate reasons for finding that  the
    Appellants would still be at risk, as set out in  [45]  to  [53].   The
    Judge was bound to take into account that the Appellants had previously
    suffered  serious  harm  at  his  hands.   He  took  into  account  the
    unchallenged evidence of his contacts in Sri Lanka,  and  the  evidence
    that such men  could  act  with  impunity.   These  findings  were  not
    challenged.

23. In relation to the reference to GJ, it was not argued before the First-
    tier Tribunal that the Appellants fell within GJ,  but  rather  GJ  was
    cited as evidence of the corruption within the Sri Lankan police force,
    and therefore the ability of Mr. C and Mr. S to act with impunity  (see
    [7] and [8] of  the  first  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  As stated above, this finding has not been challenged.

24. The Judge found at [45] that the Appellant formed part of a  particular
    social group as a woman  from  Sri  Lanka  who  had  suffered  domestic
    violence.  There was no challenge to this and, in any event, the  Judge
    considered in the alternative that the Appellants would  succeed  under
    Article 3 for the same reasons [54].

25. I find that the Judge has given adequate reasons for his  finding  that
    the Appellants would still be at risk on return.  This ground of appeal
    is not made out, and is an attempt to reargue the case.   I  find  that
    the decision does not involve the making of any error of law.

Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the making  of
    a material error of law and I do not set it aside.

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed                                  Date 17 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

