
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/04417/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21st November 2017                      | On 7th December 2017            |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                                  Mr K. T.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    & Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Oliver  promulgated  on  4th  July  2017  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal.

 2.  Judge  Oliver  noted  within  his  decision  that  the  Appellant  had
    previously claimed asylum and his appeal against the  original  refusal
    dating back as far as 1st August 2001, had been heard by the First-tier
    Tribunal on 27th March 2002, at which time the First-tier Tribunal  had
    dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal, and  that  the  Appellant  had
    become appeal rights exhausted on 3rd September 2002,  after  a  failed
    attempt to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The history of the case was  then  further  set  out  by  Judge  Oliver
    explaining the intervening years, but  eventually  it  was  noted  that
    during  that  time  there  had  been  further  submissions   made   for
    applications for judicial review  and  further  evidence  submitted.  A
    further asylum decision had actually been then made  dated  20th  March
    2017.  It is that decision which was being  considered  in  the  appeal
    before Judge Oliver. He stated in paragraph 31 of his decision that the
    Respondent had asserted that nothing had changed  in  his  application,
    apart from the inconsistent account of the length of detention, how  he
    was freed from detention and whether he arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully  or  not  and  reliance  was   placed   upon   the   earlier
    determination in 2002.

 4. The Respondent's case was that she  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
    supported the LTTE in a low-level capacity, but did not accept that  he
    had been detained or tortured and did not accept that he had escaped on
    payment of a bribe.

 5. Judge Oliver in his findings, which run just between paragraphs 35  and
    39 of the decision, found  that  very  little  had  changed  since  the
    arrival of  the  Appellant  in  2001  and  the  refusal  of  his  first
    application in 2002.  He found that and accepted that a report from  Dr
    Arnold was evidence which supported the Appellant's claim to have  been
    detained and tortured, although he found the Appellant's account of the
    detention and his release had not always been consistent  and  to  that
    limited extent therefore Judge Oliver found that  that  aspect  of  the
    determination from 2002 could properly be looked  at  again.  He  found
    that other key findings were to remain and in particular he found  that
    the Appellant had never been a member of the LTTE and that the activity
    for them, in which he has claimed to have been forced to take part  was
    only that of raising money, at the very lowest end of support.

 6. Judge Oliver then went on to consider  whether  or  not  the  Appellant
    would be at risk upon return in light of the country guidance given  in
    the case of GJ and others (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and did not accept that the Appellant fell into
    any of the categories that would put him at risk following that country
    guidance case and on that basis he refused the Appellant's appeal.

 7. The Appellant has now sought to appeal against that decision and within
    the Grounds of Appeal it is argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    failed to consider or give any reasons for accepting  or  rejecting  an
    expert report prepared by Dr Nadarajah.  It is  also  argued  that  the
    judge failed to assess credibility  and/or  risk  upon  return  in  the
    context of the country background material provided and that the  judge
    has failed to approach and consider the evidence in the round and  with
    anxious scrutiny.

 8. Although within the file before me there was an original report from Dr
    Suthaharan Nadarajah, who is a lecturer at the Centre for International
    Studies and Diplomacy, School of Oriental and African  Studies  at  the
    University of London, dated 17th December 2015, which, I am told by  Mr
    Bandegani of Counsel, was a preliminary report, having  considered  the
    Record of Proceedings and some further evidence submitted on behalf  of
    the Appellant in terms of a witness statement from  Laura  Smith  dated
    today's date on 21st November 2017, together with email  correspondence
    dating back from 5th June 2017 and records  of  conversations  she  had
    with Mr Bandegani, who represented  the  Appellant  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, in terms of her attendance note and in light also  of  having
    considered the Record of Proceedings from Judge  Oliver  it  does  seem
    clear that, in fact, in addition to that preliminary report  there  was
    in fact a much fuller final report from Dr Nadarajah, who  was  one  of
    the experts in the country guidance case of GJ and others, which  final
    report was dated 5th June 2017.

 9. It seems clear from the email correspondence referred to by Laura Smith
    and attached to her witness statement, that a full copy of that  report
    was emailed both to the Tribunal and also to  the  Respondent  on  that
    date and indeed  considering  the  Record  of  Proceedings  from  Judge
    Oliver, times appears to have been given to the Respondent to  consider
    that report at the time of the hearing and submissions were made by  Mr
    Bandegani in respect of that final report, which  are  recorded  within
    the judge's Record of Proceedings.

10. Although today before me Ms Willocks-Briscoe did not have a  full  copy
    of the report and indeed a copy of the final report  had  not  actually
    been retained for some reason upon the court file, a full copy had been
    kindly provided by Mr Bandegani and  I  am  grateful  to  him  in  that
    regard. I have given Ms Willocks-Briscoe  time  to  consider  the  full
    report.  She accepts that it seems to have been  sent  through  to  the
    Respondent and it seems to have been considered by  the  Respondent  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, but concedes that there was no application for
    an adjournment made by the Respondent for time to further consider that
    report before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  application  for  an
    adjournment before the First-tier Tribunal was an application  made  by
    the Appellant's Counsel, given the intoxicated state of  the  Appellant
    at that stage.  That application for an adjournment had been refused by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

11. No application has actually been made after time having been  given  to
    Ms Willocks-Briscoe for consideration of that  report  to  adjourn  the
    appeal before the Upper Tribunal today and  she  made  the  submissions
    that she has made in light of that report. Although she stated that she
    had not actually received a full copy of it and various pages  seem  to
    missing from her copy, but she was perfectly happy to  proceed  on  the
    basis of the evidence before the Tribunal today.

12. Having carefully scrutinised the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Oliver, although it is clear that he had that report before him  as  he
    has made reference to it within his Record  of  Proceedings  and  noted
    that the submissions which Mr Bandegani, Counsel for the Appellant, had
    made in respect of that fuller report dated 5th June 2017 in the Record
    of Proceedings, nowhere within his determination does he actually  give
    consideration to that report.  Although it is sought to  be  argued  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State by Ms Willocks-Briscoe that in  effect
    the report from him does not take the matter very much further than the
    case of GJ and the risk categories there, when one  actually  considers
    the report from Dr Nadarajah, he does within  that  report  set  out  a
    position that in  his  expert  opinion  there  has  in  the  two  years
    following GJ and Others been a deterioration in respect of human rights
    and general repression suffered by people in Sri Lanka.

13. He noted in paragraph 15 of  his  report  that  the  objective  country
    evidence  that  had  accumulated  showed   that   initially   perceived
    improvements in relation to human rights abuses of Tamils  involved  or
    suspected of being involved with  the  LTTE  and/or  Tamil  separatism,
    following the 2015 change in government, are  demonstrably  negated  by
    subsequent developments in the country and in his  expert  opinion,  in
    the absence of continuing close attention and  determined  pressure  by
    the international community, the human rights situation  in  Sri  Lanka
    will deteriorate.  He stated that in particular, in the context of  the
    security forces remaining committed to a general  mobilisation  against
    potential LTTE resurgence and Tamil separatism, both in the country and
    in the Tamil Diaspora, the risks to those linked  or  suspected  to  be
    linked with either the LTTE and Tamil separatism remained  considerable
    and in his expert opinion can be expected to increase.

14. He went on, for example, at paragraph 19 to find that:

    "Consequently, although the Upper Tribunal's decision in GJ and  Others
         stated

         'the focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern has changed since
             the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri Lanka itself
             is a spent force ... and the Government's present objective is
             to identify Tamil activists in the Diaspora  who  are  working
             for Tamil separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan
             state',

    the objective country evidence elaborated below demonstrates  that  the
         authorities'  general  focus  -  which  as  the   GJ   and   Others
         determination noted is 'on preventing both (a)  the  resurgence  of
         the LTTE or any similar Tamil separatist organisation and  (b)  the
         revival of the civil  war  within  Sri  Lanka'  -  comprises  close
         attention to actual and suspected LTTE members and  supporters  and
         to actual or suspected separatist activities, both within Sri Lanka
         and abroad.   In  this  regard,  the  authorities'  attention  also
         encompasses deported failed asylum seekers."

15. At paragraph 24 he noted  that  with  regards  to  individuals  drawing
    adverse attention on the basis of links, actual or  suspected,  to  the
    LTTE, the authorities and security forces' criteria for  deciding  this
    are vague and broad and it is  noted  that  the  UN  Committee  Against
    Torture noted in November 2016 that even after the change in government
    numerous individuals suspected of having a link, even remote, with  the
    LTTE had been abducted and then subject to brutal torture.

16. So in that regard the evidence from the expert was  clearly  expressing
    both his own expert opinion but also his view of the  country  guidance
    background evidence that had arisen since the country  guidance  of  GJ
    and the evidence given to the Tribunal for that country guidance case.

17. It is also clear from his report that he also goes  on  not  simply  to
    consider the position in general in respect of those said to be at risk
    but went on to answer questions that had been posed by the  Appellant's
    solicitors regarding this Appellant himself and had answered and  given
    evidence upon  questions  that  had  been  put  to  him  regarding  the
    Appellant's case that he had worked crossing the LTTE-army borders  for
    four years, before having  problems.  He  gave  an  expert  opinion  in
    respect of that and how the security forces would  actually  deal  with
    someone in that context and also gave evidence regarding  the  evidence
    given by the Appellant, which appears to  have  been  rejected  by  the
    previous Tribunal, that he had been able to  pass  through  checkpoints
    and at the airport with a false ID if wanted  by  the  authorities  and
    whether or not the claim was consistent with what was happening in  the
    northern provinces during that period.

18. He then also went on to give his opinion  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant in this case is at risk now of detention and torture and  set
    out the background factors which are considered important at  paragraph
    183 and went on at paragraph 184 to find that in his opinion, were  the
    Appellant forcibly returned to Sri Lanka that would put him at risk  of
    being detained and ill-treated or worse and went to  find  that  former
    members and supporters of the LTTE and those  suspected  to  be  former
    members or supporters and even individuals with tenuous links  continue
    to be at risk of intimidation, harassment  and  arrest  in  Sri  Lanka,
    paragraph 185.

19. Clearly, in that regard I find that  regrettably  for  whatever  reason
    although Judge Oliver clearly had the full report from the  expert,  he
    has not taken that  account  in  reaching  his  findings  and  when  in
    circumstances such as in this case where he accepted  that  the  report
    from Dr Arnold had indicated and supported the Appellant's  account  of
    having been detained and tortured, so that he was able to look at  that
    part of the claim again, following Devaseelan,  he  simply  found  that
    other key findings remained.

20. In that regard the expert report was evidence which was not before  the
    Tribunal back in 2002, as clearly it had not been prepared and  written
    at that date, but it did  actually  deal  with  other  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's credibility regarding his account and the risks that he was
    said to have faced at that time  and  it  dealt  with  some  issues  in
    respect of which he had not been found to be credible by  the  original
    Tribunal.

21. That report though has not been considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge in reaching his decision nor to the extent that the expert  deals
    with the situation in his opinion regarding the country situation since
    the case of GJ and Others, that also has not been adequately dealt with
    or explored or reasons given by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  either
    rejecting or accepting that evidence. As argued within the  Grounds  of
    Appeal, in addition, although a lot  of  the  background  evidence  was
    summarised by the expert report it is argued  that  in  addition  there
    were  further  full  reports  including  the  Country  Information  and
    Guidance from the Respondent, reports from the International Truth  and
    Justice Project, the UN Office  of  the  High  Commissioner  for  Human
    Rights, the UN Commission Against  Torture  and  reports  from  Amnesty
    International, which again in terms of that background  evidence  again
    had not been dealt with by Judge Oliver in his decision.

22. Although clearly the country guidance was clear as to the categories of
    people at risk if there was evidence as in this case which was said  to
    postdate the country guidance in GJ I find that  the  judge  was  duty-
    bound to at least consider that evidence  and  to  fully  and  properly
    consider it and to say whether or not in his judgment it was sufficient
    to depart from the country guidance given in GJ and Others.  Simply  to
    ignore it is a failure to take account of  relevant  evidence  in  that
    regard.  Obviously in this case it  was  being  sought  to  return  the
    Appellant now and therefore whether  he  is  at  risk  now  had  to  be
    considered by the judge and that was a matter which was dealt  with  in
    the expert report.

23. Whether ultimately or not the First-tier Tribunal Judge either accepted
    or rejected that report or relied simply upon the country  guidance  in
    GJ I cannot know  as  he  has  not  dealt  with  it.   However,  having
    considered that report, it is clear that the expert, who, I repeat, was
    one of the experts within GJ, has given  clear  evidence  that  in  his
    opinion there was a deterioration of the  human  rights  situation  and
    those who are failed asylum seekers since the country guidance case  in
    GJ and therefore I cannot say that the decision would necessarily  have
    been the same even if that evidence had been properly considered.

24. I make no findings in that regard as to whether it would actually  have
    been the same as obviously that is a matter that  needs  consideration.
    But clearly I cannot say that it would necessarily have been  the  same
    and therefore I do find that the failure  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to consider that evidence and also the country guidance  evidence
    relied upon by the Appellant is a material error of law.

25. In such circumstances the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Oliver
    does contain a material error of law and I find that  it  is  therefore
    appropriate to set aside the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Oliver and to remit the  case  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oliver.

26. Judge Oliver did make an anonymity direction in this  case  and  it  is
    therefore appropriate, given the circumstances of this case,  for  that
    anonymity direction to be repeated and renewed here.   I  therefore  do
    direct that the Appellant is entitled to anonymity  and  no  report  or
    transcript of these proceedings shall identify  the  Appellant  or  any
    member of his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and
    to the Respondent and failure to comply with this direction could  lead
    to contempt of court proceedings.



Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver  does  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside.

The case is to be remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing
before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Oliver.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The Appellant is granted anonymity and no  record  or  transcript  of  these
proceedings shall identify the  Appellant  either  directly  or  indirectly.
This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent  and
failure to comply  with  this  direction  can  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 21st November 2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty

