
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04352/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th April 2019                    |On 18th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     EBT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Ross of Counsel, instructed by chambers of Iain
                    Ross Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the remaking of the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's
    refusal of his protection and human rights claim dated 19  March  2018,
    following the finding on 18 February 2019 of an error  of  law  in  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hosie promulgated on 6 July 2018.
     The error of law decision is set out the annex to this decision, which
    sets out the background and  procedural  history,  which  will  not  be
    repeated herein unless necessary.

 2. The Appellant claims to be a national of Eritrea who would be  at  risk
    on return there both as a Pentecostal Christian and also because he had
    exited the country illegally.  The Respondent refused  the  application
    on the basis that it was not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  from
    Eritrea, but from Ethiopia; nor was it accepted that  he  was  a  draft
    evader nor a Pentecostal Christian.  The  Respondent  did  accept  that
    Pentecostal Christians would be at risk in Eritrea but given  that  the
    Appellant was Ethiopian, he would not be returned to Eritrea or at risk
    there.

 3. As set out in paragraph 18 of the error of law decision, it  was  found
    by the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant had established  that  he
    was a Pentecostal Christian, that finding was  not  challenged  by  the
    Respondent and is preserved for the purposes of the appeal.   The  only
    outstanding issue remaining to be determined in the appeal is as to the
    Appellant's nationality.  If the Appellant is  found  to  be  Eritrean,
    then the Respondent accepts that he would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Eritrea as a Pentecostal Christian.  If on the other hand the Appellant
    is an Ethiopian national, it  is  accepted  that  he  could  safely  be
    returned to Ethiopia.

 4. In summary, in relation to nationality, the Appellant  claims  that  he
    was born in  Asseb  (or  Assab  -  the  spelling  differs  between  the
    evidence, witnesses and probably interpreters, but it is the same place
    and the difference  in  spelling  is  material,  the  version  is  used
    interchangeably in this decision depending on the source),  an  Amharic
    speaking area near the border in Eritrea in 1987, to  Eritrean  parents
    and as such is a national  of  Eritrea.   He  says  that  he  moved  to
    Ethiopia with his parents at the age of two and was  deported  back  to
    Eritrea at the age of 11 in 1988, which was at the time of  the  border
    wars between Eritrea and Ethiopia.  The Appellant claims that he is not
    an  Ethiopian  national,  nor  has  he  ever  had  any  entitlement  to
    recognition as such.

The hearing

 5. The oral hearing before me proceeded by  way  of  submissions  only  on
    behalf of both parties, there being no further  evidence  submitted  by
    either party for  the  remaking  of  the  decision.   The  evidence  is
    therefore the same as that which was before the First-tier Tribunal, as
    recorded in paragraphs 14 to 16  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 6 July 2018, as well as the  oral  evidence  of
    the Appellant, Pastor [PM], Mr [AD], Mr [SF] and Mr  [MT]  recorded  in
    paragraphs 18 to 42 of that decision.  I  set  out  further  below  the
    relevant parts of the evidence to the issue of nationality.

Documentary evidence

 6. A letter dated  26  September  2016  from  the  Eritrean  Community  in
    Lambeth, signed by a Community Adviser confirms that the  Appellant  is
    an Eritrean  national  who  has  attended  community  meetings,  health
    seminars, social gatherings and has used the  services  of  the  group.
    Assessment was made  of  the  Appellant  using  elders  with  potential
    relevant  knowledge  of  Eritrea  to  discover  family  roots  and  the
    Appellant was questioned about his family history and  those  domiciled
    in Eritrea.  The elders confirmed in this  case  that  the  Appellant's
    family came from Asmara and thus  they  authenticated  the  Appellant's
    Eritrean nationality.  The Appellant was born in Assab,  in  which  the
    Amharic language was widely spoken.

 7. The bundle includes a Certificate of Birth showing registration of  the
    Appellant, born in Assab, Eritrea and registered on 16  November  1999.
    The document bears official stamps, includes the  Appellant's  mother's
    name, date of birth, sex, birth time (albeit recorded by zeros) and the
    address.  The Public Registration Office is of  the  Southern  Red  Sea
    Asseb and the document is also stamped from  the  Ministry  of  Foreign
    Affairs Consular & Community Dep.

 8. There is a copy of proof of delivery from DHL dated 27 September  2016,
    showing a package to the Appellant from Asefa Tesfamichael  in  Asmara,
    Eritrea.

 9. At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer handed up  a  document  dated  21-24  October  2002,
    "Demographic  Profile  and  Birth  Registration  Status  of   Eritrea";
    authored by individuals from the  Ministry  of  Justice,  the  National
    Statistics and Evaluation Office and UNICEF.  On its face it is  stated
    to be for the Kampala Workshop on  Birth  Registration.   The  document
    states that there is a  transitional  code  of  birth  registration  in
    selected urban areas only, which includes Assab,  but  in  which  birth
    registration is optional and not obligatory.  It states that  there  is
    no mechanism more nor established  institution  that  backs  the  birth
    registration system and its practice throughout the country.  There  is
    a draft civil code dealing with birth registration which indicates that
    a Birth Registration Certificate includes the name of the  child:  sex:
    date of birth: place of birth: parents' names, birth places,  addresses
    and citizenship.  The status or application of the draft civil code  is
    not included in the paper but a recommendation made at the end that the
    establishment of a birth registration system is essential.

The Appellant's evidence

10. In his written statement finding dated 27  April  2018,  the  Appellant
    confirmed that he  spoke  both  Amharic  and  Tigrinya,  but  was  more
    comfortable with the former being the main language he grew up with and
    which was commonly spoken both in Assab and Addis Ababa.

11. So far as  relevant  to  the  remaining  issue,  the  Appellant's  oral
    evidence in cross examination and re-examination before the  First-tier
    Tribunal was recorded in the decision of Judge Hosie as follows:

         "19. In relation to the Eritrean birth certificate provided by  the
         Appellant he was asked who registered his  birth  in  1999  and  he
         stated that his father did.  He stated that at that time they  were
         living in Assab and that  the  reason  the  birth  certificate  was
         obtained at that time was that his father had a plan to go to Sudan
         and that he needed a birth certificate in order  to  do  this.   He
         stated that the document was issued by the Assab registrar.  He was
         asked if he knew which documents his father had to show in order to
         obtain this document and he stated that he did not know because  he
         was young at the time.  The Appellant was  asked  why  he  had  not
         produced a birth certificate at his previous asylum appeal  and  he
         stated that it was because he could not get hold of his uncle.   He
         stated that his uncle sent him this document via DHL at the end  of
         2015 and that his uncle is now in Asmara.  The Appellant was  asked
         how his uncle came to be in possession of his birth certificate and
         he stated that in 1999 he and his  father  stayed  with  his  uncle
         until they went to Sudan.

         20.  The Appellant confirmed his parents were both born in  Eritrea
         and that they lived in Eritrea until they moved  to  Ethiopia.   He
         confirmed that his grandparents were also born in Eritrea though he
         never knew them as they died before he was born.  He stated that he
         has other relatives in Eritrea including his uncle and his children
         and his aunt and her children.

         21.  The Appellant was asked if  he  had  approached  the  Eritrean
         embassy in the UK to confirm that  he  was  born  in  Eritrea.   He
         stated that he did not because he was afraid for  his  safety.   In
         relation to his visit to the Ethiopian embassy  the  Appellant  was
         asked if he had an appointment.  He stated that he did not and that
         he went there because the Home Office told him  to  go  there.   He
         stated that he spoke to a man who was the manager.  He stated  that
         he was given his business card with phone number  and  address  and
         that he gave his business card to the Home Office.

         ...

         25.  The Appellant was asked when he and his father came back  from
         Sudan and he stated that it was in 2010 and they went  to  live  in
         Assab in their own house.  He was  asked  if  his  uncle  explained
         where he got the Appellant's birth certificate which he  then  sent
         to the Appellant.  The Appellant stated  that  his  uncle  said  he
         found it in his own house and that his uncle's house was  about  30
         minutes or so from his house."

Evidence of Mr [AD]

12. There are a number of letters available  from  Mr  [D],  who  has  been
    accommodating the Appellant since March 2016, including  assisting  him
    with making further representations to the Respondent.  In  the  letter
    dated 26 June 2016 he states that he  attended  the  Ethiopian  embassy
    with the Appellant to at which the Appellant  was  told  he  could  not
    apply for Ethiopian nationality without a birth certificate showing  he
    was born in Ethiopian for the same evidence for his parents.

13. In a written statement signed and dated 27 April 2018, Mr [D] sets  out
    the support and assistance is given to the Appellant since  March  2016
    and his experience of him having Eritrean friends, sharing  stories  of
    life at home in Eritrea and about the food and culture of Eritrea.

14. Mr [D] attended the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  gave
    oral  evidence  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  attendance  at  the
    Ethiopian embassy, which was recorded as follows in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal:

         "35. Mr [D] identified himself and his address and  confirmed  that
         his witness statement contained in  the  supplementary  bundle  was
         true and accurate.  He asked that it be adopted as his evidence. Mr
         [D] confirmed that he is a solicitor by profession.  He  was  asked
         what  happened  at  the  Ethiopian  embassy.   He  stated  that  he
         travelled to the embassy with the Appellant who was living with him
         at the time and that they met [SF]  from  the  night  shelter.   He
         stated that they took photographs as evidence of attendance as  the
         Appellant had previously attended on his own.  He stated that  they
         went down to the basement and spoke to  someone  regarding  how  to
         apply for Ethiopian nationality.  He stated that they were told  to
         wait for an appointment and that they went  into  a  room  after  a
         short wait.  He stated that the Appellant was asked why he had come
         and he was asked if he had documentary evidence to show that he was
         Ethiopian.  He stated that he did not and the person they spoke  to
         stated that he did not know what the appellant thought  they  could
         do for him.  The Appellant stated that he was born in Assab and the
         man I spoke to at the embassy told him there was nothing they could
         do for him without evidence that he is Ethiopian.  The man  at  the
         Embassy gave them his  business  card.   Mr  [D]  stated  that  the
         meeting lasted 20 to 30 minutes.

         36.  Mr [D] was asked why the appointment had been  made  prior  to
         attending the Ethiopian embassy.  He stated that  there  were  told
         they would be able to attend and ask appointment on  the  day.   He
         stated that they waited for half an hour for  an  appointment.   He
         was asked if the Appellant had  received  anything  in  writing  to
         state that he was not eligible for  Ethiopian  nationality  and  he
         stated that he did not as far as he was aware.  Mr [D] was asked if
         the Appellant had approached the Eritrea embassy  for  confirmation
         of the nationality and he stated that he was  not  aware.   He  was
         asked how many times  the  Appellant  had  been  to  the  Ethiopian
         Embassy and he stated that he did not know though the Appellant had
         been with him at once."

Evidence of Mr [SF]

 1. Mr [F] is a project worker at the C4WS Homeless Project who has  worked
    with the Appellant and who also attended the Ethiopian embassy with him
    and Mr [D].  In a letter  dated  24  June  2016,  he  states  that  the
    Ethiopian embassy had told the Appellant that there was no process  for
    him to apply for Ethiopian nationality.  Further  confirmation  of  the
    same and of Mr [F]'s attendance  at  the  Ethiopian  embassy  with  the
    Appellant is given in a further letter dated 23 April 2018.

 2. Mr [F] attended the oral hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    gave oral evidence, recorded in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    as follows:

         "37. Mr [F] identified himself and his address and  confirmed  that
         his witness statement contained in  the  supplementary  bundle  was
         true and accurate.  He asked that it be adopted  as  his  evidence.
         In relation to the DHL envelope he referred to he was asked  if  he
         knew what had happened to it and he stated that  he  did  not.   He
         confirmed that he attended the Ethiopian embassy with the Appellant
         and Mr [D] where they were granted a meeting and were told that the
         Appellant would need a birth  certificate  or  parents  to  confirm
         Ethiopian nationality.  He stated that the Appellant said  that  he
         was born in Assab and as a result Ethiopian nationality  could  not
         be established at the embassy.

         38.  Mr [F]  was  asked  why  the  Appellant  was  enquiring  about
         Ethiopian nationality if he was Eritrean.  He stated that this  was
         what he was told to do by the Home Office and he  was  told  to  do
         take witnesses and that was why he  himself  attended.   He  stated
         that he supposed that the Appellant had to show  that  he  was  not
         Ethiopian.  He was asked if the Appellant had an appointment and he
         stated that he could not remember.  He stated that  they  went  and
         asked if they could see someone and that the time was arranged.  Mr
         [F] was asked if he  knew  if  the  Appellant  had  approached  the
         Eritrea embassy to see if he could obtain Eritrean nationality  and
         he stated that he did not know.  He was asked if the Appellant  had
         received anything in writing from the Ethiopian Embassy to  confirm
         that he was not Ethiopian.  He  stated  that  he  did  not  receive
         anything whilst he was there."

Evidence of Mr [MT]

 3. In a letter dated 30 September 2016, Mr [T] states that he was born  on
    14 October 1967 in Asseb which is now part of Eritrea.  He states  that
    he knew the Appellant's family well when he lived in Asseb  where  they
    were neighbours and he went to celebrations for the  Appellant's  first
    birthday.  He confirms the Appellant's birth in Asseb and the  name  of
    his parents.

 4. In a written statement signed and dated 21 April 2018, Mr [T] confirmed
    that he is a Norwegian citizen who knew the Appellant,  being  a  close
    friend of his parents and neighbour  in  Assab  and  he  describes  the
    property.  Mr [T] was present at the Appellant's first birthday.

 5. Mr [T] had contact with his mother in Assab at the end of 2013, when he
    heard that the Appellant's father had passed away and the Appellant was
    in prison.  Mr [T] was able to get in touch with the Appellant  in  the
    United Kingdom in the middle of 2016 through a pastor who he knew  from
    Eritrea who had met the Appellant at a worship conference in London.

 6. Mr [T] attended the oral hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    gave oral evidence in Amharic with the assistance of a court  appointed
    interpreter.  He is a Norwegian citizen, originating from Eritrea which
    he left for political and religious reasons.  His evidence as  recorded
    by the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was  that  his  mother  and
    sister are still living Eritrea and that he himself was born  in  Assab
    and lived there until 1989.  His main language is Amharic  but  he  did
    understand some Tigrinya.  Mr [T]'s passport showed that his  place  of
    birth was in Ethiopia, but this was because at the time, Assab was part
    of Ethiopia and Eritrea only gained independence from Ethiopia in 1991.

Submissions

 7. On behalf of the Appellant, Counsel relied  on  the  skeleton  argument
    prepared on 23 October 2018, which dealt with the issue of  nationality
    in paragraphs 8 to 21.

 8. In relation to the birth certificate, it was submitted  that  this  was
    one piece of the jigsaw which together with the other to evidence taken
    in the round supports  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be  Eritrean.   The
    address  given  on  the  birth  certificate  is  consistent  with   the
    Appellant's birth in Assab and the wider evidence.  The details even on
    the certificate comply with most of what the Respondent  says  are  the
    relevant requirements, although it could not be  explained  as  to  why
    only the Appellant's mother's details had been  included  when  on  the
    Appellant's claim, she had died prior to the date of  registration  and
    there was no evidence as to who  registered  the  birth  in  1999.   In
    addition, the Appellant has given detailed evidence, supported by other
    witnesses who have been found to be credible, of the  circumstances  of
    receipt of the birth certificate.  There is no obvious reason  why  the
    Appellant would forge a birth certificate at this point.

 9. In any event, there is evidence from Mr [T] that he knew the  Appellant
    as a baby in Eritrea and supported by the evidence of Mr [D] as to  the
    effect on the Appellant when he was first reunited  with  Mr  [T].   In
    addition, there was written evidence from  the  Appellant's  cousin,  a
    recognised refugee from Eritrea, who identified the  family  connection
    and the slight difference of spelling of the name is immaterial  as  to
    credibility.

10. The Appellant was found to be credible in relation to his claim to be a
    Pentecostal Christian, is supported by other witnesses  who  have  been
    found to be credible by the First-tier Tribunal and  taking  everything
    in the round, it was submitted that the Appellant  has  established  to
    the lower standard of proof applicable in asylum claims that he  is  an
    Eritrean national and therefore at risk on return.

11. On  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  Ms  Isherwood  took  issue  with  the
    authenticity of the birth certificate relied on further relied  on  the
    reasons given in the refusal letter.  It was noted that  the  Appellant
    had not given any evidence on how his birth was registered, and if this
    was  by  his  father,  why  his  details  were  not  included  on   the
    certificate.  In the reasons for refusal letter, the Respondent  stated
    that there had been a  delay  in  the  Appellant  producing  his  birth
    certificate, no explanation as to why  it  had  not  been  relied  upon
    earlier and in any event there is nothing to show that this is a  birth
    certificate which meets standard requirements in Eritrea.  The document
    was printed on plain  A4  commercially  available  paper  and  did  not
    contain  any  security  features  or  watermarks  with   no   objective
    supporting evidence to  show  its  genuineness.   Overall  it  was  not
    accepted as a genuine document.

12. In relation to the letter from the Eritrean Community  in  Lambeth,  it
    was submitted that the letter  contained  a  lack  of  explanation  and
    detail as to how it was assessed that the appellant  was  from  Eritrea
    and confusion within the letter as  to  whether  his  family  was  from
    Asmara or Assab.  Although there are a number of people supporting  the
    Appellant, their evidence is largely based  upon  information  that  he
    himself has given them and their credibility can  only  be  as  to  the
    belief of the Appellant.  It was further  noted  that  the  Appellant's
    cousin did not attend the oral hearing to give evidence.

13. Overall  it  was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  that  the
    Appellant's claim to be Eritrean  was  not  established  to  the  lower
    standard of proof in his appeal should therefore  be  dismissed  as  he
    would not be at risk on return to Ethiopia as an Ethiopian national.

Findings and reasons

14. The only remaining issue in  this  appeal  is  as  to  the  Appellant's
    nationality, whether he is an Eritrean  national  (who  would  thus  be
    accepted as at risk on return to Eritrea as a Pentecostal Christian) or
    whether he is an Ethiopian national and therefore not at risk on return
    to Ethiopia (it being accepted that Pentecostal Christians are  not  at
    risk in Ethiopia).

15. Although issue can and has legitimately been taken against some of  the
    evidence  relied  upon  by  the  Appellant,  in  particular  the  birth
    certificate relied upon, taking all of the evidence  in  the  round,  I
    find that the Appellant has established to the lower  burden  of  proof
    applicable in asylum claims that he is an  Eritrean  national  for  the
    following reasons.

16. First, there is written and oral  evidence  from  Mr  [T]  who  gave  a
    consistent account of knowing the Appellant at the time of his birth in
    Assab and of knowing  the  Appellant's  parents,  being  one  of  their
    neighbours.  Aside from a query about a reference to him being born  in
    Ethiopian, which has  been  fully  explained  by  the  history  of  the
    independence of Eritrea, there  is  no  substantive  challenge  to  the
    credibility of Mr [T] or his evidence.   Mr  [T]  is  now  a  Norwegian
    citizen, having been granted asylum in Norway.  I find his evidence  to
    be credible and supportive of the Appellant's claim.

17. Secondly, there is written evidence from  the  Appellant's  cousin  who
    also  attests  to  the  Appellant's  nationality   and   their   family
    connection.  He is also a refugee from Eritrea, having been accepted as
    such by the Respondent.  There  is  no  substantive  challenge  to  the
    credibility of this evidence, although I do note that  the  Appellant's
    cousin did not attend to  give  oral  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, nor before me, such that his evidence could not be tested  in
    cross-examination and therefore carries less weight

18. Thirdly, the Appellant has made a consistent claim, both in relation to
    nationality and his religion, with no significant  inconsistencies  nor
    issues of plausibility raised as to his claim.  He has been found to be
    credible in relation to being a Pentecostal Christian by the First-tier
    Tribunal, a preserved finding within the appeal.

19.  Fourthly,  the  Appellant  speaks  Amharic  and  there  is  supporting
    background evidence that this is  common  in  Asseb,  near  the  border
    between Eritrea and Ethiopia.  There is nothing about  the  Appellant's
    primary language to undermine his claim.

20. Fifthly, in relation to the birth certificate,  there  was  a  lack  of
    background evidence from either party as to the system of  registration
    of births (if any) at  the  time  of  the  Appellant's  birth  and  its
    registration and nothing to suggest  the  draft  civil  code  from  the
    document produced for a workshop in 2002 was in force at  either  date.
    There is limited evidence  available  supporting  the  issue  of  birth
    certificates in English  and  although  it  lacks  any  clear  security
    features and details about, for example, who registered  the  birth  or
    father's details which would be common in other jurisdictions, there is
    nothing to suggest that these were common or required  features  within
    Eritrea at the relevant time.  There  is  limited  background  evidence
    from the Respondent showing that even in 2002 there was  no  compulsory
    system of registration of births, with no clear mechanisms or system in
    place for registration.  In these circumstances,  whilst  concerns  can
    legitimately be raised about the genuineness of the birth  certificate,
    there is little objective basis to  substantiate  those  concerns.   In
    these circumstances, I attach some weight to the birth  certificate  in
    the Appellant's favour that he was born in Asseb in Eritrea.

21. Sixthly, although I  attach  little  weight  to  the  letter  from  the
    Eritrean Community in Lambeth given  the  lack  of  detail  as  to  who
    assessed the Appellant as Eritrean and how they did so,  it  does  lend
    limited support to the Appellant's claim.

22. Finally, the other witnesses who gave supporting  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal were all found to be credible by  Judge  Hosie  and
    their evidence, albeit in part limited to what the Appellant  has  told
    them, is entirely consistent with his claim and supportive of it.

23. For all of these reasons and to the lower standard of proof  applicable
    in asylum claims, I find that the Appellant is an Eritrean national and
    on the accepted basis that he would be at risk on return to Eritrea  as
    a Pentecostal Christian, his appeal must be allowed on asylum grounds.

24. For completeness, although there were significant discussion before the
    First-tier Tribunal and at error of law stage before the Upper Tribunal
    as to the applicability or otherwise of  the  country  guidance  in  MA
    (Ethiopia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ
    289 and ST (Ethnic Eritrean - nationality - return) Ethiopia CG  [2011]
    UKUT 00252 (IAC), neither party relied upon either case in  the  latest
    oral hearing.  I do not find that either case is in  fact  relevant  to
    the Appellant's claim or it's determination, both  of  which  deal,  in
    different ways, with the situation of a person who had or could acquire
    Ethiopian nationality based on their residence in Ethiopia  before  and
    after Eritrea's independence, continuing through the border wars and up
    to the 2004 directive.

25. There has been no substantive challenge to the chronology  set  out  by
    the Appellant as to the dates on  which  he  resided  in  Ethiopia  and
    Eritrea, nor that he was deported from Ethiopia to Eritrea  around  the
    time of the  border  wars.   There  is  also  no  suggestion  that  the
    Appellant is a person who has been denied Ethiopian nationality because
    of events around that time, it is only his case that he is not and  has
    never been an Ethiopian national nor entitled to Ethiopian nationality.
     Given the findings above which support  the  Appellant's  credibility,
    there is no  reason  to  find  that  either  of  the  country  guidance
    decisions are applicable in his case and in any event, at its  highest,
    the decision in ST is in his favour.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons set out in the  error  of  law  decision  contained  in  the
annex, the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
the making of a material error of law and as such it was  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision on appeal is remade as follows:

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]    Date 13th June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


ANNEX

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04352/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th December 2018                |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     EBT
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Ross of Counsel, instructed by Iain Ross
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant  appeals  with  permission  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hosie promulgated on 6  July  2018,  who  dismissed  his
    appeal against the Respondent's refusal of  his  protection  and  human
    rights claim dated 19 March 2018.

 2. The Appellant claimed that he was at risk on return  to  Eritrea  as  a
    Pentecostal Christian and also because he had exited from  the  country
    illegally.  The Respondent refused the application the  basis  that  it
    was not accepted that the Appellant was from  Eritrea,  nor  was  he  a
    draft evader, nor a Pentecostal Christian and therefore would not be at
    risk on return to Eritrea or Ethiopia.  It was however accepted by  the
    Respondent that Pentecostal Christians would be  at  risk  in  Eritrea,
    just that on the facts, it was not accepted that the Appellant was from
    Eritrea.

 3. Judge Hosie dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated  on  6  July
    2018 on all grounds.  In  summary,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    accept that the Appellant was an Eritrean  national  and  although  the
    evidence relating to his religion was considered to be more persuasive,
    a Pentecostal Christian would not be at risk as such in Ethiopia.

The appeal

 4. The Appellant appeals on five grounds  as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal misdirected itself in law as to  the  relevance  of
    the decision in MA  (Ethiopia)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 289 and  should  have  instead  applied  the
    country guidance case of ST (Ethnic Eritrean -  nationality  -  return)
    Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT 00252 (IAC).   Secondly,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal misdirected itself as to whether in  law,  the  Appellant  was
    obliged to have approached the Eritrea embassy for confirmation of  his
    nationality.  Thirdly, the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  make  clear
    findings  on  the  core  issues  in  the  case,  including  as  to  the
    reliability of the Appellant's birth certificate, as to the Appellant's
    religion and the assessment of the evidence from the Church.  Fourthly,
    that there was procedural  unfairness  in  findings  being  reached  on
    matters which were not put to the Appellant and other witnesses at  the
    appeal hearing.  Finally, the First-tier Tribunal erred in its findings
    in relation to the birth certificate which were made  without  evidence
    as to the nature of such documents in 1999.

 5. At the oral hearing, Counsel for the Appellant relied on  his  skeleton
    argument and made oral submissions in  accordance  with  that  and  the
    original grounds of appeal.  On the nationality issue, it was submitted
    on behalf of the Appellant that the First-tier Tribunal wrongly applied
    the  case  of  MA  (Ethiopia)  which  was   not   applicable   to   his
    circumstances, as appears to have been  recognised  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal itself in paragraph 66 of the decision.  The Appellant  claims
    to have been born in Asseb, an Amharic speaking area near the border in
    Eritrea in 1987 to Eritrean parents and  has  never  made  a  claim  to
    Ethiopian nationality.  He moved to Ethiopia with his  parents  at  the
    age of two and was deported to Eritrea at the age of 11,  in  1998,  at
    the time of the border wars and  after  the  independence  of  Eritrea.
    This is not a case such as in MA (Ethiopia) where a person has  claimed
    to be  an  Ethiopian  national  but  has  been  deprived  of  Ethiopian
    citizenship, to which evidence of them attempting to establish the same
    with the Ethiopian authorities would be highly relevant.  Instead,  the
    First-tier Tribunal should have applied the country guidance case of ST
    which more directly considered the situation of a person who  had  been
    deported from Ethiopia after the border wars and which found that  that
    such  a  person  would  have  significant   difficulties   establishing
    Ethiopian nationality.  Counsel for the  Appellant  could  not  confirm
    whether that case had specifically been relied upon at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing, but in any event submitted that as a country guidance
    case it should have been applied.

 6. A further ground of challenge is against the findings made by the First-
    tier Tribunal that the Appellant had in essence not done everything  he
    reasonably could to support his claimed nationality  and  in  addition,
    the First-tier Tribunal fell into error in  criticising  the  Appellant
    for not approaching  the  Eritrean  embassy  for  confirmation  of  his
    Eritrean nationality.  In circumstances where the  Appellant  claims  a
    fear  of  persecution  from   the   Eritrean   authorities,   this   is
    unreasonable.

 7. In relation to the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  as  to  the
    Appellant's nationality, the Appellant relied on a range of evidence as
    to his nationality, including a birth certificate, with  no  background
    evidence to suggest that there were any security features missing  from
    the same and in circumstances where supporting witness evidence  of  it
    being sent to the United Kingdom was considered to  be  credible.   The
    First-tier Tribunal took a number of points against some of the witness
    evidence which were not raised at the oral hearing and  no  opportunity
    to was given to respond to these points.  These included,  for example,
    how one of the witnesses knew that the Appellant cooked Eritrean  food,
    details  about  the  Appellant's  wife  and  further  details  such  as
    photographs or addresses from one of the witnesses as to the  situation
    in Eritrea in the late 1980s and  as  to  why  the  Appellant  had  not
    obtained his Eritrean ID card from his uncle.

 8. On behalf of the Respondent, it was submitted that the onus was on  the
    Appellant to prove his nationality to the lower standard  and  in  this
    case the First-tier Tribunal properly considered all  of  the  evidence
    and found that that burden had not been met.  The starting point of the
    previous First-tier Tribunal decision in 2015 was emphasised,  as  well
    as the Appellant's linguistic background and obvious concerns as to the
    genuineness of the birth certificate were relied upon.  It was  further
    submitted that the case of ST was of no assistance to the Appellant  as
    it concerned Eritreans who had been deported from  Ethiopia  which  the
    Appellant had not claimed.

 9. As to  whether  the  Appellant  should  have  approached  the  Eritrean
    authorities, it was submitted on behalf of the Respondent that  on  the
    present facts it was  not  necessarily  a  question  of  risk  for  the
    Appellant going to the  Eritrean  embassy,  but  a  practical  step  of
    availing himself of asking authorities to confirm the facts  he  relies
    upon.  In conclusion it was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  had
    reached a  lawful  conclusion  on  the  evidence  before  it  that  the
    Appellant was not an Eritrean national and as such, he would not be  at
    risk on return to Ethiopia.

Findings and reasons

10. As to the grounds of appeal in relation to  the  Appellant's  religion,
    there was no dispute between the parties that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had made  positive  findings  that  the  Appellant  was  a  Pentecostal
    Christian even if there was  no  express  finding  to  this  effect  in
    conclusion.  In particular, the evidence given by the Pastor on  behalf
    of the Appellant was found to  be  credible,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    accepted that there  had  been  an  error  in  the  earlier  First-tier
    Tribunal decision in 2015 about the type of church that  the  Appellant
    had previously attended and in paragraphs 84 and 89  of  the  decision,
    the Appellant's evidence as to his religion appears to have been  found
    credible as well.  When reading the decision as a whole,  it  is  clear
    that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  find  that  the  Appellant  is  a
    Pentecostal Christian and although it would of course have been  better
    for this conclusion to have been more expressly  stated,  there  is  no
    material error of law for failure to make a finding on this key  issue.
    The key issue in this appeal  remains  as  to  the  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's nationality.

11. The remaining grounds of appeal in relation to nationality are to  some
    extent intertwined and overlapping and  which  together  challenge  the
    approach of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  the  evidence  and  what  can
    reasonably expected of the  Appellant  in  circumstances  such  as  the
    present case.

12. The First-tier Tribunal's decision refers to the starting  point  being
    the previous decision wherein it was found that the Appellant  was  not
    an Eritrean national.   The  Appellant's  evidence,  supported  by  two
    witnesses, as to his approach to the Ethiopian Embassy is  set  out  in
    paragraph  66  of  the  decision,  including  a  recognition  that  the
    Appellant's claim is that he is not  Ethiopian  and  neither  were  his
    parents.  The Judge then states, "notwithstanding that I note he  could
    still have applied for Ethiopian nationality if he had been resident in
    Ethiopia at  the  time  of  Eritrea  receiving  at  independence.   The
    Appellant's account is however that he and  his  father  left  Ethiopia
    prior to that.  If he was not born in Ethiopia then MA  (Ethiopia)  may
    not assist him.  However, I note that there  is  no  evidence  that  he
    showed his Eritrean birth certificate to the official at the  Ethiopian
    embassy nor that there was any detailed discussion of  dates  when  the
    Appellant lived in Ethiopia or in relation  to  Eritrean  independence.
    The evidence presented in  relation  to  this  visit  is  therefore  of
    limited weight to the Appellant's claim to be Eritrean."

13. Although the First-tier Tribunal needed to assess all of  the  evidence
    as to nationality in the round, the passage in  paragraph  66  set  out
    above makes no clear findings as to the Appellant's claim as  to  where
    he was born or when he left Eritrea before  applying  specific  country
    guidance.  In this paragraph it is  only  noted  what  the  Appellant's
    account was and that on that basis MA (Ethiopia) may  not  assist  him.
    Such findings are however required to determine whether  MA  (Ethiopia)
    is relevant at all to this Appellant, or in the alternative whether the
    country guidance case of ST,  whether  or  not  expressly  relied  upon
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  was   applicable.    There   is   a
    fundamental, and in  the  context  of  the  facts  in  this  case  very
    important, distinction between the issues which arose in MA  (Ethiopia)
    which broadly  dealt  with  cases  of  disputed  nationality  but  more
    specifically, once a person was accepted as a de jure national  of  the
    state, a second stage of analysis is engaged as a factual  question  as
    to whether it would be reasonably likely that the  authorities  of  the
    state concerned would accept the person if returned as one of  its  own
    nationals.  In that context, the Court of Appeal in  paragraph  50  set
    out that where the  central  issue  before  the  Tribunal  was  whether
    someone will or will not be returned, an applicant is required  to  act
    bona fide and take reasonably practicable steps to seek to  obtain  the
    requisite documents to enable them to return and in that  case  whether
    the authorities will permit a person to return, i.e. whether they  will
    issue the required documents to enable this.

14. In contrast, in the case of ST, much wider issues about  the  practices
    of the authorities in Ethiopia as to nationality and  the  availability
    of Ethiopian nationality to those of Eritrean descent  were  considered
    and country  guidance  given.   In  particular,  the  country  guidance
    included that "a person who is regarded by the Ethiopian authorities as
    an ethnic Eritrean and who left Ethiopia during  or  in  the  immediate
    aftermath of the border war between Ethiopia and Eritrea, is likely  to
    face  very   significant   practical   difficulties   in   establishing
    nationality and the  attendant  right  to  return,  stemming  from  the
    reluctance of the Ethiopian authorities to countenance  the  return  of
    someone it regards as a "foreigner", whether or  not  in  international
    law the person concerned holds the nationality  of  another  country.".
    Further guidance is given on the circumstances in which a person may be
    able to reacquire Ethiopian nationality.

15. In the findings made against the Appellant which follow  paragraph  66,
    albeit without express reference to MA (Ethiopia), it is apparent  that
    it has been applied, together with paragraph 339L  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, and held against the Appellant that he  has  not  done  more  to
    establish his claim  to  Eritrean  nationality  (see  paragraph  89  in
    particular) and should have presented  more  detail  to  the  Ethiopian
    embassy, as well as approach the Eritrean embassy directly.  This is  a
    material error of law which infects  the  factual  findings  about  the
    Appellant's nationality.  It is necessary for the  First-tier  Tribunal
    first to make appropriate findings  of  fact  and  apply  the  relevant
    country guidance to those facts as part of the  overall  assessment  of
    the evidence as to the Appellant's nationality.  In  the  present  case
    the First-tier Tribunal simply failed to do so.  This was not clearly a
    case which fell into the ambit of MA (Ethiopia) without clear  findings
    that the Appellant was a de jure national of Ethiopia and  instead  the
    First-tier Tribunal  applies  the  reasoning  in  MA  (Ethiopia)  in  a
    somewhat circular fashion to support findings as to nationality.   This
    amounts to an error of law and as such it is necessary to set aside the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  It is clear that the error  could
    have a material impact on the outcome of the appeal.

16. As I have found an error of law in relation to the  applicable  country
    guidance to this case which requires the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be set aside, it is not necessary to consider  in  as  much
    detail the remaining grounds of appeal as to the First-tier  Tribunal's
    approach to the evidence on nationality, as the issue will need  to  be
    considered de novo in the remaking of this appeal.  However, I do  find
    a further error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    relation to the consideration of the birth certificate produced by  the
    Appellant, on which no clear findings made as to  its  genuineness  and
    the  concerns  raised  about  it  are  without  evidential  foundation.
    Although it is for the Appellant to prove his case to  the  appropriate
    standard,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  in  paragraphs  71  and   72
    considered that the Appellant could have derived assistance in relation
    to his birth certificate or ID documents from  family  members  or  the
    wider Eritrean community,  without  these  matters  being  put  to  the
    Appellant.

17. In relation to the birth  certificate  itself,  in  paragraph  73,  the
    Respondent's concerns as to the lack of security features in the  birth
    certificate are noted, without any background evidence as to what would
    be expected of such a document and simply with a  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant had been unable to counter the Respondent's concerns.   These
    concerns were not however raised in the reasons for refusal letter  and
    it is not clear that the Appellant has had any  proper  opportunity  to
    respond to them.

18. For the reasons already set out,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    contains errors of law in relation to the assessment of the Appellant's
    nationality such that it is necessary to set aside the  decision.   The
    findings  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  religion  that   he   has
    established that he is a Pentecostal Christian (although as above,  not
    made as expressly as would be preferable) are  not  challenged  by  the
    Respondent and are preserved.

19. At the oral hearing, Counsel for the Appellant  submitted  that  if  an
    error of law is found and the decision  to  be  remade  on  nationality
    only, it was not expected that any new evidence would  be  relied  upon
    and a preference was expressed that the appeal is retained  within  the
    Upper Tribunal to remake the decision under appeal.  I agree that  that
    is appropriate in accordance with the relevant Practice  Statement  and
    reserve the appeal to be relisted on the first  available  date  before
    UTJ Jackson.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Directions

The appeal is adjourned to be relisted in  the  Upper  Tribunal  before  UTJ
Jackson on the first available date with a time estimate of 1.5 hours.

Signed   [pic]    Date 11th February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
