
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  PA/04147/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Thursday 21 November 2019         |On Wednesday 27 November 2019        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                     M A
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   The Appellant appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Freer promulgated on 15 August 2019  ("the  Decision").   By  the
    Decision, the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision dated 8 April 2016 refusing  his  protection  and
    human rights claims.  That decision  was  made  in  the  context  of  a
    decision to deport the Appellant to Somaliland.

2.   The Appellant is a national of Somalia. He was born in Somaliland.   He
    came to the UK on 30 September 1990 with his parents and siblings.  The
    family was granted indefinite leave to remain in  February  2000.   The
    Appellant has committed a number of criminal offences in  the  UK.   He
    appealed against an earlier deportation decision  made  in  2007.   His
    appeal was allowed on 14 October 2008.  Since then, the  Appellant  has
    married a British citizen of Somali heritage, and they have  two  young
    children.

3.   The Judge did not accept that the Appellant would be at risk on  return
    to Somaliland.  The Respondent intended to remove him to  Hargeisa  via
    Addis Ababa and not via Mogadishu.  The Judge did not accept that there
    would be very significant obstacles to the Appellant's  integration  in
    Somaliland and nor did he accept that the Appellant  was  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the UK.  Accordingly, he could  not  meet  the
    Immigration  Rules  ("the  Rules")   or   Section   117C   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section 117C") based on  his  private
    life.  Nor could the Appellant meet the Rules or Section 117C based  on
    his family life as the Judge did not accept  that  the  impact  of  the
    Appellant's deportation on his partner and  children  would  be  unduly
    harsh.  Outside the Rules, the  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  had
    failed to show that there were very compelling circumstances.

4.   The Appellant appeals on five grounds as follows:

         Ground one:   failure  to  consider  the  viability  of  return  to
         Somaliland;

         Ground two:   failure to apply the Devaseelan principles;

         Ground three: failure properly to consider certain of the evidence;

         Ground four:  perverse conclusion in  relation  to  the  children's
         best interests; and

         Ground five:  failure to  weigh  in  the  balance  the  Appellant's
         length of residence.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey  on
    12 September 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 3.  The grounds disclosed arguable errors of law.   The  Judge
         arguably failed to determine an issue before him which was material
         to the outcome of the appeal  (the  viability  of  the  Appellant's
         onward  return  to  Somaliland  from   Mogadishu).    He   arguably
         misdirected himself on the principles deriving from Devaseelan  and
         arguably reached findings as to the Appellant's cultural  abilities
         which  were  speculative  and  unsupported  by  evidence.   It  was
         similarly arguable that the Judge erred in  deciding  to  place  no
         weight at all on any of the opinions expressed in the expert social
         worker's report because of the view he took  (arguably  unsupported
         by evidence and again speculative) in respect of one aspect of  it.
         Finally,  the  Judge's  findings  on  the  best  interests  of  the
         Appellant's  children  and  the  weight  to  be  afforded  to   the
         Appellant's private life in the UK (having  arrived  aged  2)  were
         arguably  insufficiently  reasoned.   All  of  these  issues   were
         material to the Judge's determination.

         4.   For those reasons, the grounds disclosed  arguable  errors  of
         law and permission to  appeal  is  granted.   All  grounds  may  be
         argued."

 6.  The matter  comes  before  us  to  assess  whether  the  Decision  does
    disclose an error of law and to re-make the Decision or  remit  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

DISCUSSION

7    Although permission was granted on all grounds, it appeared to us  that
    ground two was the strongest and had the potential to impact  on  other
    issues.  As such, we asked Mr Eaton to address us only  on  that  issue
    and allowed Ms Fijiwala to respond, again only on that ground.   Having
    heard the oral submissions, we concluded that  ground  two  did  indeed
    disclose an error of law.  We formed the view that it was not necessary
    to hear from the parties on the other issues, but we agree  with  Judge
    Povey's view that there is merit in particular also on grounds three to
    five.  Ground one is possibly less meritorious particularly since Judge
    Povey appears to have misunderstood the route of return which is to  be
    via Addis Ababa and not via Mogadishu. The ground in that regard though
    is that the Judge failed to consider what that route entailed,  viewing
    it as a purely operational matter and we therefore conclude  that  this
    ground also had some merit.

8.   We therefore turn to give our reasons  for  finding  an  error  of  law
    based on ground two.

9.   The Judge recorded the Devaseelan principle at [122]  of  the  Decision
    in the following manner:

         "Devaseelan* may apply and Mr Eaton  sought  to  rely  on  it.   In
         paragraph 3 of his skeleton argument he has particularised which of
         the various findings of IJ Harries  he  wishes  to  stay  in  force
         today, but he has not sought to explain why specifically that would
         be the right course even now.  He mentions the  findings  that  the
         Appellant  did  not  speak  Somali,  he  did  not  have  family  or
         meaningful links to  call  upon,  and  he  would  have  significant
         difficulties accessing housing and any form of employment."

10.  As we identified at the hearing,  and  we  understood  Ms  Fijiwala  to
    accept, that is not a correct statement of the principle laid  down  in
    Devaseelan for two reasons.  First, the application of the principle is
    mandatory and not, as  appears  suggested  by  the  first  sentence  of
    paragraph [122], discretionary.  Second,  there  is  no  burden  on  an
    appellant to justify the preservation of findings.  The findings in the
    first appeal stand as a starting point and the issue is  whether  there
    are circumstances or later  evidence  which  displace  those  findings.
    There is therefore an error disclosed by  the  statement  of  the  test
    which applies.

11.  Moreover, the earlier findings are the starting point and not  the  end
    point of the second Judge's consideration.   Here,  the  Judge  made  a
    series of findings at [121]  which  include  findings  in  relation  to
    issues which were considered and  determined  in  the  previous  appeal
    before turning to look at what was found in that appeal.  That  is  the
    wrong way around.  We would not find that to be  an  error  in  and  of
    itself, but  it  is  an  error,  particularly  when  coupled  with  the
    misstatement of the principle which applies.

12.  We accept as Ms Fijiwala submitted that,  following  the  statement  of
    principle at [122], the Judge does go on to set out the passage of  the
    earlier decision which contains the relevant findings at [123] and then
    sets out some reasons why circumstances  may  have  changed.   Some  of
    those reasons may carry weight, for example, in relation to the  change
    in country conditions.  We also  accept  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    previously married and that too might mark a  change  in  circumstances
    justifying a departure from earlier findings, particularly in  relation
    to Article 8 ECHR (although tending to strengthen  rather  than  weaken
    the claim).

13.  There are however findings in those paragraphs and in what is  said  at
    [121] of the Decision which do not  justify  the  departure  which  the
    Judge makes from the previous findings.   First,  the  Judge  finds  at
    [122(i)] of the  Decision  that  the  Appellant's  partner,  [DA],  has
    returned twice to Somaliland and "has returned safely and has not  made
    any complaint of any level of harm while she visited there".  That then
    feeds into the Judge's reasoning for departing from the findings in the
    earlier appeal as to risk at [124] of the  Decision.   However,  as  Mr
    Eaton pointed out, [DA]'s evidence was that she was  obliged  to  cover
    herself whilst in Somalia and had stones thrown at her on one occasion.
     The Judge found [DA] to be a witness of truth but failed to take  this
    into account.

14.  In the earlier appeal, the Judge found  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    viewed as an outsider on return  to  Somalia  because  he  "knows  only
    British culture", does not speak Somali and would be at risk  of  being
    perceived to have money.  Those findings go to the  issue  whether  the
    Appellant is  "westernised".   The  Judge  deals  with  this  issue  at
    [121(ii)], [121(x]), and [121(xi)].  He says that if the  Appellant  is
    westernised then so is [DA] (which stands to reason as she is  in  fact
    British), that "the Appellant did not marry outside  his  cultural  and
    clan background", a fact on which the Judge placed  great  weight  when
    assessing westernisation and that  there  was  no  expert  evidence  in
    relation to westernisation produced by the Appellant.

15.  Those findings are then used to displace the  earlier  appeal  findings
    that the Appellant is in effect westernised, the Judge saying at  [129]
    of the Decision that "[i]t is obvious that nobody in Somaliland decided
    that DA was westernised and had money or if they did, they did not  act
    on the impulse to cause her serious harm at the time. It  follows  that
    no such risk has been  demonstrated  in  regards  to  her  husband  the
    Appellant".  Not only does that fail to have regard to [DA]'s  evidence
    that she was obliged to cover herself whilst in Somalia but  also  once
    again fails to consider her evidence that she was stoned.

16.  Moreover, as we observed during  the  hearing,  the  finding  that  the
    Appellant has not married outside "his cultural  and  clan  background"
    makes certain assumptions about [DA] who is a British citizen.  She may
    come from a Somali background but that does not automatically mean that
    she is anything other  than  British.   We  were  also  at  a  loss  to
    understand the comment about expert  evidence.   Whether  a  person  is
    "westernised" is a matter for  the  Judge  to  determine  based  on  an
    assessment of the individual characteristics of an appellant.   Whether
    an individual is at risk on return to a  particular  country  for  this
    reason may well be a matter for expert evidence but  not  whether  they
    are as a matter of fact westernised.  This finding also therefore fails
    to take into account what is said in the earlier appeal and the reasons
    why the previous Judge found the  Appellant  to  be  westernised.   The
    factors there mentioned focus on the Appellant's integration in the  UK
    which is likely to have strengthened and not weakened in the time since
    2008.  That also illustrates why it was important for the Judge to take
    those findings as a starting point and the consequences of him  failing
    to do so.

17.  Certain of the other findings are, as Mr Eaton submitted,  speculative.
     Of particular note is the finding that the Appellant will be  able  to
    speak Somali.  At [121(v)] the Judge finds  it  "improbable  that  [the
    Appellant] did not learn any Somali language from his  father,  who  is
    close to  him  and  with  whom  he  has  lived  (when  not  married  or
    incarcerated)".  That runs contrary  to  the  finding  in  the  earlier
    appeal that "the appellant does not speak Somali" (at a  time  when  he
    would still have been living with his family).  The  Judge  asserts  at
    [125] of the Decision that the Appellant "has had plenty of time  since
    2008 in which to learn Somali from those of its speakers who are in his
    life".  We accept that the Appellant is now married to a woman who does
    speak Somali.  However, she also speaks English.  The Judge  offers  no
    evidence for the findings there made and does not treat the finding  in
    the earlier appeal as the starting point and explain what  it  is  that
    has changed.

CONCLUSION

18.  Although, as we have already noted, the Judge  was  obviously  entitled
    to have regard to the change in country conditions in Somaliland  since
    2008 and was also entitled to have regard to  the  Appellant's  changed
    circumstances by his marriage, for  the  reasons  we  have  given,  the
    findings made by the Judge fail sufficiently  to  have  regard  to  the
    findings in the earlier appeal and to explain why, based on the eidence
    he heard, those findings were displaced.

19.  For those reasons, we are satisfied that the  grounds  disclose  errors
    of law as set out above. We therefore set aside the Decision.

NEXT STEPS

20.  We have considered carefully  the  appropriate  course  for  re-making.
    Although the ground with which we have dealt in  detail  concerns  only
    the protection claim, other of the  grounds  also  identify  errors  in
    relation to the human rights assessment, particularly under  Article  8
    ECHR.  We have not preserved any findings.  The appeal  will  therefore
    have to be reconsidered entirely  afresh.   Given  the  extent  of  the
    issues and findings which will be required  to  be  made,  this  is  an
    appeal which it is appropriate to remit.  Having regard to the Practice
    Statement in relation to the remittals of appeals, we have reached  the
    conclusion that the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  ensure  that  the
    Appellant has a fair determination of his appeal.



DECISION

We are satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a  material  error
on a  point  of  law.  The  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Freer
promulgated on 15 August 2019 is set aside.  The appeal is remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a Judge other than Judge Freer.


Signed            [pic]    Dated: 25 November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
