
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04779/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2018                           |On 10 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    miuh
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Brakaj, of Iris Law Firm


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. MIUH is a citizen of Pakistan whose date of birth  is  recorded  as  20
    October 1967. He made application for  international  protection  as  a
    refugee. That application was rejected by the Secretary of State on  16
    March 2018. He appealed. His appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Head-Rapson on 14 May 2018 sitting at North Shields.  She
    allowed the appeal.

 2. By notice dated 15 June 2018  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department made application for permission to appeal to this  Tribunal.
    Permission was granted at first instance on 29 June 2018 by Judge Pedro
    on the basis that there was inadequate reasoning.

 3. I confess that in my initial view of this case was that there had  been
    inadequate reasoning, but Ms Brakaj  has  persuaded  me  that  in  fact
    looking to the grounds which were not expanded upon, the  Secretary  of
    State is not entitled to succeed. The grounds are brief. The  Secretary
    of State had targeted only one part of the decision. Mr  Diwnycz  quite
    properly concedes that the focus of the  ground  was  entirely  on  the
    issue of internal relocation and restricted therefore to that.

 4. The grounds state as follows:

         "1.  The FTTJ has failed  to  give  any  reasons  or  any  adequate
             reasons for finding that the appellant is at risk  on  return.
             Notwithstanding  that  the  document  has  been  found  to  be
             credible the FTTJ has failed  to  give  reasons  for  why  the
             appellant would be at risk in Pakistan in  2018,  particularly
             crucial given the appellant has not been in Pakistan  in  2013
             (see paragraph 47).

         2.   Secondly, the reasons given for why the  appellant  could  not
             relocate are inadequately reasoned and fails to consider  that
             Pakistan is an enormous country with a significant population.
             There is no explanation how  the  appellant's  presence  would
             even become known to the non-state agents  who  are  allegedly
             interested in doing him harm (paragraph 48).

         3.   Therefore this determination is wholly lacking in reasons  and
             as such the SSHD as the losing party does not  understand  why
             it is that the appellant would be risk on return."

 5. Ms Brakaj drew my attention to the fact that the grounds do  not  focus
    on the credibility of the substance of  the  Appellant's  case  but  on
    whether or not the Judge had adequately reasoned why it  was  that  the
    Appellant could not internally relocate.

 6. Mr Diwnycz quite properly accepted that that had to be the approach  in
    this appeal given the way in which the grounds been granted and so  the
    focus had to be with paragraphs 47 and 48 of  the  decision  which  are
    reflected in the grounds themselves.

 7. It is trite law that the losing party needs to understand why they have
    lost. Equally it is trite law (R Iran [2005] EWCA  Civ  982)  that  the
    reasons need only be adequate. Whilst it is right that the Judge  could
    have said rather more she was not obliged to do so.  Any  decision  and
    reasons must read as a whole. There are documents that were before  the
    Tribunal as late as 2016 which explain how, notwithstanding the passage
    of time since events of 2013 the Judge came to the view that there  was
    a continued risk on return. Specifically, on the  point  taken  by  the
    Secretary of State that given the  size  of  the  country,  MIUH  could
    relocate, I refer to paragraph 48 of the Decision and Reasons  and  the
    acceptance of the account that family members  who  had  relocated  had
    been found.

 8. There was therefore reasoning albeit just sufficient, but  nevertheless
    sufficient. In the circumstances the appeal of the Secretary  of  State
    is dismissed. I am grateful to Mr Diwnycz for  the  realistic  approach
    which he took in this appeal.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








Signed                              Date: 20 December 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker




