

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/04162/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6th March 2019                       | On 19th March 2019                |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                     A N
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Onuacharla (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:     Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First Tier Tribunal (Judge I. Freer) (FtT)  promulgated
    on 22nd May  2018  in  which  the  appellant's  protection  appeal  was
    dismissed.

Background
2.    The appellant is a  citizen  of  Nigeria.   There  were  two  previous
    determinations relating to EEA residence applications (7.12.2011 before
    UTJ Vaudin D'Imecourt and on 17.3.2015 FTJ Shepherd) that were in  part
    relevant in the proceedings before the FtT following  Devaseelan  *[4].
    The FtT in 2015 found that the appellant had been in the UK since  2011
    and that neither he nor his uncle were  credible  witnesses.   The  FtT
    before FTJ  Freer  heard  an  appeal  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    protection claim made  in  2017.   The  appellant  was  interviewed  in
    February 2018.  His sur place claim was that  he  was  a  supporter  of
    Biafran independence and had attended  demonstrations  in  the  UK.  He
    produced photographs and called a witness  Dr  U-L  from  the  movement
    Indigenous People of Biafra ("IPOB") [6]. He argued  that  IPOB  was  a
    banned movement in Nigeria [47].

Grounds of appeal
3.     In lengthy grounds of appeal the appellant argued that the FtT  erred
    as follows :
         Ground 1 - the FtT  failed  to  correctly  apply  the  guidance  in
    Devaseelan * and viewed all of the evidence thorough the  lens  of  the
    previous decisions.
      Ground 2 - the FtT failed to apply the  correct  guidance  in  dealing
    with the appellant's claim at [83] by failing to give adequate  reasons
    why the FtT found  the  appellant  insincere  as  to  his  motives  for
    membership of IPOB and failed to apply HJ(Iran)v SSHD UKSC 2010.  There
    was no background material from the SSHD on IPOB.
      Ground 3 -  the  FtT  failed  in  its  assessment  of  credibility  by
    starting from the viewpoint that he had been found  to  be  lacking  in
    credibility by the previous Tribunals.
     Ground 4 - the FtT failed  to  place  weight  on  the  documentary  and
    expert evidence  [75 & 89], by playing down the evidence  from  Amnesty
    International and finding it  lacked corroboration. The FtT's  approach
    to credibility was contrary to guidance in NA(Palestinians - risk) Iraq
    CG [2008] UKAIT 0046.
     Ground 5 - the assessment as to credibility in  respect  of  Article  3
    and humanitarian protection was inadequate [87-90].
     Ground 6 - the FtT misdirected itself as to internal relocation,  which
    was not raised by the respondent.
     Ground 7 - the FtT failed to apply the law correctly at [96-105].

Permission to appeal
4.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT) was granted on  renewal
    by UTJ Perkins who found that it was arguable that the  FtT  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for  placing  little  weight  on  the  supporting
    material (ground 4). UTJ Perkins expressed  doubt  that  the  appellant
    would be able to show that the FtT was not entitled to  disbelieve  him
    or that the EEA rights had much to do with the decision complained  of,
    but all grounds were arguable.

Submissions
5.  At the hearing  before  me  Mr  Onuacharla  representing  the  appellant
    argued that the main concern  was  that  the  FtT  had  relied  on  the
    previous decisions and had no proper regard to  the  new  evidence.  He
    relied on ground 1 and ground 4 only.  The FtT  was  wrong  to  require
    corroboration of the background evidence from AI about IPOB.  There was
    corroboration from the expert witness Dr U-L in any  event.  The  FtT's
    reasons for rejecting the AI report were in adequate.  The FtT ought to
    have considered if the appellant was a member of IPOB and thereafter to
    look at the consequences of that membership. Even if he  was  found  to
    have made an opportunistic claim, it was still valid and could succeed.
     The appellant had produced material at page 63 of  his  bundle  as  to
    risks  faced  by  low  level  members  which  included  the   statutory
    provisions.

6.   In response Mr Whitwell submitted that the  decision  and  reasons  was
    very clear and detailed and there was nothing that the FtT  had  failed
    to consider in terms of the evidence. The FtT considered the  available
    background material on IPOB and made findings of fact at [67-75] having
    regard to the limited evidence about IPOB and the lack of  evidence  as
    to risk for its members.  The FtT considered the evidence from  AI  and
    gave adequate reasons for placing little weight on the same  [75].  The
    FtT assessed the evidence from the witness and gave reasons for placing
    little weight on the same.  The FtT correctly applied  Devaseelan*  and
    gave adequate reasons for credibility findings [63-64] in  relation  to
    the new claim.


Discussion and conclusion

7.    After the hearing I reserved my decision.  The  decision  and  reasons
    was very detailed and thorough and fully dealt with all  issues  raised
    in the appeal.  The FtT correctly followed the Devaseelan* approach and
    set out the findings made by the previous Tribunals  [63-64]  which  it
    observed were largely in relation to previous EEA applications  and  in
    part relevant to protection issues to which  Devaseelan  applied.   The
    FtT considered the new evidence and followed a structured  approach  to
    his assessment of  credibility  having  regard  to  the  objective  and
    subjective evidence. The  FtT  accepted  that  Dr  U-L  had  in  effect
    corroborated the  appellant's  recent  activism  [79]  (also  shown  in
    photographic evidence) and which  led  to  the  FtT  finding  that  the
    appellant was a low level activist. But that he placed little weight on
    the Dr U-L's evidence as to risk on return  in  light  of  his  limited
    knowledge of the appellant and limited scope of his evidence [90].  The
    FtT found  no  evidence  to  show  that  a  low  level  activist  faced
    persecution in Nigeria [81] ,  nor  that  the  appellant's  involvement
    would come to the attention of the  authorities  [82].   He  found  the
    appellant lacked political sincerity and that  he  would  not  seek  to
    pursue political activity on return to Nigeria.  The FtT  was  entitled
    to  look  at  the  evidence  in  the  round  taking  into  account  his
    immigration history, the previous findings as regards  his  credibility
    and that his activism lacked sincerity.

8.   The FtT fully set out the available background  material  from  [46]  -
    [53] and which included the AI report and US State department  reports.
    The FtT found that there was a lack of expert evidence about IPOB  [68]
    and took the view that IPOB was not a terrorist  organisation  and  the
    appellant was not a terrorist.  At [75]  the  FtT  found  that  the  AI
    report required  corroboration  because  it  reported  from  subjective
    sources with limited corroboration and took  the  view  that  the  more
    conservative  evidence  provided  by  the  US  State  report  was  more
    reliable. That in my view was an entirely proper  approach  given  that
    the burden falls to the appellant to establish his case and  there  was
    no country expert called on his behalf.  The FtT also took into account
    that the material established a risk for those in leadership  positions
    [86] but that the appellant  had  no  political  involvement  while  in
    Nigeria [88] and would not pursue any political activities in  Nigeria.
    The FtT considered the appellant's position fully in terms of any  risk
    having regard to his claim at its highest [87-91].

9.  There is no material error of law disclosed in the decision which  shall
    stand.


Decision

10.  The appeal is dismissed.


                               Signed                     Date 14.3.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
NO FEE AWARD






                               Signed                     Date 14.3.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal














