
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04976/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Business)                                  |                                |
|On 25 March 2021                           |On 7 April 2021                 |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     SJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Khan, counsel, instructed by Thomson & Co
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Skype for Business. A face to face hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  Watson  ("the  judge")  promulgated  on  2   March   2020
         dismissing the protection and  human  rights  appeal  of  SJ  ("the
         appellant") against a decision of the  respondent  dated  29  March
         2018 refusing her protection and human rights claim.

      2. The appellant is a female national of  Pakistan  who  was  born  in
         1990. She and her husband married in Pakistan in  2010.  They  both
         entered the UK pursuant to grants of visitor entry clearance on  25
         August  2014.  They  applied  for  leave  to  remain  outside   the
         Immigration Rules, but their applications were refused. The refusal
         of the applications  led  to  appealable  decisions  and  both  the
         appellant and her husband appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
         human rights grounds. The exact basis  of  their  applications  and
         their appeals remains unclear, but it involved a claimed fear  from
         one or both of their families based on their families'  disapproval
         of the marriage.

      3. In a decision promulgated on 14 September 2017 Judge of the  First-
         tier Tribunal Quinn dismissed  the  human  rights  appeals  of  the
         appellant and her  husband.  The  appeals  were  advanced,  not  as
         protection appeals but as appeals relying on Article  8  ECHR.  The
         decision was therefore determined by reference to the  'balance  of
         probabilities'  standard  and  not  the  lower   'real   risk'   or
         'reasonable degree of likelihood' standard applicable in protection
         appeals.  Judge  Quinn  drew  an  adverse  inference  against   the
         appellant based on discrepant evidence relating to her  instruction
         of solicitors. Judge Quinn additionally  made  adverse  credibility
         findings in  respect  of  evidence  from  the  appellant's  husband
         relating to the payment of rent on a property in which  the  couple
         had resided. Judge Quinn found that  both  the  appellant  and  her
         husband had made  false  representations  to  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer in respect of their visitor applications. Judge Quinn found
         that the appellant's husband would be able to  find  employment  in
         Pakistan and there was no reason to think that he  could  not  find
         accommodation in which both he and the appellant could live.  Judge
         Quinn  noted,  as  a  matter  of  significance,  that  neither  the
         appellant nor her husband had, at that stage, made asylum claims in
         the United Kingdom. Judge Quinn did not find the reasons  given  by
         the appellant's husband for failing  to  do  this  to  be  "at  all
         convincing." The  appellant's  husband  was  an  educated  man  but
         purported not to know about asylum. He claimed during  the  hearing
         that he came to the UK because his life and that of  the  appellant
         were in danger. He claimed that he had been told by his  family  to
         leave his wife or they would kill him. Judge Quinn noted  that  "it
         was possible that both appellants were withholding an asylum  claim
         to await the outcome of this appeal." Judge Quinn  considered  that
         if the appellant and her  husband  had  a  genuine  fear  of  being
         killed, then there was every reason for  them  to  make  an  asylum
         claim as soon as they arrived in the United  Kingdom.  Judge  Quinn
         stated, "the fact that they had not done so over all the years they
         have been in the UK has damaged their credibility."


      4. Judge Quinn noted the absence of any medical evidence to detail any
         injuries suffered by the appellant and, in  light  of  the  judge's
         other findings, rejected the appellant's credibility on  the  issue
         of violence. Judge  Quinn  believed  that  the  alleged  threat  of
         violence had been fabricated to bolster their claim to stay in  the
         UK. Judge Quinn found that  the  appellant  and  her  husband  were
         prepared to use any means at their disposal, including  deceit,  to
         stay in the United Kingdom. Judge Quinn  found  that  even  if  the
         family had disagreed with  the  marriage  she  did  not  find  that
         threats had been made to kill both the appellant and  her  husband,
         and even if she was wrong about this the appellant and her  husband
         could relocate within Pakistan as there was no  reason  to  believe
         that their families could find them in a country with such a  large
         population.

      5. Shortly after the dismissal of her human rights appeal and that  of
         her husband,  the  appellant  lodged  an  asylum  application.  She
         maintained, so far as I can tell  for  the  first  time,  that  her
         mother was an Ahmadi (her father was a Sunni Muslim) and  that  she
         and her husband would face  persecution  in  Pakistan  because  her
         husband's family became aware that she was Ahmadi.  In  her  asylum
         interview, conducted on 22 March 2018, she claimed  she  had  never
         followed her Ahmadi teaching openly (Q 85), that she only had  some
         basic information about the Ahmadi (Q 131 - 134), and  stated  that
         her marriage to her Sunni Muslim husband would not be  accepted  in
         Pakistan (Q84). I make the observation that the appellant  did  not
         mention anything about  her  husband  becoming  interested  in  the
         Ahmadi faith in her interview, although  in  his  statement  of  19
         January 2020 the husband claimed (at paragraph 16) to have accepted
         Ahmadiyya Islam as his religion around mid-February  2018.  In  her
         decision of 29 March 2018 the respondent rejected  the  appellant's
         claim to have experienced family problems due to her  marriage  and
         rejected the appellant's claim to be Ahmadi. The appellant appealed
         the respondent's decision to the First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to
         s.82 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  An
         initial decision dismissing the appeal was overturned by the  Upper
         Tribunal and remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh
         hearing.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      6. The appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal  was  that  she
         had now embraced the Ahmadi faith and her husband had converted  to
         Ahmadiyya. As such they (or at least the appellant's husband) would
         be considered an apostate. They would face persecution  on  account
         of their Ahmadi faith and because their families, and in particular
         the husband's family, disapproved of the marriage.


      7. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  her  husband,
         and both were underwent detailed cross-examination.


      8. Having set out the relevant legal framework and principles applying
         to protection appeals, and having directed herself according to the
         Devaseelan guidelines (Devaseelan v SSHD  [2002]  UKIAT  00702)  in
         respect  of  Judge  Quinn's  decision,  the  judge  summarised  the
         decision of Judge Quinn and the evidence before her.  In  so  doing
         the judge reminded herself, at [17],  that  Judge  Quinn's  adverse
         credibility findings were made by  reference  to  the  'balance  of
         probabilities' standard.

      9. The judge made comprehensive adverse credibility  findings  against
         the appellant noting, inter alia, that neither she nor her  husband
         made any mention of her Ahmadi faith in  the  appeal  before  Judge
         Quinn. The judge found this undermined the claim by  the  appellant
         and her husband that they were adherents to the Ahmadi faith  [17].
         The judge found she could attach little  weight  to  a  psychiatric
         report or to a large number of documents provided by the appellant,
         some of which were said to have been  obtained  from  Pakistan  and
         some issued by the Ahmadi community in the UK. The  judge  rejected
         the appellant's claim to  have  been  assaulted  by  her  husband's
         family. The judge found that the timing of the protection claim and
         the dates on which the documentary evidence  was  produced  damaged
         the appellant's claim to be a genuine and active  follower  of  the
         Ahmadi faith. The  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  both  families
         refused to accept the marriage in light of her findings in  respect
         of the  appellant's  veracity  and,  as  the  judge  only  had  the
         appellant's and  her  husband's  own  evidence  about  the  alleged
         assault on her, "and in view of [the judge's] severe  doubts  about
         her truthfulness" the judge was  not  satisfied  that  the  assault
         occurred [32].


     10. Applying WA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 302 the judge was not
         satisfied that the appellant had any intention or wish to  practice
         or manifest aspects of the Ahmadi faith in such a  way  that  would
         expose her to a real risk of  persecution  in  Pakistan  [34].  The
         judge found that the appellant had no beliefs that would  lead  her
         to practice the  faith.  Nor  was  the  judge  satisfied  that  any
         profession of the Ahmadi faith  by  the  appellant  in  a  Facebook
         account under her 'nickname' would not come  to  the  attention  of
         anyone who would be able to identify her. The judge concluded  that
         the appellant could relocate even if she was fearful of her and her
         husband's families and that she  could  relocate  to  Rabwah  where
         Ahmadis were said in general to feel secure (although no  reference
         was made to MN and others (Ahmadis -  country  conditions  -  risk)
         Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC) where the  Tribunal  held  that
         internal relocation to Rabwah is not generally reasonably  open  to
         an Ahmadi who wishes to openly practice their  faith).  The  appeal
         was dismissed.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     11. Permission was granted on  three  of  five  proposed  grounds.  The
         principle ground contended that the judge erred in not  making  any
         finding in respect of the evidence from  the  appellant's  husband.
         The other two  grounds  related  to  a  failure  to  make  adequate
         findings in respect of the Facebook evidence and a failure to apply
         the cases of MN and others (Ahmadis - country  conditions  -  risk)
         Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC) and HJ(Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC
         31. In granting permission to appeal  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb
         explained that the judge did not appear to have made any finding in
         respect of the appellant's husband's evidence when concluding  that
         the appellant was not credible. Judge Grubb found it arguable that,
         in reaching an  adverse  credibility  finding  in  respect  of  the
         appellant, the judge erred in law by  not  making  any  finding  in
         respect of the  appellant's  husband  who  gave  oral  and  written
         evidence before the judge supportive of the claim.


     12. At the commencement of the 'error of law' hearing I raised with the
         representatives a concern I had with the decision that derived from
         the first ground, but which I  considered  was,  in  any  event,  a
         'Robinson obvious' point (R v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department, ex p Robinson [1998] QB  929).  Absent  any  clear  and
         express assessment or findings in respect of the husband's  claimed
         conversion to the Ahmadi faith, it was not  possible  to  determine
         whether his conversion was genuine and whether he  would  face  any
         risk of ill-treatment in Pakistan either on  account  of  being  or
         perceived to be an apostate, or on HJ(Iran) principles if he wished
         to practice and manifest his faith openly,  and  whether  any  real
         risk of persecution to the husband would consequently entail a risk
         to the appellant herself. Ms Everett indicated her  agreement  with
         this observation, and  indicated  that  she  considered  the  first
         ground of appeal to be the strongest ground. She accepted that  the
         husband's evidence was potentially corroborative of the appellant's
         account, that there were no findings in respect  of  the  husband's
         evidence, and no clear reasons were given by the judge if  she  had
         rejected  the  husband's   evidence   as   incredible.   In   these
         circumstances it was not necessary to hear full  argument  from  Mr
         Khan. I indicated that I would allow the appeal.

Discussion

     13. It is clear from the judgment that  the  judge  did  not  find  the
         appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness.  The  judge  gave   fairly
         comprehensive reasons for so doing, ones that were rationally  open
         to her. The difficulty with the decision is that there are no clear
         findings,  adverse  or  otherwise,  in  respect  of  the  husband's
         evidence. Whilst the judge did state at [17]  that  she  found  the
         failure of the appellant and her  husband  to  mention  the  Ahmadi
         faith as a reason for their fear of return to Pakistan to undermine
         the claim that "they" were adherents to the Ahmadi faith, there  is
         little other evaluation of the husband's evidence. At no  stage  of
         the decision does the judge expressly  engage  with  the  husband's
         evidence  which  corroborated  the  appellant's  claim  and   which
         indicated that he had, prima facie, converted to the Ahmadi  faith.
         For example, the claim that  the  husband's  family  assaulted  the
         appellant was rejected because the judge had "severe doubts"  about
         the  appellant's  truthfulness.  There  was  no  reference  to  the
         husband's evidence. Although the husband had  been  disbelieved  by
         Judge Quinn, this was in the context of a human rights claim with a
         high standard of proof. The judge did not engage with  any  of  the
         evidence supportive of the husband's claim to have converted to the
         Ahmadi faith, none of which was before Judge Quinn. Whilst  it  may
         sometimes be possible to infer  by  necessary  implication  that  a
         judge has  made  adverse  credibility  findings  in  respect  of  a
         witness, I am not satisfied, having read the decision as  a  whole,
         that it is possible to do so on this occasion.

     14. Whilst it may well have been open to the  Judge  to  have  attached
         little weight to  the  husband's  evidence,  especially  given  his
         marital relationship and  the  findings  of  Judge  Quinn,  it  was
         nevertheless incumbent on her to provide at least brief reasons for
         so doing. The fact  that  his  evidence  was  self-serving  and  in
         support of a family member did not mean that it  was  incapable  of
         lending weight to the appellant's claim (R (on the  application  of
         SS) v SSHD ("self-serving" statements) [2017]  UKUT  00164  (IAC)).
         The judge's failure to expressly consider or make any  findings  in
         respect of  the  husband's  evidence  has  consequently  materially
         undermined the sustainability of the adverse  credibility  findings
         in respect of the appellant.

     15. Moreover, although the judge found that the appellant would not act
         in a way that would expose her to persecution  on  account  of  her
         association with the Ahmadi faith, the judge made no findings as to
         whether the husband was a genuine convert to the Ahmadi faith, and,
         if so, whether he would wish to practice  and  manifest  his  faith
         openly. Nor was there any finding or assessment as to  whether  the
         husband would be an apostate, or would be treated  as  an  apostate
         (there was, for example, no reference to the Facebook page  in  the
         husband's actual name showing him with  the  Supreme  Head  of  the
         Ahmadiyya Association). Although the protection claim  and  related
         appeal were brought by the appellant, if there was a real risk that
         her husband would be subjected to serious ill-treatment on  account
         of his Ahmadi faith (if, of course, it was accepted that he  was  a
         genuine convert) then this would clearly have a serious bearing  on
         the appellant's own safety,  and  on  the  Article  8  relationship
         between her and her husband. I am  satisfied,  for  these  reasons,
         that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

     16. Under Part 3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
         Statement of the 18 June 2018 the case may be remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before  the
            First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for
            that party's case to be put to and considered by the  First-tier
            Tribunal; or


         (b) the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
            necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made
            is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in  rule
            2, it is  appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
            Tribunal.

     17. Although this appeal has already been remitted once before  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal, I am persuaded that it is appropriate to  once
         again remit the appeal. The  judge's  failure  to  make  any  clear
         findings in respect of the  husband's  evidence  has  rendered  the
         adverse credibility findings  made  in  respect  of  the  appellant
         unsustainable. In these circumstances there will need to be a  full
         re-assessment of all the evidence rendering it appropriate to remit
         the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  full  fresh  (de
         novo) hearing, all issues open.


Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making  of  an
error on a point of law requiring it to be set aside.

The case will be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
hearing before a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Watson.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the respondent and to the  appellant.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



D.Blum

Signed                                  Date 26 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



