
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04802/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 February 2020                  |On 3 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     RH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a  court
    directs otherwise the Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  refer  to  him.   This
    direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.



Background:

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity. He  left  Iraq
    on  the  25th  November  2015  and  after  travelling  through  several
    countries, he arrived in the UK and claimed asylum on the 10th December
    2015.  In a decision issued on the 29  April  2016,  the  Secretary  of
    State refused his protection claim.

 3. The appeal against that decision came before the First-tier Tribunal on
    the 28th November 2016 and in the decision promulgated on  4th  January
    2017 his appeal was dismissed. Permission to appeal that  decision  was
    sought and granted and on the 20th June 2017 a  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge allowed the appeal and set aside the decision of the FtTJ.

 4. The appeal was remitted, and it came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Duff) on the 18th October 2017 for a second time. In a  decision
    promulgated on the 19th October the judge  dismissed  his  appeal.  The
    Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and it was  granted
    on renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on the 15th May 2018.

 5. Following a hearing, and in a decision promulgated on  the  9th  August
    2018, the Upper Tribunal  set out why the decision of the FtTJ involved
    the making of an error on a point of law and the decision was set aside
    to be remade in the Upper Tribunal.

 6. Given the nature of the error of law, it was deemed necessary  to  hear
    further evidence and make the necessary further findings  of  fact  and
    hear submissions from the parties in the light of the  current  country
    evidence and the country guidance decisions and  any  further  evidence
    placed before the Tribunal.

 7. As the findings made by the Judge relating to events in Iraq  were  not
    challenged in the grounds and the findings at paragraphs 22-29  in  the
    decision  of  FtTJ  Duff  were  to  be  preserved  findings  of   fact.
    Accordingly, and in the interests of a fair and just  disposal  of  the
    Appellant's claim, I was satisfied that  it  was  appropriate  for  the
    Upper Tribunal to remake the decision in accordance with the directions
    sent out to the parties.

 8. Thus, the matter was listed for re-making in the light of  the  further
    evidence and the latest CG decision in SMO, KSP &  IM  (Article  15(c);
    identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC).

 9. This decision should be read  alongside  the  decisions  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal promulgated on the 9  August  2018,  the  decision  of  the  3
    January 2019 and 19 July 2019.

The factual background:

10. The background to the Appellant's protection claim is set  out  in  the
    determination of the FtTJ at paragraphs 1 - 6 and paragraphs  9-14  and
    in the decision letter of the Secretary of State issued on  29th  April
    2016.

11. The Appellant lived with his parents in xxxxx, an area  of  Kirkuk.  He
    attended school but this was interrupted by having to assist his  uncle
    who worked in an orchard. He worked with him for some time but then  he
    joined the Iraqi army as a driver and  bodyguard.  He  had  some  basic
    training, around his ability to drive and became a bodyguard to  a  man
    named X who was in a senior position in the Iraqi army.  After  he  had
    been working in the army  for  some  time,  on  17  November  2015  the
    Appellant was driving his vehicle when it  was  stopped  by  number  of
    armed men who told the Appellant that he had to work for them and  they
    wanted him to poison food that he was required to transport and give it
    to the soldiers.

12. The Appellant went to the base which he worked  and  informed  X  about
    what had happened, and X sent a group of people to the place where  the
    Appellant had been stopped, but the men were no longer  there.  X  told
    the Appellant that he should watch himself as X could not  provide  him
    with any security.

13. In the light of those events the  Appellant  was  concerned  about  his
    safety and, on return to his home, told  his  parents  about  what  had
    happened and then went his paternal uncle's house where he remained for
    a short while before arrangements were made  for  him  to  leave  Iraq,
    which he did on 25 November 2015. He was taken by an agent to Iran  and
    then on to Turkey and from there, in a series of lorries to the UK.

14. The basis of his claim was that if he returned to  his  home  area,  he
    would be sought out by those persons and harmed by them. Thus, he would
    be targeted by non-state actors from whom the state would be unable  to
    protect him.

15. In a decision letter dated 29th April 2016 the Respondent  refused  his
    claim for asylum. It was accepted that he was a  national  of  Iraq  of
    Kurdish ethnicity (paragraph 9) but his account of events in  Iraq  was
    not accepted. In particular, that it was implausible that  a  group  of
    unknown armed men would ask him to work them without  telling  him  who
    they were or which group they were part of. Furthermore, the claim  was
    vague, and he had no idea who it was who threatened him  and  therefore
    the account of being threatened by unknown men on 17 November 2015  was
    rejected. Other aspects of his account were rejected (see paragraphs 11
    - 12). Whilst he had not specifically claimed that he feared return  as
    a result of deserting from the army, the Respondent made  reference  to
    the objective country material and that even if he did leave  the  army
    it was not accepted that he would  be  court-martialled.  The  decision
    letter made reference to sufficiency of protection at paragraphs  16  -
    19.

16. The Secretary of State considered that  in  the  alternative  he  could
    internally  relocate  to  a  different  part  of  Iraq  (Baghdad)   and
    consideration was given to whether he  was  able  to  relocate  to  the
    Kurdish region of Iraq ("IKR"). There was no reference to  the  country
    guidance case of AA (Article 15 (c) (Rev 2)  [2015]  UKUT  544  in  the
    decision letter but reference was made to the country  information  and
    the CIG.



The preserved factual findings of the FtTJ:

17. As set out, there had been no challenge made  in  the  grounds  to  the
    factual findings concerning the events in Iraq. They were preserved for
    the purpose of re-making the decision.

18. The judge set out his findings of fact at paragraphs 22 - 29.  He  gave
    several reasons as to why he rejected the Appellant's  factual  account
    as to the events that the Appellant stated had occurred in Iraq.  Those
    findings are reproduced below:

         "23. I do not accept the basic account put forward by the Appellant
         about his being stopped and threatened by unknown men whilst acting
         as an Army driver. I considered that  the  Appellant  probably  was
         employed in the  army  in  some  capacity  at  some  stage  as  the
         photographs that appear in the Appellant's bundle  and  which  (the
         expert) described as "good quality, colour scans" would  appear  to
         be genuine and I regard the suggestion by the  presenting  officer,
         made in cross-examination, that the Appellant has  somehow  managed
         to stage those photographs in order to support his claim  as  being
         fanciful. In light of all the evidence I consider that it is likely
         that it was brief employment. I find that  the  Appellant  has  not
         deserted from the army.

         24.  The fact that the Appellant  has,  at  some  stage,  had  some
         employment with the army is not, of itself, any support  his  claim
         to have been stopped and threatened by unknown armed men and I find
         there was such significant contradictions in the  varying  accounts
         of the Appellant has given and gave before me that I  am  compelled
         to reject the account that he has given.

         25.  The first significant contradiction in the Appellant's account
         is as to the amount of time that he spent employed in the army. His
         witness statement is entirely specific and states that on 7  August
         2013 he joined the military and it was on 17 November 2015 that  he
         was threatened by the armed men.  That  statement  was  signed  and
         dated on 29 July 2016. When the Appellant came to give his evidence
         and was asked how long he had been in the  army  and  worked  as  a
         driver and bodyguard for X he said he could not  remember.  He  was
         pressed about the matter but continue to  say  that  he  could  not
         remember how long. Ultimately, seeking clarification of  matter,  I
         asked him to give the best estimate he could - whether it was days,
         weeks, months or years - and he said that he thought it  was  about
         six or seven months.  If,  as  the  Appellant's  witness  statement
         states, the Appellant was employed in the army for a period  of  27
         months that is not something which could or would be forgotten,  in
         the absence  of  a  traumatic  event  such  as  a  head  injury  or
         debilitating illness. A  person  might  not  be  able  to  give  an
         absolutely precise answer but would inevitably know that it was for
         a period of about two years. The fact that  the  Appellant  was  so
         hesitant in giving any answer and then gave the estimate of 6 to  7
         months is highly suggestive of his having  forgotten,  through  the
         effluxion of time, what he had said in his original  statement  and
         attempting not to contradict himself.

         26.  The Appellant also gave conflicting accounts of  the  position
         of X. In his interview (question 44) is  said  that  his  rank  was
         Brigadier. In his statement describes him as Brigadier General.  In
         his  oral  evidence  he  described  him  as  a  Colonel.  If  those
         contradiction stood alone than they would not carry a great deal of
         weight and would  not  do  great  damage  to  the  account  of  the
         Appellant  since  there  might  be  room  for  some  error  in  the
         translation of ranks or no precise equivalence between ranks in the
         Iraqi  army  and  the  UK  army,  but  put  alongside   the   other
         inconsistencies, they are of significance. The Appellant's evidence
         about  military  training  that  he  received  was  also   somewhat
         unsatisfactory in that, despite repeated questioning, he was rather
         evasive as to what that entailed and when asked if he had  received
         any weapons training he said that was not necessary as "everyone in
         Iraq knows how to shoot, every house has a gun." It was  only  when
         clarification of that was sort that he said that he had some  basic
         weapons training. Furthermore,  he  was  unable  to  say  what  the
         military base he was working at was called or if  it  had  a  name,
         stating only that it was "regiment two". This contrasted  with  the
         statement in which he said that the military base was at xxx.

         27.  However the greatest and most striking contradictions were  in
         his description of his being stopped and threatened  by  the  armed
         men. His statement is quite clear. He stated that he was on his way
         to the military base when I was stopped by 4-5 unknown  men.  Later
         in his statement he said that - in relation to their demands - that
         "he would think about it" (in order to escape  the  situation).  In
         his oral evidence the Appellant said that there were three men.  He
         also said that he was on his way from regiment two to Kirkuk  (i.e.
         in the opposite direction to that described in his  statement)  and
         that is response to the men was that he  agreed  to  their  demands
         and, in order to convince the men of his willingness,  so  that  it
         would carry out what they wished.

         28.  If it occurred,  an  event  such  as  that  described  by  the
         Appellant would be about a significant and memorable as  any  could
         be. I make allowance for the fact that an event such as that  would
         inevitably be traumatic and the trauma can affect the  laying  down
         of memories, but the contradiction set out above  -  in  particular
         the contrast between 4-5 men and three  men  in  the  direction  of
         travel,  whether  going  to  the  base  or  to  Kirkuk-are,  in  my
         judgement,  of  such  significance  that  they  are  indicative  of
         forgotten elements in a constructed account rather than  explicable
         on the basis of minor details of a true event  being  forgotten  or
         confused.

         29.  I am therefore driven to the conclusion that  the  Appellant's
         basic account of the event which lies at the heart of this claim is
         false and is invented in order to bolster a claim for asylum."

Further evidence:

19. For the purposes of remaking the  decision,  the  appellant  gave  oral
    evidence on some of the outstanding issues. It principally  related  to
    whether he had  any  ongoing  contact  with  his  family.  Whilst  that
    evidence had been given at an earlier hearing, it had been set  out  in
    full in the decision and directions of the 19 July  2019.  I  reproduce
    this below. In the interim, no further witness statement had been filed
    to address any remaining issues and Ms Cleghorn confirmed that  it  was
    not necessary for any further oral evidence to be given.  Ms  Petterson
    did not seek to ask any  further  questions  and  both  advocates  were
    content to procced on the basis of the evidence as it stood and for  it
    be considered in the light of the  country  information  and  the  most
    recent CG of SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq  CG
    [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC).

20. I shall set out below the evidence of the appellant. He  gave  evidence
    with the assistance of an interpreter in the Kurdish  Sorani  language.
    There were no difficulties with the appellant understanding interpreter
    all the interpreter understanding the  appellant  and  no  issues  were
    raised by either of the advocates relating to the interpretation of the
    evidence.

21. In his oral evidence he confirmed the contents of a  witness  statement
    filed with the Tribunal dated 11 December 2018 (see page 46AB). In that
    witness statement he  set  out  his  place  of  birth  in  Kirkuk,  his
    educational history and the events which led  him  to  leave  Iraq.  At
    paragraph 13 of the witness statement, he referred to travelling to his
    paternal uncle's house in Kirkuk where he stayed between 17th - 20th of
    November 2015 and both his uncle and father made arrangements  with  an
    agent to him to leave the country.

22. At paragraph 16 of his witness statement, he set out the last  time  he
    had contact with his paternal uncle was two years ago and  that  he  no
    longer had contact with anyone in Iraq. The witness statement sets  out
    that his uncle had informed him that his parents were still  living  in
    the same area of Iraq, but he was  not  told  if  there  had  been  any
    problems. Even if there had been, he stated that he would not have been
    told because it would have upset him.

23. At paragraph 27 of that witness statement, he set out that  he  had  no
    family in Baghdad or in the KRG. That he did not speak Arabic and  that
    he was a Sunni Kurd. He referred to having identity documents with  him
    when he left Iraq but that the agent had taken them from him.

24. He also confirmed the contents of a more recent witness statement dated
    5 April 2019. In  that  witness  statement  he  set  out  that  he  had
    contacted his uncle twice and had asked about his parents but  did  not
    have any contact with them. He stated that they did not have  a  mobile
    phone or a landline. At paragraph 3, he stated that he has  since  lost
    contact with his uncle although he had his mobile number it  no  longer
    works and that he had tried on numerous occasions to dial  the  number,
    but it was not in use.

25. At paragraph 4 of the witness statement he referred to having  been  to
    the British Red Cross and that he had been interviewed by them. He  did
    not have any further information and he was  waiting  to  hear  whether
    they had found out anything further about his family.

26. He was asked no further questions in evidence in chief.

27. In cross-examination he was asked about previous contact with his uncle
    and he confirmed that he had been in contact with his uncle as set  out
    at paragraph 16 of his witness statement dated July 2016. He  confirmed
    that the last time it had contact was at the end of 2016. He was  asked
    when he had last contacted his uncle and he stated that it was after 16
    October 2017 and he had not contacted him after that date  because  the
    phone had been switched off. He referred to the telephone  number  that
    he had put in his witness statement.

28. In cross-examination he confirmed what  he  had  said  in  his  earlier
    witness statement that after they had been problems in Iraq he went  to
    stay with his paternal uncle. He was asked how far away his uncle lived
    for his parents' home. The appellant stated  that  it  was  "10  to  15
    minutes by foot". He also confirmed that it was in  the  same  village.
    When asked what his paternal uncle did for a living, he stated that  he
    was a farmer, the same as his father. He was asked to explain  why  his
    uncle had a phone whereas he had stated that his father  did  not  have
    one. He stated that because his parents were old, they did not know how
    to use a phone.

29. He was asked about his visit to the Red Cross in 2019 and he was  asked
    whether he had contacted them since his last visit. The appellant  said
    that he had not, and he had not provided any  further  information.  It
    was suggested to him that he had not done anything  since  his  witness
    statement was filed on the 6 April 2019. He was asked to explain why he
    had gone to the Red Cross in January 2019 but had not been there before
    that date. The appellant stated, "I don't know - my lawyer informed  me
    of this I would not have gone if I had not been informed of this."

30. There was no re-examination.

The submissions:

31. Ms Petterson on behalf of the respondent submitted that the possibility
    of the appellant obtaining a replacement (or his original) CSID  should
    be considered in the light of the preserved findings that  he  had  not
    been credible in his account of  events  prior  to  leaving  Iraq.  The
    respondent further submits that the first time the appellant  has  made
    enquiries as to his family's whereabouts was in  January  2019  and  no
    evidence has been forthcoming as to what those enquiries  were  or  any
    outcome.



32. Given the findings of the Upper Tribunal in Paragraphs 391 and 392 of
    the Country Guidance case about the importance of the CSID and the
    family book system in Iraq, that it is likely to only be a very small
    number of individuals who would not know, or readily have access to
    that information. The respondent submits that this is information that
    the appellant either has or could readily access.

33. In the circumstances it is submitted that the appellant is not someone
    who requires Protection against a potential breach of Article 3 of the
    ECHR

34. Ms Cleghorn relied upon her skeleton argument.  She submitted that  the
    Appellant's position, is  that  he  has  no  contact  with  any  family
    relatives. As the Shia militia are now in control of Kirkuk this   will
    be an additional risk factor in light of his previous position  in  the
    army and that in terms of enhanced risk,  he is likely  to  be  treated
    with suspicion as he is from a conflict area. Given the presence of the
    Shia militia in Kirkuk, she submitted that it may well  be  that  harm,
    even after the withdrawal of ISIS, has befallen his uncle and  parents.
    It also explains why contact may fail especially in  the  aftermath  of
    the referendum. It is therefore plausible that the Appellant  has  lost
    contact as explained.

35. In terms of documentation, he  did  not  arrive  in  the  UK  with  any
    documents and he cannot arrange, for his original documents to be sent,
    if they even still exist. The Appellant's only alternative is therefore
    to obtain a replacement document which,  following  the  guidance  from
    SMO, would not be possible as confirmed in  the  headnote  of  SMO.  As
    noted, the Appellant is from Kirkuk. Kirkuk has  rolled  out  the  INID
    scheme (see new evidence). It is no longer possible for this  Appellant
    to obtain a replacement CSID. He would need  to  travel  to  Kirkuk  to
    obtain a replacement document which would be the INID as  the  CSID  is
    being phased out.

36. In conclusion she submitted that it is clear then that he cannot obtain
    an INID by proxy in the UK before he leaves. He cannot obtain  an  INID
    from Baghdad. His only option is to obtain a  replacement  from  Kirkuk
    which he can't do because  that  would  involve  a  period  in  Baghdad
    without documentation during which he could not  avoid  and  not  avoid
    encountering conditions that would breach Article 3 ECHR.  Equally,  it
    is well settled he cannot travel overland without documentation due  to
    the militia-controlled checkpoints. Therefore, as the Tribunal noted in
    relation to the first Appellant SMO. She therefore invited the Tribunal
    to allow the appeal under Article 3 ECHR.

The relevant CG:

37. In the most recent CG  decision  of  SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);
    identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC) the headnote  reads
    as follows:

          A.  INDISCRIMINATE  VIOLENCE  IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE  15(C)  OF   THE
             QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE


          1. There continues to be an internal armed  conflict  in  certain
             parts of Iraq, involving government  forces,  various  militia
             and the remnants of ISIL.  Following the  military  defeat  of
             ISIL at the end of 2017 and the resulting reduction in  levels
             of direct and indirect violence,  however,  the  intensity  of
             that conflict is not such that, as a general matter, there are
             substantial grounds for believing that any  civilian  returned
             to Iraq, solely on account of his presence there, faces a real
             risk of being subjected to indiscriminate  violence  amounting
             to serious harm within the scope of Article 15(c) QD.


          2. The only exception to  the  general  conclusion  above  is  in
             respect of the small mountainous area north of Baiji in  Salah
             al-Din, which is marked on the map at Annex D.  ISIL continues
             to exercise doctrinal control over that area and the  risk  of
             indiscriminate violence there is such  as  to  engage  Article
             15(c) as a general matter.


          3.  The  situation  in  the   Formerly   Contested   Areas   (the
             governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah and  Salah  Al-
             Din)  is   complex,   encompassing   ethnic,   political   and
             humanitarian issues  which  differ  by  region.   Whether  the
             return of an individual to such an area would be  contrary  to
             Article  15(c)  requires  a  fact-sensitive,  "sliding  scale"
             assessment to which the following matters are relevant.


          4. Those with an actual or perceived association  with  ISIL  are
             likely to be at enhanced risk throughout Iraq.  In those areas
             in which ISIL retains an active presence,  those  who  have  a
             current  personal   association   with   local   or   national
             government, or the security apparatus  are  likely  to  be  at
             enhanced risk.


          5. The impact of  any  of  the  personal  characteristics  listed
             immediately below  must  be  carefully  assessed  against  the
             situation in the area to which return  is  contemplated,  with
             particular reference to the extent of  ongoing  ISIL  activity
             and the behaviour of the security actors in  control  of  that
             area.  Within the framework of such  an  analysis,  the  other
             personal characteristics which are capable of being  relevant,
             individually and cumulatively, to the sliding  scale  analysis
             required by Article 15(c) are as follows:


                . Opposition to or criticism of the GOI, the  KRG  or  local
                  security actors.


                . Membership of a national, ethnic or religious group  which
                  is either in the minority in the area in question, or  not
                  in de facto control of that area.


                . LGBTI individuals, those not conforming to  Islamic  mores
                  and wealthy or Westernised individuals.


                . Humanitarian or medical staff and  those  associated  with
                  Western organisations or security forces.


                . Women and children without genuine family support; and


                . Individuals with disabilities.


          6. The living conditions  in  Iraq  as  a  whole,  including  the
             Formerly Contested Areas, are  unlikely  to  give  rise  to  a
             breach  of  Article  3  ECHR  or  (therefore)  to  necessitate
             subsidiary protection under Article 15(b)  QD.   Where  it  is
             asserted that return to a particular part of Iraq  would  give
             rise to such a breach, however, it is to be recalled that  the
             minimum level of severity required is relative,  according  to
             the personal circumstances of the individual  concerned.   Any
             such circumstances require individualised  assessment  in  the
             context of the conditions of the area in question.


         B.   DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)


          7. Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
             will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.
             The Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in  the
             United Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession  of  a
             current or expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a  Laissez
             Passer.


          8. No Iraqi national will be returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
             possession of one of these documents.


          9. In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)
             and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
             EWCA Civ 1276, an international protection  claim  made  by  P
             cannot succeed by  reference  to  any  alleged  risk  of  harm
             arising from an absence of a current or expired Iraqi passport
             or a Laissez passer, if the Tribunal finds that P's return  is
             not currently feasible on account of a lack of  any  of  those
             documents.


         10. Where P is returned to Iraq on a  Laissez  Passer  or  expired
             passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at the point of
             return by reason of not having a current passport.


         C.   CIVIL STATUS IDENTITY DOCUMENTATION


         11. The CSID is being replaced with a new biometric Iraqi National
             Identity Card  -  the  INID.   As  a  general  matter,  it  is
             necessary for an individual to have one of these two documents
             in order to live and travel within Iraq  without  encountering
             treatment or conditions which are contrary to Article 3  ECHR.
              Many of the checkpoints in the country  are  manned  by  Shia
             militia who are not controlled by the GOI and are unlikely  to
             permit an individual without a CSID or an  INID  to  pass.   A
             valid Iraqi passport is not recognised as acceptable proof  of
             identity for internal travel.


         12. A Laissez Passer will be of no assistance in the absence of  a
             CSID or an INID; it is confiscated upon arrival and is not, in
             any  event,  a  recognised  identity   document.    There   is
             insufficient evidence to show that returnees are issued with a
             'certification letter' at Baghdad Airport, or to show that any
             such document would be  recognised  internally  as  acceptable
             proof of identity.


         13. Notwithstanding the phased transition to the INID within Iraq,
             replacement CSIDs  remain  available  through  Iraqi  Consular
             facilities.  Whether an individual will be able  to  obtain  a
             replacement CSID whilst in the UK  depends  on  the  documents
             available and, critically, the availability of the volume  and
             page reference of the entry in the Family Book in Iraq,  which
             system  continues  to  underpin  the  Civil  Status   Identity
             process.  Given the importance of that information, most Iraqi
             citizens will recall it. That information may also be obtained
             from family members, although  it  is  necessary  to  consider
             whether such relatives are on the  father's  or  the  mother's
             side because the registration system is patrilineal.


         14. Once in Iraq, it  remains  the  case  that  an  individual  is
             expected to attend their local CSA office in order to obtain a
             replacement document.  All CSA  offices  have  now  re-opened,
             although the extent to which records have  been  destroyed  by
             the conflict with ISIL  is  unclear  and  is  likely  to  vary
             significantly depending on the extent  and  intensity  of  the
             conflict in the area in question.


         15. An individual returnee who is not from Baghdad is  not  likely
             to be  able  to  obtain  a  replacement  document  there,  and
             certainly not within a reasonable time.  Neither  the  Central
             Archive nor the assistance facilities for IDPs are  likely  to
             render documentation assistance to an undocumented returnee.


         16. The likelihood of obtaining a replacement identity document by
             the use of a proxy, whether from the UK or on return to  Iraq,
             has reduced due to the introduction of the  INID  system.   In
             order to obtain an INID, an individual must attend their local
             CSA office in person  to  enrol  their  biometrics,  including
             fingerprints and iris scans.  The CSA offices  in  which  INID
             terminals have been installed are unlikely - as  a  result  of
             the phased replacement of the CSID system - to issue  a  CSID,
             whether to an individual  in  person  or  to  a  proxy.    The
             reducing number of CSA offices in which  INID  terminals  have
             not been installed will continue to issue CSIDs to individuals
             and  their  proxies   upon   production   of   the   necessary
             information.


         D.   INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN GOI-CONTROLLED IRAQ


         17. Where internal relocation is raised in the Iraqi  context,  it
             is  necessary  to   consider   not   only   the   safety   and
             reasonableness of relocation but also the feasibility of  that
             course, in light of sponsorship and residency requirements  in
             operation in various parts of the  country.   Individuals  who
             seek to relocate within the country may not be admitted  to  a
             potential safe haven or may not be permitted to remain there.


         18. Relocation within the  Formerly  Contested  Areas.   With  the
             exception of the small  area  identified  in  section  A,  the
             general conditions within the Formerly Contested Areas do  not
             engage  Article  15  QD(b)  or  (c)  or  Article  3  ECHR  and
             relocation within the Formerly Contested Areas may  obviate  a
             risk  which  exists  in  an  individual's  home  area.   Where
             relocation  within  the  Formerly  Contested  Areas  is  under
             contemplation, however, the ethnic and  political  composition
             of  the  home  area  and  the  place  of  relocation  will  be
             particularly relevant.  In particular, an individual who lived
             in a former ISIL stronghold  for  some  time  may  fall  under
             suspicion  in  a  place  of  relocation.   Tribal  and  ethnic
             differences  may   preclude   such   relocation,   given   the
             significant presence and control of largely  Shia  militia  in
             these areas.  Even where it  is  safe  for  an  individual  to
             relocate within the Formerly Contested Areas, however,  it  is
             unlikely to be either feasible or reasonable without  a  prior
             connection to, and a support structure  within,  the  area  in
             question.


         19. Relocation to Baghdad.  Baghdad is generally safe for ordinary
             civilians but whether it is safe for a particular returnee  is
             a question of fact in the individual case.  There are  no  on-
             entry sponsorship  requirements  for  Baghdad  but  there  are
             sponsorship  requirements   for   residency.    A   documented
             individual of working age is likely  to  be  able  to  satisfy
             those requirements.  Relocation to Baghdad  is  likely  to  be
             reasonable for Arab Shia and Sunni single, able-bodied men and
             married couples of working age without  children  and  without
             specific vulnerabilities.  Other  individuals  are  likely  to
             require external support, ie a support network of  members  of
             his or her family, extended family or tribe, who  are  willing
             and able to provide genuine support.  Whether such  a  support
             network is available is to be considered with reference to the
             collectivist nature of Iraqi society,  as  considered  in  AAH
             (Iraq).


         E.   IRAQI KURDISH REGION


         20. There are regular direct flights from  the  UK  to  the  Iraqi
             Kurdish Region and returns might be  to  Baghdad  or  to  that
             region.  It is for the respondent to state whether she intends
             to remove to Baghdad, Erbil or Sulaymaniyah.


         Kurds


         21. For an Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish  origin  in
             possession of a valid CSID or  Iraqi  National  Identity  Card
             (INID), the journey  from  Baghdad  to  the  IKR  by  land  is
             affordable and practical and can be made without a  real  risk
             of P suffering persecution, serious harm,  or  Article  3  ill
             treatment nor would  any  difficulties  on  the  journey  make
             relocation unduly harsh.


         22. P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the
             IKR without either a CSID, an INID or a valid passport.  If  P
             has one of those documents, the journey from  Baghdad  to  the
             IKR by land is  affordable  and  practical  and  can  be  made
             without a real risk of P suffering persecution, serious  harm,
             or Article 3 ill treatment nor would any difficulties  on  the
             journey make relocation unduly harsh.


         23. P will face considerable  difficulty  in  making  the  journey
             between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a CSID or an INID.
             There  are  numerous  checkpoints  en  route,  including   two
             checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of the  airport.   If  P
             has neither a CSID nor an INID there is a real risk of P being
             detained at a checkpoint  until  such  time  as  the  security
             personnel  are  able  to  verify  P's  identity.   It  is  not
             reasonable to require P to travel between Baghdad and  IKR  by
             land absent the ability of P  to  verify  his  identity  at  a
             checkpoint. This normally requires the attendance  of  a  male
             family member and production of P's identity documents but may
             also be achieved by calling upon "connections"  higher  up  in
             the chain of command.


         24. Once at the IKR border (land  or  air)  P  would  normally  be
             granted entry to the territory. Subject to security screening,
             and registering presence with the local mukhtar,  P  would  be
             permitted to enter and reside in the IKR with no further legal
             impediments  or  requirements.  There   are   no   sponsorship
             requirements for entry or residence in any of  the  three  IKR
             Governorates for Kurds.


         25. Whether P would be at particular risk of ill-treatment  during
             the security screening process must be assessed on a  case-by-
             case basis. Additional factors that may increase risk include:
             (i) coming from a family with a known association  with  ISIL,
             (ii) coming from an area associated with ISIL and (iii)  being
             a single male of fighting age. P  is  likely  to  be  able  to
             evidence the fact of recent arrival from the UK,  which  would
             dispel any suggestion of having  arrived  directly  from  ISIL
             territory.


         26. If P has family members living in the IKR cultural norms would
             require that family to accommodate P. In such circumstances  P
             would, in general, have sufficient assistance from the  family
             so as to lead a 'relatively normal life', which would  not  be
             unduly harsh. It is nevertheless important for decision-makers
             to determine  the  extent  of  any  assistance  likely  to  be
             provided by P's family on a case by case basis.


         27. For Kurds without the assistance of  family  in  the  IKR  the
             accommodation options are limited:


               i) Absent special circumstances it is not  reasonably  likely
                  that P will be able to gain access to one of  the  refugee
                  camps in  the  IKR;  these  camps  are  already  extremely
                  overcrowded and are closed to newcomers. 64% of  IDPs  are
                  accommodated in private settings with  the  vast  majority
                  living with family members;


              ii) If P cannot live with a family  member,  apartments  in  a
                  modern block in a new neighbourhood are available for rent
                  at a cost of between $300 and $400 per month;


             iii) P could resort to a 'critical shelter arrangement', living
                  in  an  unfinished  or  abandoned   structure,   makeshift
                  shelter, tent, mosque, church or squatting in a government
                  building.  It would  be  unduly  harsh  to  require  P  to
                  relocate to the IKR if P will live in a  critical  housing
                  shelter without access to basic necessities such as  food,
                  clean water and clothing;


              iv) In considering whether P would be  able  to  access  basic
                  necessities, account must be taken of the fact that failed
                  asylum seekers are entitled to apply for a grant under the
                  Voluntary Returns Scheme, which could  give  P  access  to
                  �1500. Consideration should also be given to whether P can
                  obtain financial support from other sources  such  as  (a)
                  employment, (b) remittances from relatives abroad, (c) the
                  availability of ad hoc charity or by being able to  access
                  PDS rations.


         28. Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed  on  a
             case-by-case basis taking the following matters into account:


               i) Gender. Lone women are very unlikely to be able to  secure
                  legitimate employment;


              ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the IKR  is
                  70%;


             iii) P cannot work without a CSID or INID;


              iv) Patronage and nepotism continue to be important factors in
                  securing employment. A returnee with family connections to
                  the region will have a significant advantage  in  that  he
                  would ordinarily be able to call upon  those  contacts  to
                  make introductions to prospective employers and  to  vouch
                  for him;


               v) Skills, education and experience. Unskilled workers are at
                  the  greatest  disadvantage,  with  the  decline  in   the
                  construction industry reducing  the  number  of  labouring
                  jobs available;


              vi) If P is from an area with a marked association with  ISIL,
                  that may deter prospective employers.


         Non-Kurdish Returnees


         29. The ability of non-Kurdish returnees to relocate to the IKR is
             to be distinguished.  There are  no  sponsorship  requirements
             for entry or residence in  Erbil  and  Sulaymaniyah,  although
             single Arab and Turkmen citizens require regular employment in
             order to secure residency.  Arabs from former  conflict  areas
             and  Turkmen  from  Tal  Afar  are  subject   to   sponsorship
             requirements to enter or reside in Dohuk. Although  Erbil  and
             Sulaymaniyah are accessible for such  individuals,  particular
             care must be taken in evaluating whether  internal  relocation
             to the IKR for a non-Kurd  would  be  reasonable.   Given  the
             economic and humanitarian conditions in the IKR at present, an
             Arab with no viable support network in the IKR  is  likely  to
             experience unduly harsh conditions upon relocation there.


         F.   EXISTING COUNTRY GUIDANCE DECISIONS


         30. This decision replaces all existing country guidance on Iraq.


Analysis of the evidence:

38. There is no dispute that the appellant is an ethnic Kurd  from  Kirkuk.
    It is common ground that the area that  he  previously  resided  in  is
    located between Hawija and the Hamrin mountains.  It  is  also  not  in
    dispute that he left Iraq on the 25 November 2015.

39. The country information sets out the present position in that  area  as
    reflected in the country guidance decision at paragraphs 251 - 257. All
    of Kirkuk governorate is disputed between the GOI and the  IKR.  It  is
    described as an ethnically diverse governorate which has seen  a  great
    deal of upheaval in recent decades. Kirkuk  city  was  never  taken  by
    ISIL, although Hawija was, and was also one of the last places in  Iraq
    to  be  liberated  in  October  2017.  The  battle  for  Hawija   cause
    significant damage to its infrastructure.  ISIL controls  no  territory
    as such in Kirkuk governorate, but it is certainly present and  active,
    particularly in the areas surrounding Hawija and the Hamrin  mountains.
    There are pockets of fighters in these  areas.   It  is  recorded  that
    ISIL's main focus in Kirkuk is to  attack  specific  targets,  who  are
    usually  authority  figures  or  those  associated  with  the  security
    services.

40. I confirm that I have considered the background evidence that refers to
    the present position in the Kirkuk governorate. No further evidence ahs
    been provided by the respondent.

41. Ms Petterson submits that the appellant has not  been  found  to  be  a
    credible witness by the previous FtTJ concerning the events in Iraq and
    therefore it  follows  that  his  evidence  relating  to  contact  with
    relatives should equally be dismissed as being  not  credible  evidence
    worthy of weight.

42. The relevance of the background  material  is  that  it  sets  out  the
    background to the issue of continuing contact with  relatives  in  Iraq
    and  the  appellant's  ability  to  obtain  documentation.  Whilst  his
    evidence was not found to be credible in relation to  events  in  Iraq,
    that does not mean that his  evidence  as  to  contact  with  relatives
    should be dismissed solely on that basis.

43.  It  is  the  appellant's  evidence  that  his  uncle,  who  had   made
    arrangements for him to leave Iraq along with his  father,  did  so  in
    November 2015 and that he last had contact with him in 2016. He has had
    no direct contact with his uncle or his father as the mobile number  he
    had no longer works and that was the  only  means  of  contact  between
    them.

44. I have set his evidence against the country materials and  having  done
    so I am satisfied that it is reasonably likely that the  appellant  has
    lost contact with his uncle and his father  in  Kirkuk.  It  is  common
    ground that he is an only child and therefore it is not suggested  that
    he had any contact with  siblings  in  Iraq.  On  the  appellant's  own
    evidence, he has had no contact directly with his family since he  left
    Kirkuk in 2015 and last spoke to his  uncle  in  2016.  The  background
    materials demonstrate that at the time he last resided there, the  area
    was under the control of ISIL. It is not inherently improbable when set
    against that background material that the appellant  has  lost  contact
    with his family relatives. As Ms Cleghorn submits  whilst  the  present
    position is that ISIL has been driven out of Kirkuk governorate itself,
    there has been large-scale displacement of its  inhabitants  and  given
    the length of time since he left  Iraq,  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is
    reasonable likely that he  has  lost  contact  with  them.  Dr  Fatah's
    evidence in SMO is recorded as:

         The KRG and the GOI remain locked in disagreement over the Disputed
         Territories, and about Kirkuk in particular. Disputes over the
         right to export oil from the IKR only serve to increase the
         tension. Iraq itself held elections in May 2018 and Adil Abdul-
         Mahdi became Prime Minister, although his position is a difficult
         one, since it was only earned by consent from all political blocs.
         The security situation is complicated by the presence of Shia
         militia known as the Popular Mobilisation Forces or Units ("PMF" or
         "PMU") in the country. The most powerful of these militias have
         ties to Iran and whilst they have technically been under Baghdad's
         control since 2016, they answer to their Iranian sponsors. Dr Fatah
         opines that the current level of insecurity in Iraq is rooted in a
         number of socio-political circumstances. He identifies sectarian
         and tribal divisions, poverty, the loss of command and structure in
         the army.

    The Tribunal also noted:

         Since control over Kirkuk was taken back from the peshmerga in the
         aftermath of the Kurdish Independence Referendum, the whole
         governorate is controlled by the ISF, with a significant presence
         of PMU militia. We also accept the evidence given by Dr Fatah about
         the effect of the PMU in Kirkuk governorate. Whilst they lessen the
         threat from ISIL in the region, they have also brought renewed
         sectarian tension, for instance by renaming Sunni sites with Shia
         names. The fact that Kirkuk remains a Disputed Territory also
         contributes to the uncertainty experienced by residents of the
         Governorate [256].

45. The competing power sources set out in the material and referred to  in
    the decision of  SMO  and  the  continued  fluidity  of  the  situation
    supports the plausibility of his account. Whilst he has taken steps  to
    contact the Red Cross there is no evidence from them as to the  outcome
    of any enquiries. That evidence  does  not  support  or  undermine  his
    account. Whilst it is submitted that he  did  not  make  the  enquiries
    until January 2019, I do not find that that necessarily counts  against
    him.

46. Notwithstanding the adverse  credibility  findings  made  by  the  FtTJ
    relating to events in Iraq, when the evidence is viewed in the round, I
    am satisfied that it is reasonably likely that he has lost all  contact
    with his relatives in Iraq and that he has no present information as to
    their current whereabouts.

47. As to the availability of documentation, his  evidence  was  that  upon
    arrival in the UK he had given his documentation to the agent. This  is
    not been the subject of any evidential challenge and  it  is  therefore
    not in dispute that the appellant has no current  documentation  is  to
    his identity or otherwise in his possession.

48. Turning to the question of Article  15(c),  the  position  relating  to
    Kirkuk is set out at paragraphs 251-261. Ms Cleghorn did  not  seek  to
    challenge  that  assessment  by  the  provision  of   further   country
    materials.

49. The Upper Tribunal in SMO set out its general conclusion at  paragraphs
    282 - 289 that the evidence before them indicated that the situation in
    the formerly contested areas and  the  Baghdad  belt  is  fundamentally
    different from that which obtained in 2015. The UT set out the  changes
    in the respective areas and that the evidence showed that the degree of
    indiscriminate  violence  characterising  the  current  armed  conflict
    taking place  in  those  formerly  contested  areas  (Baghdad,  Diyala,
    Kirkuk, Ninewah, Salah Al-Din and Anbar) is not at such  a  high  level
    that substantial grounds of been shown for believing that any  civilian
    returning there was solely on account of his  presence  there,  face  a
    real risk of a threat to his life or person. The Tribunal was satisfied
    that the changes were  "well-established  and  durable"  and  that  the
    previous country guidance in AA (Iraq) required revision in  accordance
    with that conclusion.

50. The only exception was the area north of Baiji (see paragraph 286).  It
    is not the position that this particular appellant is from that area.

51. Ms Cleghorn submits that the appellant falls within one of the enhanced
    risk categories identified by the  Upper  Tribunal  at  paragraphs  290
    onwards. A set out in the country materials, the position  relation  to
    Kirkuk is that it is  in  control  of  the  Shia  militia.  Whilst  the
    appellant is a Sunni Kurd, I do  not  reach  the  conclusion  from  the
    general evidence that he would be at risk or be in  any  enhanced  risk
    category on account of being a Sunni Muslim. Indeed, Ms  Cleghorn  does
    not make that submission.

52. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that  this  appellant  falls
    within the enhanced risk category due to his previous position  in  the
    Iraqi army. Whilst the previous findings of the FtTJ make it plain that
    he did not accept that the appellant had given a credible account as to
    his length and service or his role in the military, it did not seem  to
    be in dispute that the appellant had been employed as a driver  in  the
    army although he had no significant role other than that.

53. The decision in SMO at paragraph  299  sets  out  that  those  who  are
    perceived to be opposed to the KRG may be at an enhanced risk on return
    to the territory controlled by those bodies. While the Tribunal did not
    give a detailed analysis of this, the  Tribunal  referred  to  credible
    reports of journalists critical of the KRG  encountering  difficulties.
    There is no evidence that the appellant has been critical of the KRG in
    that way or that his employment as a driver in  the  Iraqi  army  would
    lead to any such perception.

54. The conclusion reached at paragraph 313 is that those with an actual or
    perceived association with ISIL are  likely  to  be  at  enhanced  risk
    throughout Iraq. Secondly, in those  areas  in  which  ISIL  retain  an
    active presence, those who have a current personal association with the
    local or national government, or the security apparatus are  likely  to
    be at enhanced risk.

55. The appellant has no actual or perceived association with ISIL. It  has
    not been demonstrated by any country  materials  that  the  appellant's
    home area or village is one where ISIL  have  an  active  presence  and
    therefore his work as a driver in the Iraqi army has not been shown  to
    place him in any category of enhanced risk. At paragraph 314  there  is
    reference to the personal characteristics relevant to the sliding scale
    analysis required by Article 15 (c) and refers  to  "opposition  to  or
    criticism of the GOI, the KRG or local security actors".  There  is  no
    evidence before the Tribunal that the appellant has  been  critical  of
    the GOI or the KRG and that simply by being a driver would not lead  to
    any such perception. I prefer the submission made by Ms Patterson  that
    the appellant's personal characteristics which  solely  relate  to  him
    having once been employed as a driver  in  the  Iraqi  army  does  not,
    without more place him in  an  enhanced  risk  category.  He  therefore
    cannot succeed on asylum grounds or under Article 15 (c).

56. I now turn to the assessment under Article 3 of the ECHR. As  reflected
    at paragraph 317 of SMO,  the  respondent's  position  is  that  person
    returning to Iraq without either family connections able to assist him,
    or the means to obtain a CSID may be at  risk  of  enduring  conditions
    contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

57. The Tribunal at  paragraph  331  concluded  that  the  position  for  a
    healthy, documented male returnee to  their  place  of  origin  in  the
    formerly contested areas, does not cross the threshold for a breach  of
    Article 3. The appellant does not fall within the  categories  referred
    to at paragraph 332. However, this the particular factual  circumstance
    relevant to this appellant is that he is undocumented.

58. The issue surrounding the documents required to return to Iraq  and  to
    survive in that country have played a prominent  part  in  the  country
    guidance cases thus far decided. Those documents are referred to as the
    Civil Status Identity Card ("CSID"), the Iraqi Nationality  Certificate
    (INC) and the public distribution  system  ("PDS")  card/  food  ration
    card. There is now reference to a new digital  identification  document
    known as Iraqi National Identity Document ("INID)".

59. The importance of the CSID was set out in the decision of AA (Iraq)  as
    it is required to access financial  assistance,  employment,  education
    and housing etc. it was described as an "essential document for life in
    Iraq" (at [39] AA (Iraq) [2017].

60. It has been emphasised in the previous country guidance decisions  that
    an intensely fact sensitive enquiry  is  necessary  as  to  whether  an
    individual  would  be  able  to  obtain  a  replacement  CSID  and  the
    possession of other documents and the location of  the  civil  registry
    office and the availability of other male  family  relatives  were  all
    relevant considerations.

61. When applied to this appellant, the appellant is undocumented and  does
    not  have  a  passport  nor  does  he  have  CSID   or   any   identity
    documentation. I have found that this appellant has no contact with any
    male relatives in  Iraqi  and  therefore  he  cannot  arrange  for  the
    original documentation to be sent to  him,  even  supposing  that  they
    exist in the light of the displacement and previous conditions  in  his
    home area in Iraq.

62. I have  therefore  considered  whether  he  can  obtain  a  replacement
    document to enable him to return to Iraq, either to his home area or to
    relocate.

63. The headnote in SMO sets out that the returns are via Baghdad and  that
    an Iraqi national will only be able to enter Iraq if in possession of a
    passport or a laissez passer. A CSID or  INID  is  needed  to  work  or
    travel within Iraq without encountering treatment or  conditions  which
    are contrary to Article 3 and a passport is not a  sufficient  document
    for internal travel.

64. As to obtaining a CSID from Baghdad, an individual returnee who is  not
    from Baghdad, which is the position of this appellant, is not likely to
    be able to obtain a replacement document or to do so  in  a  reasonable
    time. The central archive and the facilities for IDP's are  not  likely
    to provide assistance for an undocumented returnee. The appellant would
    not be able to board a domestic flight beyond Baghdad  or  to  the  IKR
    without either a CSID or INID or invalid passport.

65. Ms Petterson submits that the appellant can obtain a CSID. She  submits
    that he would know the  entry  in  the  family  book  and  the  details
    necessary to obtain a CSID because he would have provided those details
    in applying to join the military even with his limited education. It is
    not been suggested that he has any difficulties with his memory. In the
    alternative, she submits he could ask a  family  member  to  bring  the
    documents to the airport in Baghdad.

66. When considering whether the appellant  can  access  documentation,  it
    must be seen in the light of the finding made that he  has  no  current
    contact with family  relatives  in  Iraq  therefore  he  cannot  obtain
    documents from those family members to assist him in providing evidence
    of his identity or to produce any documents.

67. As to whether the appellant recalls any entry in  the  family  book,  I
    take into account what is said in SMO that given the importance of that
    information most Iraqi citizens will recall  it.  Whilst  Ms  Clegg  on
    submits that the appellant  has  had  little  education,  there  is  no
    evidence before me that he has  ever  been  asked  he  can  recall  the
    details contained in such a document or what is on  his  own  document.
    The Tribunal in SMO did not say how  they  reach  the  conclusion  that
    someone could be expected to remember such details save that they  were
    important matters to an Iraqi citizen.

68. However, the appellant would not be up to obtain a replacement document
    in Baghdad as he is not from there and the archives  will  not  provide
    him with assistance.

69. I accept the submission made  by  Ms  Cleghorn  that  the  evidence  in
    respect of Kirkuk has now been clarified and that the CAD in Kirkuk  no
    longer issues old CSID cards and that it now issues  the  new  national
    unified card which requires the presence of the appellant at the office
    in Kirkuk for his fingerprinting and iris scan  (  see  document  Iraq;
    centre and south biweekly protection update August  2017  at  page  3).
    This is consistent with the material referred to  in  the  decision  of
    SMO, where reference  was  made  to  the  documentation  and  that  the
    likelihood of obtaining a replacement identity document by use of proxy
    (whether from the UK or on return to Iraq) has been reduced due to  the
    introduction of the new  INID  system.  The  Tribunal  recognises  that
    offices where INID terminals have been placed  would  not  be  able  to
    issue such a document by way of proxy.

70. I  accept  the  submission  made  by  Ms  Cleghorn  that  the  material
    demonstrates that the appellant would not be able to leave the  airport
    at Baghdad without a CSID or valid  INID.  The  Tribunal  recorded  the
    evidence which they describe as "uncontested" that a failure to produce
    a CSID or, in the environs of the airport a  valid  passport,  will  be
    likely result in detention until the authorities could be satisfied and
    individuals identity. An internal flight to the IKR is possible but  an
    individual would need either a valid passport or a CSID.

71. It has not been explained in the submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent how the appellant can obtain an INID  although  I  recognise
    that the burden is  upon  the  appellant  to  demonstrate  the  factual
    circumstances. When drawing those matters together and in the light  of
    the particular factual circumstances of this appellant, I am  satisfied
    that the evidence demonstrates that it is no longer  possible  for  the
    appellant to obtain a replacement CSID and that to obtain the  relevant
    document which would be the INID he would  be  required  to  return  to
    Kirkuk. He cannot obtain an INID by way of proxy before he  leaves  and
    also cannot obtain one from Baghdad. Whilst it may  be  said  he  could
    obtain a replacement with the help of family members; the appellant has
    no contact with his family members in order to assist him. He could not
    remain in Baghdad as he does not speak Arabic and has no family support
    or connections in that area  and  could  not  travel  overland  without
    documentation due to the militia -controlled checkpoints as set out  in
    SMO.

72. For those reasons  I  have  reached  the  conclusion  that  his  appeal
    succeeds under Article 3 of the ECHR.




Notice of Decision

73. The decision of the FtTJ involved the making of an error on a point  of
    law; the appeal is remade as follows; the appeal is allowed on  Article
    3 of the ECHR.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 13/2/2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
