
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04423/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 October 2019                   |On 20 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                     N H
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Appellant:     Ms E. Gunn, instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Order Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008


 1.  Anonymity  was  ordered  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  There  is  no
    application to change  that  position  and  as  the  issue  is  one  of
    international protection we maintain and make the same order.

The Appellant and the Proceedings

 2. The appellant is an Iranian citizen of Kurdish ethnicity who is 26-year-
    old.  He appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Clemes ("the
    Judge")  promulgated  on  28  June  2019  whereby  he   dismissed   the
    appellant's  appeal,  brought  on  international  protection   grounds,
    against by the respondent's decision dated 1 May  2019  to  refuse  him
    asylum or humanitarian protection and discretionary leave.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan on 21
    August 2019, on the basis that it was arguable that the Judge had erred
    in  concluding  that  the  appellant's  account  was  implausible   and
    rejecting his account as lacking credibility.

Discussion

 4. In his grounds, the appellant contends that  the  Judge  dealt  wrongly
    with his evidence that he had approached a vehicle unexpectedly  parked
    up in a remote place,  which it transpired  contained  Kurdish  rebels,
    when he was about 15 minutes into his 25-30 minute walk home  at  night
    from the family orchard. The men detained him in the  vehicle,  seizing
    his documents for inspection, but when shots broke out in the vicinity,
    and men arrived in the road, he realised an ambush was taking place and
    the men were somehow involved in it.  The men  left  him  and  all  ran
    toward the gunfire. He ran away but left his documents in the  vehicle.
    Initially he was frightened the Kurdish rebels might pursue  him,  able
    to locate him from his documents, and believing he was connected to the
    authorities, and he was too frightened to go home. He went to his uncle
    in the same village who told him to go to the mountain.  The  next  day
    his uncle told him the authorities had visited his father's house,  and
    he concluded it was because they had found his papers  in  the  Kurdish
    rebels' vehicle and he was under suspicion as a Kurdish rebel  involved
    in the ambush. His uncle arranged  for  him  to  flee  abroad.  He  was
    subsequently in touch with his uncle.

 5. Grounds 1 and 2 complain that  the  Judge  should  not  have  found  it
    implausible that the appellant would approach a  vehicle  in  a  remote
    location at night,  the Judge  was  being  speculative  and  adopted  a
    Eurocentric  view  when  he  said  that  the  area  was  dangerous  and
    unpredictable implying that natural caution would have  prevented  such
    an approach. The area was  not  dangerous  and  unpredictable.  We  are
    satisfied that there is no merit in Grounds 1 and 2.

 6. There is no dispute that it was the appellant's evidence that  he  knew
    that the vehicle did not belong to a fellow local orchard owner  as  he
    knew their vehicles, and because it was not parked by the orchards  but
    in  a  remote  location  away  from  the  orchards.  Contrary  to   the
    implication that the Judge exceeded the evidence or was speculating  in
    a Eurocentric way,  the  Judge  was  relying  on  the  appellant's  own
    submission.  The appellant relied on country information to  show  that
    there was a real likelihood that, in the countryside where he lived, he
    would come across insurgents in the way he  described.  The  Judge  was
    taken to the January 2019 respondents Country  Policy  and  Information
    Note which showed that Kurdish traps or  ambushes  on  the  authorities
    were "prevalent" in the border area and that they were conducted by all
    the Kurdish groups  and,  further,  that  there  was  an  active  armed
    conflict primarily targeting security assets in the mountainous regions
     along the Iraqi border (see paragraph 11).  Counsel before us, who was
    not counsel before the  Judge,  took  us  to  different  parts  of  the
    background evidence, which were  not  referred  to  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which stressed how difficult it is  for  the  authorities  to
    maintain control along the borders, and their  porosity.  However,  the
    Judge was entitled to reason according to the  evidence  and  arguments
    put on  the  day,  and  nothing  in  the  evidence  we  were  taken  to
    demonstrates a mistake of  fact  or  perversity  in  the  reasoning  or
    assessment  of  the  evidence  relied  upon  before  the  Judge.    The
    submission to the Judge was that, because it was a close-knit area,  it
    would be a natural instinct for the appellant to approach the  vehicle.
    The  Judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that,  as  the  appellant  had
    identified that the vehicle did not belong to a  local  orchard  owner,
    and as the vehicle had attracted the appellant's attention  because  it
    was parked unusually, being in a remote area where there was no obvious
    reason for a vehicle to be parked, country conditions did  not  support
    the contention argued for.

 7. Ground 3 argues that the Judge failed to apply anxious scrutiny to  the
    appellant's account and at paragraph 21  conflated the account  of  the
    15 minutes spent getting to the accidental meeting point with the  time
    it would have taken the appellant to walk on to the village  to  obtain
    help, which gives rise to the appearance that the  Judge  believed  the
    appellant said he had walked 15 minutes out of his way  en  route  from
    the orchard to his village and so accidentally met the insurgents.

 8. The ground misreads the Judge's decision. A fair reading shows that the
    Judge did not understand the appellant to have walked out of  his  way,
    or diverged from his route home, which led him to meet the  insurgents.
    At paragraph 7, the Judge identified the appellant's evidence in  cross
    examination that it took him 15 minutes to reach the accidental meeting
    place. At paragraph 21, the Judge noted that, when asked what he  would
    have done had he found the vehicle was a break down, he said  he  would
    have offered help.  Challenged as to how he could have hoped  to  help,
    he said that he might have walked on to the village to get help.   That
    is not a conflation which shows that the Judge thought there had been a
    divergence from the appellant's normal route home.

 9. Further, although not mentioned in the grounds, the appellant does  say
    in his asylum interview that the entire walk from the  orchard  to  the
    village is approximately 35 to 40 minutes, and so  the  Judge  was  not
    significantly outside the evidence in concluding that the walk  to  the
    village would have taken him 15 minutes again.

10. A fair reading of the whole of the decision shows that paragraph 21  is
    under a heading "My analysis of the evidence" which begins at paragraph
    18 and continues over  almost  three  pages  to  paragraph  25  of  the
    decision. The mere inclusion of the time the walk to the village  would
    take, although it is the same as the time it  took  to  walk  from  the
    orchard  to  the  car,  does   not   reveal   a   conflation   or   the
    misunderstanding argued for.  There is  no  evidential  basis  for  the
    assertion in the grounds that the Judge  mistakenly  reached  the  view
    that the appellant walked 15  minutes  out  of  his  way  to  assist  a
    vehicle. We pause to note that the only particularisation of the reason
    for the grant of permission by Upper Tribunal Judge  Sheridan  is  this
    claimed misunderstanding when the grant states: "arguably, there may be
    less of a credibility issue in stopping to assist a  vehicle  that  was
    passed on the way home then (sic) walking 15 minutes out of the way  to
    assist a vehicle."

11. The ground also criticises the Judge for a  lack  of  anxious  scrutiny
    when the Judge concluded as implausible that the appellant's account of
    the family being unable to buy a phone for him  because  the  Ettala'at
    would trace the purchase back to them and so attract adverse attention,
    when his evidence was that his  uncle  had  bought  a  phone  for  him,
    obscures the point  being  made  by  the  Judge.   That  was  that  the
    appellant's account, that his family were unable to be in contact  with
    him because their phone would be monitored, and hence he was unable  to
    provide any information as to what had happened to his father following
    the Ettala'at's  search of the property and the arrest of  his  father,
    was undermined because his family could have (also) purchased  a  phone
    for themselves and used it to call him. The evidence referred to in the
    grounds: that the appellant's uncle had bought him a phone and had  not
    been traced nor come to any adverse attention as  a  result,  precisely
    underlines the point. Further, as the Judge said, the appellant's claim
    went even further, namely that he was of such interest to the  security
    services that they would have bugged his family's phones in  the  small
    window of time between their finding the documents in the  vehicle  and
    the appellant fleeing.

12. The ground further argues that the Judge was not entitled to find that,
    on the appellant's evidence, his uncle's house in the same  village  as
    his father's house  had  not  been  searched.  Counsel  clarified  that
    because the appellant's evidence was that when he spoke  to  his  uncle
    (when he was in the mountains and his uncle told him that the  security
    forces had been to his father's house, had searched it and arrested his
    father, brought him food and arranged his  escape  over  the  next  two
    days, as well as after his arrival in the United  Kingdom),  his  uncle
    did not mention that his house had been raided or searched, it did  not
    mean that his house had not been searched, it might simply be that  his
    Uncle had not told him of any search. The  ground  exemplifies  a  nit-
    picking forensic approach to the Judge's assessment of credibility. The
    burden is on the appellant not on the Judge. The job of the  Judge  was
    to assess credibility in the round, and to provide sufficient reason to
    the appellant to explain why his account was not believed. The decision
    must be read in the round.

13. The fourth ground is that the Judge should have put  to  the  appellant
    that he thought it required explanation  that  the  appellant,  finding
    himself abandoned in the vehicle by his captors  whom  he  thought  had
    detained him in order to prevent him from revealing their  presence  to
    the authorities and whom he feared might  track  him  to  his  village,
    would not have taken the opportunity of taking his documents  in  order
    to prevent them from doing so. The grounds say that, had the  appellant
    had the opportunity to respond, he could  have  detailed  his  distance
    from the firefight and his mental and emotional state  or  his  thought
    process. Ms Gunn accepted before us that the criticism  in  respect  of
    this documentation point was not material on its own so as to make  the
    decision unsustainable. We deal with it because it is a further example
    of how, in the detail of the grounds, the reasoning of  the  Judge  has
    been mischaracterised.  Contrary to the grounds, the appellant did give
    evidence as to how far away from the firefight he was, which  was  that
    he did not know but the nearby mountainside was lit up.  He  also  said
    that he was scared and panicked, and his only thought was to  get  away
    because he thought his life was in danger. The Judge referred  to  that
    evidence, including at paragraphs 5 and 7 of  his  decision.  There  is
    simply no merit to  the  criticism  that  the  point  was  new  to  the
    appellant and should have been put by the  Judge.  Whilst  a  different
    Judge might have come to a different credibility conclusion here it  is
    not for us to redecide credibility absent an error of law.

14. In this case the Judge found that the appellant's account did  not  sit
    well with the country information and there were several matters  which
    the Judge found impacted negatively on credibility.

15. The Judge took into account all of the evidence and the arguments  made
    for the appellant and reached conclusions which were fairly open on the
    evidence. No perversity has been established.

Decision

16. We find the decision is not flawed by a material error of law  and  the
    decision dismissing the appeal stands.




Signed                              Date 13 November 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge




