
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04035/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision and Reasons  promulgated |
|on 27 March 2018                         |On 28 March 2018                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     LV
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk instructed by Broudie Jackson Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Caswell, promulgated on 8 June 2017,  in  which
         the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on protection and  human
         rights grounds.

      2. The appellant's case was based upon not only the oral evidence  but
         a  considerable  amount  of  documentary  evidence.    Mr   Schwenk
         submitted that the case may appear convoluted but  the  documentary
         evidence did assist with an understanding of the case and supported
         the appellant's assertions, warranting a finding in her favour.

      3. The Tribunal was referred to the finding at [26] in which the Judge
         writes:

             "26.     I have considered  all  the  verbal  and  documentary
                  evidence together  in  this  appeal.  I  accept  that  the
                  Appellant may have told her former husband she was  having
                  problems in Ukraine, and I find she may well have had some
                  problems, but I cannot accept that she  had  the  problems
                  she has related, since the central core  of  her  account,
                  namely the reason for why she will be attacked by the gang
                  and threatened, does not make sense. I therefore find also
                  that the documents she has put forward in support  of  her
                  case are not genuine or reliable. Even if the account were
                  credible, (which I do not find) I do not accept  that  the
                  Appellant could not reasonably and safely relocate  within
                  Ukraine to avoid any problems from a gang based in Odessa.
                  Her account is that her sister in Kiev also had  problems,
                  but there are other more remote areas of Ukraine where the
                  Appellant has not tried  to  move  to,  even  on  her  own
                  account."

      4. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on a renewed
         application in the following terms:

             "3.  The grounds of appeal content, in summary,  that  firstly
                  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed   in   the   credibility
                  assessment of the appellant as it failed to  consider  the
                  documentary evidence in the round before  concluding  that
                  the  appellants  claim  of  threats  by  a  gang  was  not
                  credible, see paragraph 26 of the decision; and because it
                  found that the appellant could relocate to a  remote  area
                  of Ukraine, see also paragraph 26  of  the  decision,  but
                  this finding is not lawful as she should not be forced  to
                  live an abnormal life with her two children  in  a  remote
                  area;  and  because  there  was  no  appreciation  of  the
                  supporting country of  origin  materials  brought  to  the
                  attention of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  decision.
                  Secondly it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal  failed
                  to properly apply paragraph 352D  refugee  family  reunion
                  for the children to the appellant's son as he did,  it  is
                  argued, form part of his father's  family  unit  when  his
                  father left his country of  habitual  residence  to  claim
                  asylum. Thirdly it is argued that the conclusion that  the
                  appellants children's father could go and live in Ukraine,
                  where he had been previously a student, was one which  had
                  no factual basis.

             4.   The grounds are  all  arguable:  those  relating  to  the
                  asylum claim may not  be  ultimately  material  given  the
                  findings at paragraphs 24 and 25 of the  decision  of  the
                  First-tier Tribunal but permission is given for all to  be
                  argued."

      5. The Court of Appeal have made it clear that an error  of  law  will
         only arise in relation to a challenge to  the  manner  in  which  a
         judge is considered documentary or other evidence if  it  is  shown
         there has been an artificial separation between the  evidence  from
         different sources i.e. oral and documentary.  The  obligation  upon
         the Judge was to consider the evidence as  a  whole,  i.e.  in  the
         round, before arriving at her findings. Mr Schwenk  submitted  that
         the  wording  in  [26]  clearly  indicates  that  such   artificial
         separation has occurred in this case. Mr Schwenk  relies  upon  the
         use of the words "I therefore find  also....".  That  wording  does
         suggest that the Judge arrived at her conclusions  in  relation  to
         credibility, which was that the claim was not credible,  and  as  a
         result found that the documents were not genuine or reliable. It is
         argued this wording does not show that the Judge took the  contents
         of the documents into account and assessed the weight that could be
         given to the same before arriving at the credibility conclusions.

      6. Mr Harrison, when his  view  upon  these  submissions  was  sought,
         conceded that a reading of the decision did arguably make out  that
         artificial separation had occurred.

      7. On the basis of this concession and  the  submissions  made  by  Mr
         Schwenk I find the appellant has made out her case that  there  has
         been such artificial separation amounting to a failure by the Judge
         to properly consider the evidence in the round as  required  in  an
         appeal  of  this  nature.  Accordingly,  the  adverse   credibility
         findings cannot be said to be safe and are therefore set aside.

      8. The grounds relating to the reasonableness of  internal  relocation
         also appears to be infected by arguable error for the  reasons  set
         out in the grounds seeking permission to appeal and  the  grant  of
         permission, in relation to which arguable material legal  error  is
         also found.

      9. As the evidence has not been considered adequately and errors  have
         been made  in  relation  to  internal  relocation;  I  find  it  is
         appropriate for all findings of the Judge  to  be  set  aside  with
         there being  no  preserved  findings.  As  the  appellant  has  not
         received the hearing to which she is properly entitled I find it is
         appropriate, and in accordance with the practice direction relating
         to remittals of appeals, for this matter be to be remitted  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal sitting at the hearing  centre  appropriate  to
         the appellant's place of residence in Bolton to be heard afresh  by
         a judge other than Judge  Caswell.  There  shall  be  no  preserved
         findings.

Decision

     10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
         the decision of the original Judge. I remit the appeal to the First-
         tier Tribunal sitting at either Manchester or  Bradford  (according
         to the operational requirements  of  that  Tribunal)  to  be  heard
         afresh by a judge other than Judge Caswell.

   Anonymity.

     11. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

         I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 27 March 2018

