
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/04770/2016



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 April 2018                     |          On 18 April 2018            |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL

                                   Between

                              Mr FAWAD ALKOZAI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, Counsel
      (instructed by Rahman & Company, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with permission granted by Upper Tribunal
         Judge Plimmer on 12 February 2018 against the decision and  reasons
         of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  who  had  dismissed  the
         Appellant's protection, humanitarian protection  and  human  rights
         appeal.  The decision and reasons was promulgated on 3 August 2017.



    2.     The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, who  gave  10  March
         1992 as his date of birth. He claimed asylum on 16  November  2015,
         which was refused on 22 April 2016.  The  Appellant  has  an  older
         brother resident in the United Kingdom who  has  become  a  British
         Citizen.  The Appellant claimed to have a British Citizen  partner.
         He said that  he  feared  return  to  Afghanistan  because  of  the
         Taliban.

    3.     Judge Lawrence found that the claim advanced  by  the  Appellant
         deserved no weight, and that his documents were  false.   He  found
         that the Appellant's brother's  evidence  was  untrue.   The  judge
         found that the marriage relied on was one of convenience. The judge
         thus dismissed the appeal.

    4.     Permission to appeal was refused in the First-tier Tribunal  but
         permission to appeal was granted on the renewed application.  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Plimmer considered that the allegation of bias  made
         against the judge  was  not  sustained  by  reference  to  specific
         examples, but that the submission that the judge  had  not  engaged
         sufficiently with the expert evidence produced  on  behalf  of  the
         Appellant, had engaged in  speculation  and  had  given  inadequate
         reasons for dismissing the appeal were all arguable.

    Submissions

    5.     Mr Briddock renewed his permission to appeal application  as  to
         the refused ground of perceived judicial bias at the start  of  the
         hearing.  Given that the previous refusal  had  been  for  want  of
         specific examples, the tribunal permitted further oral argument  on
         the point.  Mr Briddock  identified  examples  within  the  judge's
         decision as consisting of repeated use of strong  and  condemnatory
         language, with repeated criticism of the conduct of the  appeal  by
         the Appellant's solicitors.  An independent observer would perceive
         a closed mind and outright hostility to the  Appellant.   This  was
         before the other problems of the general paucity of  reasoning  and
         the treatment of the expert evidence were reached.

    6.     Mr Tarlow for the Respondent  indicated  in  response  that  the
         Secretary of State was not in a position to defend the decision and
         reasons.  There was an impression of bias, for the reasons advanced
         by Mr Briddock. There was no  alternative  to  the  appeal's  being
         reheard in the First-tier Tribunal before another judge.

    Discussion - error of law

    7.     To a significant extent the decision as to whether  there  is  a
         material error of law is taken out of the  Upper  Tribunal's  hands
         when an onwards appeal is conceded  by  either  party.   When  that
         concession is made by the Secretary of State, it is  of  particular
         significance, given that the  tribunal's  jurisdiction  is  one  of
         public law and that the Secretary of State retains inherent, extra-
         statutory powers.

    8.     The tribunal must agree with  Mr  Briddock's  submissions.   The
         renewed ground of the impression of bias has been made  good.  This
         sadly is an appeal  which  has  caused  a  hard  working  and  very
         experienced  judge  inadvertently  to  create  an   impression   of
         hostility which means that the Appellant's complaint  that  he  has
         not had a fair hearing succeeds.  It was  not  an  easy  situation.
         The Appellant's solicitors, in  the  judge's  perfectly  reasonable
         view, had not complied  with  directions,  had  provided  documents
         piecemeal and in duplication: see, e.g., [8], [9] and [10]  of  the
         decision and reasons.  Considerable and  justified  irritation  had
         been  caused  and  the  overriding  objective  had  been   ignored.
         Experienced solicitors must expect sanctions  if  such  conduct  is
         repeated and that is drawn to their attention.  But such  unhelpful
         and sub-standard behaviour was hardly  the  responsibility  of  the
         Appellant and can never be allowed to colour a  judge's  evaluation
         of the appeal.  For a judge to state in terms that an appeal should
         have been  certified  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department under section 94 of the Nationality and Asylum Act  2002
         is a private opinion the judge may have formed,  but  that  opinion
         expressed so strongly in the decision almost inevitably  serves  to
         reinforce the  impression  of  hostility  already  created  by  the
         remarks about the Appellant's solicitors.

    9.     Given the finding of prejudice conceded by the Respondent, it is
         not necessary for  the  tribunal  to  consider  the  other  grounds
         onwards appeal in any depth.  It should however be  said  that  the
         judge expressed himself without sufficient regard to the convention
         of judicial restraint, and often in polarised,  unqualified  terms,
         which tends to detract from conveying impartiality and balance.  No
         doubt all of this was inadvertent.

    10.    The tribunal records these matters so that the  next  judge  can
         avoid repeating such errors.  Material errors of  law  having  been
         conceded by the Respondent, the onwards appeal is allowed  to  that
         extent.  The appeal must be  reheard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         before another judge.




    DECISION

    The onwards appeal is allowed

    The decision and reasons is set aside because of material error of law

    The appeal will be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton  Cross,
    not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence on  the  first  available
    date




    Signed                             Dated 17 April 2018


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
