
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/04921/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34               |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21st July 2020                    |On 5th August 2020                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     PAS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Duncan Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Home Office Presenting Officers Unit


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies  amongst  others  to  all  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Introduction

      1. In this decision I determine whether the decision of the First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') sent on 14 January 2020, discloses an error of law
         such that it should be set aside.  I have made this 'on the papers'
         but with the assistance of written submissions from the parties.

Rule 34

      2. On 26 April 2020 the Upper Tribunal ('UT') issued directions to the
         parties setting out the provisional view that in this case it would
         be appropriate  to  determine  whether  the  making  of  the  FTT's
         decision involved the making of an error of law, and if so, whether
         that decision should be set aside, on the papers.  UTJ  Bruce  gave
         directions giving both  parties  an  opportunity  to  make  written
         submissions.  The directions also provided an opportunity for  both
         parties to indicate within 21 days of the  notice  being  sent,  if
         they opposed the matter proceedings without a hearing.

      3. The appellant continued to rely upon the grounds of appeal as  well
         as extracts from Counsel's attendance note of the FTT hearing.  The
         respondent  provided  written  submissions  dated  10  June   2020.
         Neither party objected to the matter proceeding without a  hearing.
         I am satisfied  that  it  is  in  accordance  with  the  overriding
         objective and the interests of justice for there  to  be  a  timely
         determination of the question whether there is an error of  law  in
         the decision of the FTT, and that it is entirely appropriate in the
         circumstances of this case for the error  of  law  decision  to  be
         determined on the papers, to secure the  proper  administration  of
         justice.  For the avoidance of doubt, in  reaching  my  decision  I
         have taken into account the matters  set  out  in  the  appellant's
         grounds of appeal and  the  written  representations  made  by  the
         parties in response to the directions.

Background

      4. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who claims that he  has  a  well
         founded fear of persecution in Iraq for  reasons  relating  to  his
         political opinion.  He asserted that: he worked  as  a  driver  and
         journalist for a Kurdistan TV channel, GM TV;  he  posted  articles
         against the government on his Facebook  account  in  October  2017,
         which was hacked; he was told that the PUK security  services  were
         looking for him as a result of this; his home  was  raided  by  the
         security services on 24 July 2018.  In support of his asylum appeal
         before the FTT, the appellant relied upon  considerable  supporting
         evidence including: copies of his press passes; photographs of  him
         working for GM TV; screenshots of Facebook pages;   a  letter  from
         his neighbour together with CCTV  footage,  photographs  and  other
         evidence relevant to the appellant's car and address; a letter from
         his brother  dated  7  September  2019;  a  country  expert  report
         prepared by  Sheri  Laizer  dated  18  November  2019;  a  clinical
         psychologist's report dated 12 November 2019 prepared by Dr Thomas.



      5. The FTT rejected the core of the appellant's account and  concluded
         that the evidence relied upon by the appellant in  support  of  his
         asylum claim was not credible.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

      6. The appellant advanced eight wide-ranging and  lengthy  grounds  of
         appeal, and permission to appeal was granted by FTT  Judge  Bulpitt
         on 10 February 2020.  Judge Bulpitt considered it arguable that the
         FTT erred in law when addressing the CCTV evidence and the  country
         expert  report.   Although  the  remaining  grounds  appeared  less
         arguable to Judge Bulpitt permission to appeal was granted  on  all
         grounds.

Discussion

Ground 1

      7. Ground 1 submits that the FTT made two errors of fact which  caused
         the appellant unfairness.  First, the FTT declined to view the CCTV
         video footage said to  show  the  PUK  security  forces  (known  as
         Asayish) actually entering the appellant's home on  19  July  2008.
         The FTT opted to only consider screenshots  taken  from  the  video
         footage which  did  not  show  the  men  actually  going  into  the
         appellant's property.  The respondent's written submissions  simply
         assert that "irrespective" of  the  video  footage,  the  appellant
         could not demonstrate on the evidence that the  residence  was  his
         home.  This is difficult to follow.  It would have  been  far  more
         helpful if the respondent had adopted a clear position on what  the
         footage does show.  I do not need to resolve this issue because  in
         my judgment the second error identified in ground 1 is  significant
         and clearly made out.  This relates to the FTT's  finding  at  [33]
         that there was "nothing" from the appellant's own family in Iraq to
         support his claim and the finding at [39] in these terms:

             "The  other  particular  point  of  note  in   assessing   the
             appellant's claim is that his family are still living  in  the
             same location in Iraq and have not experienced any threats  as
             a result of  the  appellant's  actions.   Further  no  threats
             appear to  have  been  made  against  the  appellant  via  his
             family..."

      8. The FTT's factual findings predicated upon a perceived  absence  of
         evidence from any family members in Iraq entirely fail  to  address
         relevant evidence within the bundle of evidence before the  FTT:  a
         letter from the appellant's brother in Iraq dated 7 September  2019
         with a certified translation.  This letter  provides  corroboration
         of the appellant's claim in important respects:

          i) The brother describes Asayish attacking the family home on  24
             July 2018, during which  time  they  stated  that  there  were
             looking for the appellant and took his belongings including  a
             laptop.

         ii) The brother explains that on this occasion he  was  threatened
             that if he did not disclose the  appellant's  whereabouts,  he
             would "face consequences as well".

        iii) The brother also describes that on many occasions Asayish have
             attended his shop to ask about the appellant's whereabouts and
             he was threatened on each occasion that  any  news  should  be
             communicated straight away.

      9. The respondent's written submissions do not address the failure  to
         take the brother's letter into  account.   Reference  was  made  to
         documents from the appellant's parents but the submissions  do  not
         address the letter from the appellant's brother, together with  his
         identification (to be found  at  pages  46-71  of  the  appellant's
         bundle before the FTT), in any meaningful manner.

     10. I am satisfied that the FTT failed to take  into  account  relevant
         evidence material to the credibility of  the  appellant's  account.
         This undermines the credibility findings and renders  them  unsafe.
         This error of law is sufficient alone to set  aside  the  decision,
         with no findings preserved.

Country expert evidence

     11. I am also satisfied that  the  FTT  failed  to  take  into  account
         relevant evidence contained in  the  country  expert  report,  when
         considering the plausibility of the appellant's  account.  At  [33]
         the  FTT  appears  to  have  drawn  adverse  inferences  from   the
         appellant's claim that Asayish attended  the  appellant's  property
         without official documentation such as an arrest or search  warrant
         or court summons.  Although the FTT considered the  country  expert
         report in other respects, the FTT failed to  consider  the  country
         background evidence to the effect that  Asayish  conducts  security
         sweeps without warrants.

     12. In addition, the FTT's acknowledgment that Dr Laizer considered  it
         plausible in the context of Iraq for  an  employee  to  act  up  in
         another role at [35] is inconsistent with the finding at [36]  that
         this was not plausible in the appellant's case.  The FTT also found
         that the photographs of the appellant might be explained by being a
         driver but failed to reconcile this with  the  screenshots  of  the
         appellant acting as a journalist by  actually  interviewing  people
         and holding a microphone whilst doing so.

     13. I have carefully considered the  respondent's  written  submissions
         regarding plausibility and the country expert evidence,  but  these
         do not clearly address the matters I have identified above.



Vulnerable witness

     14. Ground 6 relies upon a very detailed 57-page report from Dr Thomas.
          This describes the appellant as a traumatised and  psychologically
         distressed man who presented in a manner entirely  consistent  with
         an individual suffering  from  moderate-severe  symptoms  of  Major
         Depressive Disorder.  Dr Thomas considered that the appellant would
         find providing oral evidence challenging and safeguards  should  be
         put in place.  When making its findings of fact in relation to  his
         asylum claim, the FTT has not engaged in any meaningful manner with
         the detailed evidence in this report.  The report  is  referred  to
         later on in the decision at [42] when  dealing  with  suicide  risk
         under Article 3, but there has been a failure to  engage  with  the
         findings in the  report  when  making  findings  of  fact  for  the
         purposes  of  the  asylum  claim.   This  breaches   the   relevant
         vulnerability guidance and constitutes an error of  law  -  see  AM
         (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123.   As  the  respondent
         notes, it is not altogether clear how  the  failure  to  apply  the
         vulnerability guidance materially impacted the outcome.  I  do  not
         need to consider this in any more detail  because  I  have  already
         found that irrespective of any other ground of appeal, the  failure
         to address the brother's letter  on  the  part  of  the  FTT  is  a
         material error of law, requiring the decision to be set aside.

     15. I reject the submission in  the  respondent's  written  submissions
         that the grounds of appeal I have focussed upon above  do  no  more
         than disagree with the FTT's conclusions.  For the  reasons  I  set
         out above, the FTT 's decision  contains  errors  of  law  and  its
         decision is set aside.

Disposal

     16. The assessment of a claim for asylum  which  turns  on  credibility
         such as this, is always a highly fact sensitive task,  and  in  all
         the circumstances, I have decided that it is appropriate  to  remit
         this appeal to the FTT  for  a  fresh  hearing,  having  considered
         paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement of  25th
         September 2012.  The nature and extent of any judicial fact-finding
         necessary will be extensive.

     17. When the decision is re-made by  the  FTT  and  when  applying  the
         relevant vulnerability guidance, care must be taken to address  the
         appellant's psychological condition  as  outlined  in  Dr  Thomas's
         report.

Notice of Decision

     18. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of the FTT is set aside, and I
         remit the matter for a re-hearing de novo by a judge other than FTT
         Judge Kemp, with no findings preserved.

Melanie Plimmer
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     22 July 2020
