

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: PA/04311/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: City Tower, Birmingham      |Decision&Reason Promulgated          |
|On: 12th May 2017                     |On: 2nd June 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                  Master J
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms E. Rutherford of Counsel instructed by Coventry
                       Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born in  2001.   He  appeals
    with permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Hussain) dated 7th November 2016 to dismiss his  appeal  on  protection
    grounds.








    Anonymity Order


 2. This case involves a claim  for  international  protection  made  by  a
    minor. Having had regard to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of  2013:
    Anonymity Orders I therefore consider it appropriate to make  an  order
    in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"






    Background and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on the 22nd July  2015.  It
    has never been in issue that the Appellant was  14  years  old  at  the
    time.


 4. He claimed asylum and advanced a fear of persecution  by  the  Taliban.
    The Appellant said that he is from Hesarak,  a  district  of  Nangarhar
    Province with a high incidence of Taliban activity. Two of his paternal
    uncles were killed. It was believed that  they  were  executed  by  the
    Taliban, possibly because they had some  association  with  the  Afghan
    National Army.  This resulted in an enmity between the Taliban and  the
    Appellant's family. They came to  the  family  home  on  at  least  two
    occasions and beat and  threatened  the  Appellant's  father.   Taliban
    would often come to the village  and  threaten  and  cajole  boys  into
    joining their ranks. There are hardly any boys left in the village now.
    The Appellant's family were afraid for his safety and so  arranged  for
    him to come to the United Kingdom.

 5. The Respondent did not accept that the account was true, but in view of
    the Appellant's young age was prepared to grant him Discretionary Leave
    until he reached the age of  17  and  a  half  years.   Protection  was
    refused.

 6. The Appellant  appealed  the  protection  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It accepted that the  area  that  he  comes  from  is  under
    Taliban control. The Tribunal did not  expressly  reject  the  evidence
    that the Appellant's uncles were killed, but rejects as speculative his
    assertion that they were killed by  the  Taliban.  The  Tribunal  finds
    there to be no risk to the Appellant from the Taliban today.  There  is
    no objective evidence that the Taliban forcibly recruit men into  their
    ranks. The Appellant expresses a fear that he will be killed by them in
    case he  seeks  revenge  for  his  uncles'  deaths,  but  this  is  not
    consistent with the fact that a) they did not kill him when he lived in
    the village, b) they have not killed his younger brothers and  c)  they
    have not killed his father.   Finding  there  to  be  no  risk  in  the
    Appellant's home area, the appeal is dismissed.



    The Appeal

 7. The Appellant now has permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law in the following material respects:


              i) Failing to make a finding key issues, namely whether  there
                 would be adequate reception facilities  available  for  the
                 Appellant in Afghanistan, whether he would be  at  risk  on
                 return as  a  member  of  a  particular  social  group  (an
                 unaccompanied child) or whether he  could  be  returned  to
                 Kabul.


             ii) Failing to take all of the relevant evidence into  account,
                 in particular:


                      a) the reasons advanced by the Appellant as to why he
                         and his  family  believed  it  to  have  been  the
                         Taliban who killed his uncles;


                      b) the country background material demonstrating that
                         there have been instances of forced recruitment in
                         the Appellant's home area of Hisarak;

                      c)  the  reasons   given   by   the   Appellant   for
                         inconsistencies in  his  evidence,  including  the
                         fact that he was very young at  the  date  of  the
                         events being narrated




            iii) Making perverse findings, in particular the Tribunal  finds
                 there to be no risk to the Appellant today  inter  alia  on
                 the basis that they did not try and kill him when he was  a
                 child. This was contrary to the country background evidence
                 that the Taliban  do  not  deliberately  target  women  and
                 children.




    The Reply


 8. The Respondent accepts that the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law in
    that it failed to consider whether there would be a risk on  return  to
    the Appellant as an unaccompanied asylum seeking child;  there  are  no
    findings on that point in respect of Nangarhar nor  indeed  Kabul,  the
    only place where  the  Secretary  of  State  believes  there  to  be  a
    sufficiency of state protection.  Mr Mills accepts that  there  are  no
    findings in the determination about whether or not the Appellant is  in
    contact with his family, nor about whether he could safely be  returned
    to any part of Afghanistan. It  was  Mr  Mills'  submissions  that  the
    matter of family tracing would stand and fall with the findings on  the
    Appellant's credibility: if I upheld the  negative  assessment  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, it could be assumed that he  remained  in  contact
    with his parents and would be received upon his return  to  either  the
    home area or Kabul.




    My Findings


 9. The central reason that the First-tier Tribunal gives for rejecting the
    claim that the Appellant's uncles were killed by the  Taliban  is  that
    the accusation is speculative.  The Tribunal finds [at 11] that  "there
    is no direct evidence" that the men are dead, or that if they are, that
    they were killed by the Taliban.


10. The Appellant's evidence about his two paternal uncles was as  follows.
    They were not in the army but used to help the ANA whenever  they  came
    to the village. They would sit with the soldiers. "Bad people"  in  the
    village did not like this and would give information about them to  the
    Taliban. There are a lot of Taliban in the area, and they  control  the
    roads. They would come into the village and knock  on  doors  demanding
    that the people feed them. A lot of people followed them  because  they
    were afraid. They had killed people in the village  and  the  Appellant
    believes that this is why his uncles did not like  them.  The  ANA  has
    tried to drive them out but has not been successful.   In  the  witness
    statement prepared for his  asylum  claim  and  submitted  at  the  SEF
    interview on the 3rd September 2005 the Appellant said this:


         "I don't know exactly how my uncles were  killed  but  people  said
         that they were killed during the night. On the day that  they  were
         killed my  uncles  had  gone  to  the  field  for  farming  in  the
         afternoon. In the evening they didn't return and then late at night
         villagers came to the house. Everyone was talking in the house  and
         I heard them saying that my uncles had been killed by the  Taliban.
         My father was very sad but he didn't cry. Later on other  villagers
         brought the dead bodies home. Everyone was crying and  I  cried  as
         well. People were saying that my uncles were  shot.  The  following
         day we buried them together in the cemetery".


11. In his substantive asylum interview the Appellant was asked how he knew
    that his uncles had  been  killed  by  the  Taliban.  He  repeated  the
    evidence he had given in his witness statement and said that  this  was
    what people had told him. He had not seen them shot himself.  Everybody
    knew it must be them since they had no other enemies [at Q63].  In  his
    appeal statement the Appellant acknowledges that he has no direct proof
    of their responsibility, but states that he "knows in his  heart"  that
    they killed his uncles.


12. Ms Rutherford's short submission on this evidence was  that  in  making
    its findings  the  Tribunal  focused  exclusively  on  the  Appellant's
    admission that he no direct proof linking the Taliban  to  the  deaths.
    The determination fails to address the reasons that the  Appellant  did
    have for believing them guilty, namely the  strong  inference  that  he
    (and apparently the rest of his village) drew from  the  circumstances:
    his uncles were opposed to the Taliban, associated with members of  the
    army, and were shot dead in a field in an area  with  a  heavy  Taliban
    presence.   The standard of proof is a low  one,  and  in  looking  for
    "direct  evidence"  it  would  appear  that  the  Tribunal  applied  an
    impermissibly high  standard of  proof.    I  am  satisfied  that  this
    ground is made out.

13. In assessing the materiality of the error I bear in mind that this  was
    not the only reason given for rejecting this  particular  part  of  the
    claim.


14. A second reason given was that the Appellant had failed to mention  his
    uncles in his 'screening interview'. That pro-forma, completed  on  the
    3rd September 2015, is extremely brief. The  Appellant  says  that  the
    Taliban were active in his village and that they  even  killed  people.
    The First-tier Tribunal considered it "surprising" that  the  Appellant
    did not specify that the people he was talking about were  his  uncles.
    Although this point was not taken by Ms Rutherford, I  note  -  in  the
    context of materiality of the foregoing error - that this is  precisely
    the approach deprecated in  YL ( Rely  on  SEF  )  China  [2004]  UKIAT
    00145. In his appeal statement  the  Appellant  confirms  that  he  was
    instructed to only give basic details about why he was afraid to return
    to Afghanistan. He reports "not feeling good emotionally" and  that  he
    found the interview to be a very difficult experience.   None  of  that
    appears to have been weighed in the balance.

15. The determination goes on to find no  risk  arising  from  the  Taliban
    based on the fact that the Taliban had not yet  killed  the  Appellant,
    nor his brothers, nor the Appellant's father. I am satisfied that  this
    reasoning was apparently employed without any  consideration  given  to
    whether the Taliban were reasonably likely to  consider  themselves  at
    risk of revenge attack  by  young  children.  As  for  the  Appellant's
    father, the evidence was that he had been intimidated and beaten by the
    Taliban.

16. Overall I am satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  in
    respect of the credibility findings are made out.    Mr Mills  accepted
    that if this was my conclusion the  proper  course  would  be  for  the
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  re-hearing.    I
    need not deal with the remaining grounds. The Respondent  accepts  that
    the First-tier Tribunal omitted to make the key findings  on  important
    matters as alleged in the grounds and in view  of  the  extensive  fact
    finding required I agree that remittal would be the appropriate course.




    Decisions


17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  errors  of  law  such
    that the decision must be set aside.


18. The decision in the appeal is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.


19. There is a direction for anonymity.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               31st May 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 1st December 2016 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Gillepsie


