
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04026/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 8 November 2016                   |on 10 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 EBRIMA [N]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr H V McCusker, of McAuley McCarthy & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge P A Grant-Hutchison, promulgated on 22  August  2016,  dismissing
    his appeal against refusal of asylum as a gay man from the Gambia.

 2. Mr McCusker submitted further to the  grounds  as  follows.   The  only
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's credibility were at paragraph 14.
     Five reasons could be identified, none of which stood up to  scrutiny.
    The first was that the appellant at interview  did  not  "develop"  his
    sister's or his family's reaction to finding out he was homosexual, but
    he had given full answers at Q/A  68  -  71  and  had  not  been  asked
    anything further.  The judge said it was "highly unusual" that  he  was
    released after his first detention, when he did not confess, and  after
    his second, when he did.  The judge did  not  explain,  and  there  was
    nothing in the appellant's or in the background evidence  to  show  why
    release would be "unusual".  The judge said  it  was  unclear  why  the
    appellant  would  find  it  necessary  to  remind  his  sister  he  was
    homosexual before  his  marriage,  but  his  reluctance  to  marry  was
    precisely the reason for discussion.  The judge  did  not  say  why  he
    thought the appellant's answers at Q/A 66 and  71  were  contradictory,
    and  on  examination  there  was  no  significant  inconsistency;   the
    appellant was describing different circumstances at  different  periods
    of his life.  The judge founded on failure to claim asylum in countries
    through which the appellant travelled, but he was acting on advice, and
    the fact that he speaks English explained his preference.  The  reasons
    did not support the conclusion reached.  Separately, the appellant  had
    given evidence that he had a scar on his neck as the result of torture,
    and that he was trying to obtain a medical report, but  the  judge  did
    not address that point.  The medical report arrived  before  permission
    was granted.  The judge had failed to deal  with  the  outcome  in  the
    alternative that the appellant was gay, although the refusal letter had
    done so. The errors required a fresh hearing.

 3. Mr Matthews, very fairly, observed that there might have been an  error
    regarding a medical report, although not raised as such by the grounds.
     The report was known to have been sought prior to the hearing  in  the
    FtT.  It was obtained and sent to the FtT after the  hearing  but  well
    before the decision was issued.  The judge might have explained why  he
    declined to take it into account, or might have  given  the  respondent
    the opportunity to make submissions in  response,  but  it  should  not
    simply have been  ignored.   It  might  not  have  been  drawn  to  the
    attention of the judge, but in that case there had been  a  failure  of
    procedure which might amount to  error  of  law.   The  appellant  gave
    evidence of the existence of the scar and how he came by it.  The judge
    did not deal with that evidence.  There was now  corroboration  of  the
    scar and its nature ("difficult to imagine what type  of  injury  other
    than a knife would produce the  linear  cut  to  the  neck").   Without
    conceding all points made for the appellant, the  criticisms  did  show
    some inadequacy  of  reasoning.   Taking  matters  in  the  round,  the
    decision could not safely stand.

 4. I noticed after the hearing that there  is  an  envelope  on  the  file
    marked  "F  A  O  Judge  Grant-Hutchison"  and  below   that   "already
    promulgated".  It seems likely that  there  was  a  procedural  mishap,
    capable of constructively amounting to error of law.

 5. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  errs  in  law,  as  explained
    above, and as conceded.  It is set aside. None of its findings  are  to
    stand. The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate  in  terms
    of section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2 to
    remit the case to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

 6. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case or not to  include
    Judge P A Grant-Hutchison.

 7. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


         [pic]


         9 November 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
