
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04161/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2019                           |On 04 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AKH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Simo, Simo Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, AKH, was born in 1990 and is a female citizen  of  Iraq.
    She entered the United  Kingdom  in  2017  and  claimed  asylum.  By  a
    decision dated 15 March 2018, respondent refused  the  application  for
    protection. The  appellant  appealed  the  first-tier  tribunal  (Judge
    Arullendran) which, in a decision promulgated on 9 May 2018,  dismissed
    the appeal. The appellant now appeals, with permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claims that, if she returns to Iraq, she faces  the  real
    risk of being a victim of honour crime. That claim was rejected by  the
    judge.  Granting  permission,  Judge  Chalkley  made  it   clear   that
    permission was only granted in respect of the challenge to the  judge's
    findings on Article 8 ECHR. Although at the heading of  the  permission
    grant, the judge states that 'permission to appeal is granted'  at  the
    foot of the document he makes it clear that permission is only  granted
    in respect of the first challenge (there is a typical graphical  error;
    it is clear that the  judge  in  referring  to  the  'fifth'  challenge
    intended to return refer to the 'first' challenge).  Having  regard  to
    the principles set out in the decision in Safi and  others  (permission
    to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC), I consider that  the  judge
    has granted permission only in respect of the challenge on  Article  8.
    The asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds shall not be revisited.

 3. I do not find that the appeal has merit. The grounds raise the analysis
    of the judge in respect of section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 but do no more than to assert  that  the  children
    have made  good  progress  in  school.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant is in a relationship with Mr M, who is the natural father  of
    the appellant's two children, although the  couple  of  never  married.
    However, as the judge observed at [75], there was no evidence  to  show
    that Mr M and any involvement with the welfare and  upbringing  of  the
    children prior to their arrival in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  judge's
    finding that Mr M may  return  to  Iraq  with  the  appellant  and  the
    children, should he wish to do so, is not subject to a grant permission
    to this tribunal. Further, it was open to the judge to  find  that  the
    children were integrated into the culture and society of Iraq  and  the
    fact that the youngest child is of pre-school age and the  eldest  only
    five years old entitled the judge to find that the  best  interests  of
    the children would be met by their returning  to  Iraq  with  the  sole
    carer, the appellant. The assertion in the  grounds  that  the  judge's
    assessment of best interests is flawed is wholly without merit.

 4. Mr Simo, for the appellant, submitted  that  that  there  had  been  no
    proper assessment by the judge of the immigration rules under which the
    appellant and the children might qualify  for  leave  to  remain.  That
    submission ignores the findings of the judge at [73].

 5. Granting permission, Judge Chalkley was concerned that that  there  was
    no assessment outside the immigration rules of family life. It is  true
    that the judge has proceeded from a consideration  of  the  immigration
    rules at [73] to analysis of the  children's  best  interests  and  the
    judgement that removal would be proportionate.  However,  having  found
    that the appellant and the children could not meet the requirements  of
    Appendix FM, the judge's conclusion that  the  appellant  and  children
    and, if he so wishes, Mr M may return  together  return  to  Iraq,  was
    inevitable.

 6. In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 28 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

