
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04618/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|Centre                                 |                                      |
|On 17 October 2019                     |On 13 November 2019                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   M H A R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Johnrose, Broudie, Jackson & Canter (Dale House)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran born on 23 March 1994.  He  arrived
    in the UK on 7 September 2018 and claimed asylum the  same  day.   This
    application was refused in a decision dated 10 May 2019.  The Appellant
    appealed against that decision and his appeal came before Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal A.J. Parker for hearing  on  9  July  2019.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 12 July 2019  the  judge  dismissed
    the appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis  primarily  that
    the judge had failed to give anxious scrutiny to the  Appellant's  case
    and had conflated  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  with  that  of  a
    different Appellant.  At [8] when referring  to  the  documents  before
    him, the judge referred to different documents  from  those  that  were
    before him so, for example, there was no screening or asylum interviews
    within the Respondent's bundle but rather these were in the Appellant's
    bundle and those documents  were  of  a  different  length  from  those
    referred to by the  judge.   The  judge  concluded  at  [33]  that  the
    Appellant was from Iraq not Iran  and  then  considered  the  issue  of
    internal relocation and whether the Appellant was able to obtain a CSID
    card.  The judge referred to a different representative  from  the  one
    that appeared before him, at [39] he made reference  to  other  aspects
    which were not related to the Appellant's claim, for  example,  a  fear
    arising from an arranged marriage of a sister and it was submitted that
    all of this served to seriously undermine the safety of the Appellant's
    claim.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    O'Brien in a decision dated 12 August 2019, on the  basis  that  it  is
    reasonably arguable that the judge  took  into  account  matters  which
    relate to another case, or at least are not founded on any evidence  in
    this Appellant's appeal.  All the grounds are arguable.

     Hearing

 4. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Bates  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent accepted that he was  unable  to  explain  where  the  judge
    obtained some of the references in the decision  and  reasons  and  the
    reference, for example, to different representatives, the wrong  number
    of pages  and  the  whereabouts  of  material  documents  such  as  the
    screening interview and the  asylum  interview.  Thus  he  accepted  it
    appeared that the information  upon  which  the  judge  determined  the
    Appellant's  appeal  had  indeed  been  contaminated  by  another   and
    different case.  In the interests of fairness it was difficult for  him
    to argue that the judge had given the appeal anxious scrutiny.

     Decision and reasons

5.   In light  of  Mr  Bates'  helpful  concession,  which  I  consider  was
properly made, I find  the judge did err materially in law in  that  somehow
it seems that documents and      information  from  another  case  had  been
erroneously placed in the file for this      particular  Appellant  and  had
been considered alongside or  indeed  instead  of  the     information  upon
which this Appellant's case was based.  The effect of that is  clearly   the
decision and reasons is unsafe.  I set the decision and  reasons  aside  and
remit the     appeal for a hearing de novo before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
not to be heard by Judge of     the First-tier Tribunal A.J. Parker.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.







Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 10 November 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman



