
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04535/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2019                   |On 6 March 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                   mr O B
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Warren of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Yemen.  He was born on 23 June 1989.   He
    appealed against the respondent's  decision  dated  13  March  2018  to
    refuse him asylum and humanitarian protection.

 2. Judge Lodge (the judge) dismissed the appeal in  a  decision  dated  27
    August 2018.

 3. There were six grounds:

         Ground 1.  The judge erred in his consideration of the  appellant's
         ability  to  apply  for  Saudi  citizenship.   The  law   was   not
         contentious and set out at [26] of the  refusal  letter  and  dealt
         with by the expert.  The judge had no  regard  to  the  appropriate
         evidence.

         Ground 2.  The judge failed to grasp the significance of the  issue
         of citizenship in considering the  appellant's  asylum  claim.   He
         said at [38] that citizenship was  not  the  central  issue.   This
         ground claims on the contrary that denial of citizenship was highly
         relevant to the question of persecution.  See MA (Ethiopia)  [2009]
         EWCA Civ 289 at [43].

         Ground 3.  The judge failed to  have  regard  to  the  evidence  of
         increased  persecution  within  Saudi  Arabia  which  infected  his
         assessment of the appellant's credibility  and  his  assessment  of
         risk.

         Ground 4.  The judge erred in treating risk to the  appellant  from
         having made an asylum claim and his  criticism  of  the  regime  as
         conjunctive.  See [47] of the decision.  The  expert  was  explicit
         that both issues exposed the appellant to risk independently.

         Ground 5.  The judge failed to deal  with  the  principle  of  non-
         refoulment and the risk to the appellant that he would  be  removed
         to Yemen by the Saudi authorities.

         Ground  6.   The  judge  had  regard  to  irrelevant   matters   in
         considering the risk to the  appellant  through  criticism  of  the
         Saudi regime.

 4. Judge Keane granted permission on 3 October 2018.  He said  inter  alia
    as follows:

         "All the grounds mentioned in the  application  are  arguable.   In
         particular, the judge arguably  took  into  account  an  irrelevant
         consideration in requiring corroboration in the form of documentary
         evidence of the appellant's account that he  had  applied  and  had
         been refused Saudi  citizenship.   The  judge  arguably  failed  to
         engage with the appellant's claim as to the  consequences  for  him
         having been refused Saudi citizenship.  The consequences for  which
         the appellant contended were significant and arguably  amounted  to
         persecution.  The judge did not engage with the  issue  and  merely
         stated at paragraph 38 of his decision, 'In any  event  citizenship
         is not the central issue.'  The respondent had  accepted  that  the
         appellant would be at risk  of  persecution  in  Yemen,  there  was
         expert evidence that if returned to Saudi Arabia the appellant  was
         at risk of deportation to the Yemen and in these circumstances  the
         judge's arguable error in his treatment of  the  citizenship  issue
         was all the more material ......"

Submissions on Error of Law

 5. Mr Clarke submitted that it was open to the judge (at [17]-[34] of  his
    decision) to reject the appellant's explanation given what he found  to
    be his general unreliability and the  implausibility  of  Saudi  Arabia
    doing business verbally and not issuing letters.

 6. Mr Clarke submitted that the appellant's grounds were misconceived with
    regard to the judge having failed to have regard to  Saudi  citizenship
    law in the Reasons for Refusal Letter (RFRL) or  the  expert's  opinion
    with regard to the same.  The Saudi law evidence contained in the  RFRL
    was from the Saudi Ministry of the Interior and it confirmed at  [8](d)
    that the appellant might be granted Saudi citizenship if "applying  for
    citizenship after one year of reaching the legal age" not as  suggested
    in the grounds at [4] "within one year of reaching the legal age."   As
    regards the expert,  at  [38]  of  his  report,  this  was  merely  his
    interpretation and understanding of the Saudi citizenship  system  from
    what he had been told by unnamed Saudis and "......what appears  to  be
    another English language translation of the Saudi citizenship  system."
    There was nothing to suggest that he could only apply  for  citizenship
    during the year after he turned 18.

 7. As regards Ground 2, the appellant claimed that the judge's finding  at
    [38] that "......in any event, citizenship is not  the  central  issue"
    was unsustainable because citizenship was  relevant  to  the  issue  of
    persecution. The appellant had relied upon  his  witness  statement  at
    [29] and the expert report at [54]-[58]  as  to  the  effect  of  being
    denied Saudi citizenship.  The ground further  argued  that  the  judge
    erroneously considered at [42] the situation as  though  the  appellant
    was a Saudi citizen whereas the respondent conceded the  appellant  was
    Yemeni such that it was  not  open  to  the  judge  to  go  behind  the
    respondent's concession.

 8. Mr Clarke acknowledged  that  denial  of  citizenship  was  capable  of
    amounting to persecution in certain circumstances but that was not  the
    case with regard to this particular appellant. At [54]-[58] the  expert
    was referring anecdotally to the deportation of foreigners with uncited
    assertions, text relying upon inaccessible  hyperlinks  such  that  the
    report was of little value.  In  any  event,  the  appellant's  witness
    statement at [29] identified four complaints flowing  from  a  lack  of
    citizenship, none  of  which  engaged  the  threshold  of  persecution.
    Equally, the grounds failed to identify which category of  the  Refugee
    Convention  the  appellant  allegedly  fell  into  by  being  denied  a
    citizenship he had never possessed.  In any event, the judge  found  at
    [37] that Saudi citizenship was obtainable.  The appellant's  complaint
    that  the  judge  went  behind  the  respondent's  concession   as   to
    nationality at [42] was misconceived.   At  [39]  the  judge  correctly
    directed with regard to Saudi nationality, "I will proceed on the basis
    that he does not have it."

 9. As regards Ground 3, the appellant took issue that the  judge  was  not
    impressed with any risk to him given the  coup  in  Saudi  Arabia.   Mr
    Clarke submitted that the judge recognised at [31] that the arrests  on
    the installation of the new regime were for  the  most  part,  of  high
    level dignitaries, including members of the Saudi Royal Family, as  did
    the appellant's expert at [90].  The expert claimed the appellant would
    be at risk because of his dissertation but the judge dealt with that at
    [20]-[33] concluding it was benign and in any event it was  not  passed
    on to the OIC and even if it was, there was no evidence they had passed
    it on to the Saudis.  The expert had not  even  seen  the  dissertation
    himself.

10. As regards Ground 4, the  appellant  argued  that  the  judge  at  [47]
    erroneously treated dual risks to the appellant  from  having  made  an
    asylum claim here and his  criticism  of  the  regime  as  conjunctive,
    contrary to the expert who confirmed both issues exposed the  appellant
    to  risk  independently.  Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  the  appellant's
    complaint was wholly without merit.  Whilst the judge had  referred  to
    the conjunctive "and" in the expert report at [79] he  dealt  with  the
    two risk issues independently.  At [48]  he  found  the  appellant  had
    never  been  critical  of  the  regime  and  at  [49]  that  the  Saudi
    authorities did not know  of  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  and  the
    appellant would not need to disclose his asylum claim in any event.

11. As regards Ground 5, the appellant argued  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider whether he would be at risk of being  removed  to  Yemen  from
    Saudi Arabia.  The  appellant  claimed  the  judge  made  only  passing
    reference to the issue at [50] without any reasoning.  He  relied  upon
    the expert report at [103] and the background evidence in his bundle as
    evidence of such a risk.  Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  the  ground  was
    misconceived as the judge found at [37] that the appellant could  apply
    for Saudi citizenship.  In  any  event,  as  set  out  in  Mr  Clarke's
    skeleton at [17] and [21] the evidence relied upon by the appellant was
    distinct from his factual matrix.

12. As regards Ground 6, the appellant had alleged  that  his  dissertation
    had come to the attention of the Saudi authorities and that  the  judge
    erroneously found his dissertation "mild" at [20] because of  erroneous
    comparison to a different report submitted to the Home  Office  by  the
    appellant.  The appellant complained that the  content  of  one  report
    said nothing of how the Saudi  authorities  would  consider  the  other
    report.  Equally, the expert report at  [70]  confirmed  "there  is  no
    freedom of expression in the Saudi Kingdom  and  no  criticism  of  the
    regime is tolerated.  Anyone who does can expect very serious trouble".
     The appellant further complained that the judge failed to have  regard
    to the fact that the dissertation was submitted at the  outset  of  the
    internship and only during the internship did he become aware of  Saudi
    influence at OIC. Mr Clarke submitted that the  complaint  was  without
    merit.  The judge did not use the appellant's report  as  sent  to  the
    Home Office, for finding that the dissertation was benign.   The  judge
    merely  found  the  report  instructive  as  an  example  of  sustained
    criticism of the Saudi authorities.  The judge gave adequate reasons at
    [20]-[23] based upon the merits of the dissertation alone.  Further, at
    [23]  the  judge  found  that  the  expert  had  never  even  seen  the
    appellant's dissertation a finding  that  was  not  challenged  by  the
    appellant.  In any event, the judge found at [33] that the dissertation
    was never given to the OIC.  He said at [29] that the appellant  merely
    speculated that the  OIC  passed  the  dissertation  on  to  the  Saudi
    authorities as was conceded in oral evidence.

13. As regards the complaint that the judge failed  to  consider  that  the
    appellant gave the OIC the  dissertation  before  realising  the  Saudi
    influence  at  OIC,  Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  the   complaint   was
    misconceived.  The judge found  that  the  OIC  gave  the  appellant  a
    glowing reference when he left the intern programme.  See [30].   There
    was no evidence the OIC passed on the dissertation.  See  [33].   There
    was no adverse interest in the appellant before or after he left  Saudi
    on his own passport and without issue.  See [32].

14. Ms Warren responded to Mr Clarke's skeleton.  She raised a  preliminary
    issue concerning humanitarian protection as now understood in light  of
    Abunar (paragraph 339C: "country of return") [2018] UKUT  00387  (IAC).
    This case was promulgated after permission to the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted and clarified the law on return to a third country that was the
    country  of  nationality.   Abunar  confirmed  that  the  Qualification
    Directive defined the country of origin as the country  of  nationality
    by virtue of the definition given at Article 2  and  must  be  followed
    over the incorrect transposition in the Immigration Rules.  It followed
    that a person was entitled to humanitarian protection where  there  was
    such a risk in their country of nationality.  The  respondent  accepted
    at [49] of the RFRL that the appellant was a Yemeni citizen  and  would
    be at risk if returned there.  Following  Abunar  Ms  Warren  submitted
    that he was entitled to  humanitarian  protection  notwithstanding  the
    question of return to Saudi Arabia.   That  was  a  "Robinson  obvious"
    point and should be dealt with by me.

15. As regards Ground 1, Mr  Clarke's  submission  attempted  to  hide  the
    inadequacy of the judge's reasoning on  corroboration  and  citizenship
    behind general support for his plausibility findings.  It did not  deal
    with the errors in the decision as identified in Ground 1.   The  judge
    was not only asked to consider the  appellant's  detailed  account  but
    expert and documentary evidence too.  There was evidence  that  it  was
    not implausible that rejection would be given without  explanation  and
    corroboration.  Further, Mr Clarke misstated the law on  corroboration.
    The attack on the expertise of the expert was unwarranted and  was  not
    made before the judge.  Clearly, he was an expert on Saudi Arabia  with
    extensive contacts and reliance upon such first-hand contacts.

16. As regards Ground 2, Mr Clarke  misrepresented  the  disadvantages  the
    appellant was subject to as a result of not having  Saudi  citizenship.
    See his witness statement at [29]. A "visa to travel" was an  exit  and
    re-entry visa with a concurrent risk that  re-entry  would  be  denied.
    Further, the expert's evidence was extensive at [54]-[58] and  referred
    to a risk of removal to Yemen.

17. There was no requirement for the expert to source his  report.   See  K
    [2005] EWCA Civ 1627.

18. Mr Clarke at [19] of his  skeleton  considered  persecution  separately
    from the question of the right of abode.  If denial  of  the  right  of
    abode denied the person other rights and was for a  Convention  reason,
    then it was persecutory.  See MA (Ethiopia)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  289  at
    [60]:

         "In my judgment, however, the correctness or otherwise of  EB  does
         not arise directly in this case since if the appellant were able to
         establish that she has been arbitrarily refused the right to return
         to Ethiopia for a Convention reason, that would in my  view  amount
         to persecution.  It would negate one of the most fundamental rights
         attached to nationality, namely the  right  to  live  in  the  home
         country and all that goes with that.  Denial of that right of abode
         would necessarily prevent the  applicant  from  exercising  a  wide
         range of other  rights  -  if  not  all  -  typically  attached  to
         nationality, as well as almost inevitably involving an interference
         with private and/or family life in  breach  of  Article  8  of  the
         ECHR."

    Ms Warren submitted that most tellingly, Mr Clarke did  not  deal  with
    the central premise of Ground 2 which was the complete failure  of  the
    judge to deal with the question of citizenship as seen at [38]  of  his
    decision.

19. As regards Ground  3,  Ms  Warren  repeated  the  grounds.   There  was
    extensive   evidence   of   a   crackdown   that   was   described   as
    "unprecedented".  See expert's report at [60].   The  judge  failed  to
    engage with that evidence.  High profile arrests might  make  the  news
    but the expert evidence was of a widespread crackdown.

20. As regards Ground 4, the judge's failure to  consider  the  two  issues
    conjunctively in misreading the  expert  evidence  infected  his  whole
    reasoning on risk.  The evidence of risk to  the  appellant  was  dealt
    with by the expert at [84]-[86] which was not dealt with by either  the
    judge or the respondent.  Without appreciating  the  risk  that  flowed
    from making an asylum claim on its own, the judge could not assert that
    the appellant could avoid that  risk  by  lying.   In  any  event,  the
    appellant could not be expected to lie.

21. As regards Ground 5, non-refoulement was  a  fundamental  principle  of
    refuge law and had to be considered by the judge.  The  background  and
    expert evidence showed that Saudi Arabia operated a policy  of  removal
    to Yemen.

22. As regards Ground 6, Ms Warren submitted that Mr  Clarke  misunderstood
    what the judge said at [33].  The judge did not dispute  that  the  OIC
    would have passed on the dissertation.  He found  the  converse.   That
    is, the appellant would not have passed it on given the OIC would  have
    passed it on to the Saudi regime.  In any event, Mr  Clarke's  argument
    was not a response to the ground which was that the  judge  substituted
    his own view of risk in the exercise  he  undertook,  namely  the  risk
    posed by an academic dissertation without  considering  the  background
    evidence that any dissent or critical expression exposed an  individual
    to risk in Saudi Arabia.

Conclusion on Error of Law

23. As regards the preliminary issue, Abunar was not before the  First-tier
    Judge.   Neither  side  took  issue   with   me   dealing   with   this
    notwithstanding the fact that it was not before the  First-tier  Judge.
    Leaving aside the  fact  that  the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the
    appellant would be at risk on return to Yemen,  and  the  Secretary  of
    State intended to return the Appellant to Saudi Arabia,  he  was  prima
    facie entitled to humanitarian protection.

24. I find the judge's reasoning with regard to the  corroboration  of  the
    appellant's evidence inadequate.  He  did  not  take  into  account  ST
    (Corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119 nor did he  engage
    with the detail of the expert's report and the  supporting  documentary
    evidence.  Whilst Mr Clarke took issue with the expertise of Dr  Miles,
    there was no challenge in that regard before the judge.  Without  more,
    significant in its absence, I do not accept that the judge was entitled
    to  make  an  adverse  credibility  finding  regarding  the   lack   of
    corroboration particularly bearing in mind the expert's  evidence.  The
    judge was obliged to consider the appellant's citizenship as it was the
    central issue.  See [38].

25. The judge failed to  engage  with  the  issue  of  refoulement  in  any
    meaningful way.  All he says at [50] is that there would be no risk  of
    detention in Saudi Arabia or refoulement to Yemen on the basis  of  the
    appellant's political opinion or the fact that he  applied  for  asylum
    here.  That fails to take into account the  views  of  the  expert  who
    considered both issues in detail.

26. Clearly, the judge  was  in  error  at  [49]  in  suggesting  that  the
    appellant was obliged to tell the Saudi authorities untruths  in  order
    to disguise the fact that he  was  late  in  renewing  his  entry  visa
    because he had applied for asylum in the UK.   See  HJ  (Iran)  and  HT
    (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31.

27. As regards the dissertation, I accept the judge appeared to be  correct
    in his observation that Dr Miles had not seen it.  The  issue  must  be
    however not whether the judge felt the dissertation  was  innocuous  or
    not but what the Saudi authorities would make of  it.   See  Dr  Miles'
    report at [70]-[72].

28. I find the judge materially erred in his approach to  this  appeal  for
    the reasons I have set out above.  The parties have agreed that in  the
    event that I found a material error of law it was appropriate to  remit
    the appeal to the First-tier.



Notice of Decision

The judge materially erred such that his decision is set aside and  will  be
remade in the First-tier following a de novo hearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 4 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

