
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04733/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 September 2018                         |on 03 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                    I U D
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  to
   refuse  him  international  protection  under  the  Refugee   Convention,
   humanitarian protection, or leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
   human rights grounds.  The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan  and  is
   an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child (he is 15).

First-tier Tribunal decision

2. In the First-tier Tribunal decision, at [16]-[22], the  First-tier  Judge
   made findings of fact in the appellant's favour.   The  First-tier  Judge
   found that the appellant  had  been  unable  to  contact  his  family  in
   Afghanistan since coming to the United Kingdom, that  the  representative
   had not taken any substantive steps to trace his family members, and that
   recent contact between the appellant and the Red Cross had  not  resulted
   yet in any substantive steps to trace  the  appellant's  family  members.
   The Judge found that:

          "20.    Based on the above circumstances, I  have  concluded  that
         the appellant would probably have no family  support  available  to
         him on a return to Kabul.  I have noted the decisions in LQ  [2008]
         UKAIT 00005 and AA (unattended children)  Afghanistan  [2012]  UKUT
         00016.  The appellant would be returned as an  orphaned  child.   I
         have noted that the lack of someone to  receive  the  appellant  on
         return to Kabul would compel the grant of asylum.  However  I  have
         noted and accept that  the  appellant  has  been  targeted  by  the
         Taliban as a potential recruit.

         21.  I have noted the respondent's Country Policy  and  Information
         Note Afghanistan: Unaccompanied Children dated April 2018.  I  have
         noted paragraph 2.6.3 which states:

             In the absence of an adult male relative who  is  willing  and
             able to provide care  and  support  for  the  child,  internal
             relocation is likely to be unreasonable.

         22.  The appellant will not have the protection of  his  family  on
         return to  Afghanistan.   He  will  be  susceptible  to  the  risks
         specified in paragraph (2) to the headnote in AA.  I find  that  he
         faces a real risk of  the  kind  of  persecution  and  mistreatment
         specified in that paragraph.  At this time, he cannot  be  returned
         to Afghanistan and I allow this appeal."

3. However, under the heading Notice of Decision, the  Judge  dismissed  the
   appellant's appeal.   The appellant appealed.

Permission to appeal

4. On 3 August 2018, First-tier Judge O'Garro granted permission  to  appeal
   based on the conflict between [22] and the Notice of Decision.

Respondent's response

5. The respondent has not filed a Rule 24 Reply, but by a  letter  dated  20
   September 2018, he indicated that he did not oppose the  application  for
   permission to appeal and that the  respondent  invited  the  Tribunal  to
   determine the appeal on the papers, in light of the findings of fact made
   in the body of the decision.

6. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Discussion

7. I have considered the decision on the papers, as requested.

8. A request to amend  under  rule  31  (the  slip  rule)  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
   2014 was rejected pursuant to Katsonga v Secretary of State for the  Home
   Department [2016] UKUT 228 (IAC) which held that '[the] 'Slip Rule', rule
   31 of the First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules, cannot be used to  reverse
   the effect of a decision'.

9. It would have been open to the First-tier Tribunal, once the  application
   for permission to appeal had been received, to review the decision  under
   Rule 35 of the First Tier Procedure Rules, which provides a procedure for
   correction of a patently erroneous decision.  That has not been done.

10. Both parties agree that the Notice of  Decision  is  erroneous.   It  is
   plain from the body of the decision that the Judge intended to allow  the
   appeal.

11. I have had regard to the findings of fact in  the  decision,  which  are
   not challenged.  I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and
   substitute a decision allowing the appeal.

DECISION

12. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by allowing the
   appeal.

Date:         28 September 2018              Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson


