
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04633/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 12 April 2019                      |On 29 April 2019                       |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AB
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. By a decision promulgated on 4 March 2019, I set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and made directions for  the  remaking  of  the
    decision in the Upper Tribunal:

         "1.  The appellant, AB, is a citizen of  Gambia  and  was  born  in
         1970. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision  of
         the respondent dated 4 May 2017 to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
         Turnock). The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated  on  6
         March 2018, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now  appeals,  with
         permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The focus of the appeal in the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  the
         appellant's medical condition.  The  appellant  suffers  from  left
         ventricular failure and significant hypertension.  He  has  chronic
         kidney disease stage 5. At the time of the hearing before the First-
         tier  Tribunal,  he  was  not  receiving  kidney  dialysis  but   I
         understand from his counsel that he is now receiving it. The appeal
         before the First-tier Tribunal turned  on  the  application  of  AM
         [2018] EWCA Civ 64. The judge's finding at [50] is not challenged:

             "I am  satisfied  that  if  the  appellant  does  not  receive
             appropriate treatment [in Gambia] then he  would  fall  within
             the risk categories referred to in AM. The issue then  becomes
             what treatment would be available for  the  appellant  in  the
             event of his return to Gambia."

         3.   The judge examined the evidence before him  and  concluded  at
         [69];

             "I am not satisfied that the appellant has established even to
             the low standard required that  his  is  a  case  which  falls
             within the test to be applied in the light of the decision  in
             AM."

         4.   As regards AM, the judge cited [40-41]:

             "It is true that if one read the phrase  "would  face  a  real
             risk ... of being exposed ... to a  significant  reduction  in
             life expectancy" in para. [183] out of context,  it  might  be
             taken to indicate a very wide extension of the  protection  of
             Article 3 in medical cases, since  in  very  many  such  cases
             where a foreign national is receiving treatment  at  a  higher
             level of effectiveness in the removing  state  than  would  be
             available in the receiving state (e.g. in the  case  of  those
             suffering from AIDS) they would be able to say they would face
             a real risk of a significant reduction of life  expectancy  if
             they were removed. But this is not a tenable interpretation of
             para. [183] of Paposhvili, read in its  proper  context.  N  v
             United Kingdom was itself a case where removal resulted  in  a
             very significant reduction in life  expectancy  (as  was  also
             noted in Paposhvili at para. [178]), in which no violation  of
             Article 3 was found,  and  the  Grand  Chamber  in  Paposhvili
             plainly regarded that case as  rightly  decided.  N  v  United
             Kingdom was itself a Grand Chamber  judgment,  decided  by  14
             votes to 3. It is impossible to infer that by the formula used
             in para. [183] of Paposhvili the ECtHR intended to reverse the
             effect of N v United Kingdom. Moreover,  the  Grand  Chamber's
             formulation in para. [183] requires there to  be  a  "serious"
             and "rapid" decline in health resulting in  intense  suffering
             to the Article 3 standard where death is not expected, and  it
             makes no sense to say in the context of analysis under Article
             3 that a  serious  and  rapid  decline  in  health  is  not  a
             requirement where death rather than intense suffering  is  the
             harm expected. In my view, the only tenable interpretation  of
             para. [183], read in context, is the one given above.

             In that regard, it  is  also  significant  that  even  on  the
             extreme and exceptional facts of the  Paposhvili  case,  where
             the applicant faced a likelihood of death within 6  months  if
             removed to Georgia, the Grand Chamber did not feel able to say
             that it was clear that a violation of  Article  3  would  have
             occurred for that reason had he  been  removed.  Instead,  all
             that the Grand Chamber held was that the applicant had  raised
             a sufficiently credible Article 3 case that it gave rise to  a
             procedural obligation for the relevant Belgian authorities  to
             examine that case with care and  with  reference  to  all  the
             available evidence. The violation of Article 3 which the Grand
             Chamber held would have occurred if  the  applicant  had  been
             removed  to  Georgia  was  a  violation  of  that   procedural
             obligation."

         5.    In  addition,  the  judge  relied  on  [38]  for  the   'risk
         categories' to which he refers at [50]:

             "So far as the ECtHR and the  Convention  are  concerned,  the
             protection of Article 3 against removal in  medical  cases  is
             now not confined to deathbed  cases  where  death  is  already
             imminent when the applicant is in  the  removing  country.  It
             extends to cases where "substantial grounds  have  been  shown
             for believing that [the applicant], although not  at  imminent
             risk of dying, would face a  real  risk,  on  account  of  the
             absence of appropriate treatment in the receiving  country  or
             lack of access to  such  treatment,  of  being  exposed  to  a
             serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or her state of
             health resulting in intense  suffering  or  to  a  significant
             reduction in life expectancy" (para. [183]). This means  cases
             where the applicant faces a real risk of rapidly  experiencing
             intense suffering (i.e. to the  Article  3  standard)  in  the
             receiving  state  because  of  their  illness  and  the   non-
             availability there of treatment which is available to them  in
             the removing state or faces a real  risk  of  death  within  a
             short time in the receiving state  for  the  same  reason.  In
             other words, the boundary of Article  3  protection  has  been
             shifted from being  defined  by  imminence  of  death  in  the
             removing state (even with the treatment  available  there)  to
             being  defined  by  the   imminence   (i.e.   likely   "rapid"
             experience) of intense suffering or  death  in  the  receiving
             state, which may only occur because of the non-availability in
             that  state  of  the  treatment  which  had  previously   been
             available in the removing state."

         6.    The  judge  examined  the   evidence   with   his   customary
         thoroughness. The grounds of appeal, however, submit that he failed
         to give proper weight to a document produced by  the  world  health
         organisation (WHO) which dates from 2016.  As  a  consequence,  the
         judge's conclusion, that treatment by  way  of  dialysis  would  be
         available in Gambia, was flawed. I note that  at  [65],  the  judge
         observed  that  'it  would  have  been  helpful  if   more   recent
         information had been provided [regarding the  availability  of  the
         appropriate treatment in Gambia]'. The appellant submits  that  the
         WHO document was of more recent date but was ignored by  the  judge
         or given insufficient weight in his analysis.

         7.   As I indicated to the representatives at the hearing, the  WHO
         document is somewhat problematic. It consists of nothing more  than
         a single page of A4 and is in the form of a fact sheet. At the foot
         of the  document  there  are  number  of  categories  dealing  with
         'Medicines in primary care facilities' and 'Procedures '.  In  this
         latter category is 'Renal replacement therapy by dialysis'. As  the
         box for this category is not filled in, then the key  to  the  fact
         sheet indicates that the treatment is 'not generally available.'  I
         say the document is problematic in part because it is the so  brief
         and lacking in detail  but  also  because  it  indicates  that  the
         availability of dialysis treatment in Gambia has diminished to zero
         from a time when it could be obtained, if only for  children.  That
         in itself appears to me to be very surprising.  Having  said  that,
         the fact remains that the judge's analysis fails  to  address  this
         evidence and, given the very significant  obligation  to  take  the
         greatest care to consider what treatment, if any, in  reality  this
         appellant may expect to receive  in  Gambia,  I  am  drawn  to  the
         conclusion that the judge's analysis is  flawed.  I  therefore  set
         aside his decision.  However,  I  shall  not  remake  the  decision
         without first receiving more extensive evidence not only concerning
         the availability now of dialysis treatment in Gambia but also as to
         the appellant's current medical condition. Both  parties  may  rely
         upon fresh evidence which was not before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         provided they send copies of that evidence to each other and to the
         Upper Tribunal no less than 10 days prior to the resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         8.   The decision of the first-tier tribunal set aside.  The  Upper
         Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge  Lane)  shall  remake  the  decision
         following a resumed hearing at Bradford on a date to be  fixed.  (2
         hours allowed)."

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on  12  April  2019,  the  appellant
    attended. During the course of the hearing, he became very  unwell  and
    fell from his chair. First aiders and an ambulance  were  summoned  and
    the appellant received treatment in the court  room.  Happily,  he  was
    able to leave the court without assistance following the conclusion  of
    the hearing.

 3. The appellant's representatives have now obtained a number  of  helpful
    items of additional evidence. I have also received background  material
    relating to the availability of medical treatment in  Gambia  from  the
    Secretary of State. I have had regard to these new documents and to the
    existing papers which were before the First-tier Tribunal  in  reaching
    my decision.

 4. The focus of the resumed hearing was the Court of Appeal's comments  in
    AM (Zimbabwe) (see above) in particular at [38]:

         "So far  as  the  ECtHR  and  the  Convention  are  concerned,  the
         protection of Article 3 against removal in medical cases is now not
         confined to deathbed cases where death is already imminent when the
         applicant is in the removing country. It  extends  to  cases  where
         "substantial grounds  have  been  shown  for  believing  that  [the
         applicant], although not at imminent risk of dying,  would  face  a
         real risk, on account of the absence of  appropriate  treatment  in
         the receiving country or lack of access to such treatment, of being
         exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or  her
         state of health resulting in intense suffering or to a  significant
         reduction in life expectancy" (para. [183]). This means cases where
         the applicant faces a real risk  of  rapidly  experiencing  intense
         suffering (i.e. to the Article 3 standard) in the  receiving  state
         because  of  their  illness  and  the  non-availability  there   of
         treatment which is available to them in the removing state or faces
         a real risk of death within a short time in the receiving state for
         the same  reason.  In  other  words,  the  boundary  of  Article  3
         protection has been shifted from  being  defined  by  imminence  of
         death in the removing state  (even  with  the  treatment  available
         there) to being defined  by  the  imminence  (i.e.  likely  "rapid"
         experience) of intense suffering or death in the  receiving  state,
         which may only occur because of the non-availability in that  state
         of the  treatment  which  had  previously  been  available  in  the
         removing state."

 5. Mr Diwnycz, who appeared for the Secretary of State,  do  not  seek  to
    question any of the new expert evidence produced by the  appellant,  in
    particular  the  report  of  Dr  Ceesay  which  deals  with   her   the
    availability of treatment in Gambia and the letter from Dr  Garthwaite,
    the appellant's treating surgeon at  St  James's  University  Hospital,
    Leeds. The latter confirms that the appellant now has no native  kidney
    function at all and is entirely  reliant  upon  dialysis.  He  requires
    dialysis regularly three times every week.  If  he  misses  a  dialysis
    session, his blood will fill with high levels  of  poisons  which  will
    damage heart 'very quickly.' The doctor is unequivocal as  regards  the
    impact of the appellant missing dialysis sessions. He  writes,  'it  is
    likely that without regular dialysis [the  appellant]  would  die.'  Dr
    Ceesay states that, despite the increasing burden of kidney disease  in
    Gambia, the  number  of  dialysis  machines  available  throughout  the
    country of 2 million people remains the same - 14  machines  in  total.
    The country does not have a national renal registry and  many  patients
    are obliged to wait for weeks and months for their  turn  to  come  for
    treatment. The only dialysis centre in the Gambia has  a  sole  funder,
    the Ida Bass Foundation in the United Kingdom, but the doctor indicates
    that 'these funds are not readily available.' I draw the inference that
    an already precarious system of dialysis  provision  is  rendered  even
    less stable because there is no plurality of funding for the system and
    apparently little, if any, government funding.

 6. Having regard to the evidence discussed at [5] above, I find that there
    exists a reasonable likelihood that the appellant would miss a dialysis
    treatment(s)  within  a  short  period  after  returning   to   Gambia.
    Obviously, circumstances beyond the appellant's control might  lead  to
    him missing a dialysis session here in the United Kingdom but I do  not
    consider that such a risk would not cross the relatively low  threshold
    of  reasonable  likelihood;  the  evidence  indicates  that   that   is
    emphatically not the case in Gambia where the risk of the appellant not
    accessing dialysis is manifest.

 7. Applying the analysis of the Court of Appeal in AM to those findings, I
    find that the appellant would be exposed to an  'imminent'  or  'likely
    'rapid' experience' of intense suffering and, indeed, in the  light  of
    the particular nature of his condition, death. The appellant is not  an
    individual who could in any way afford to  miss  a  single,  let  alone
    several, dialysis treatments; his kidney condition is so bad  that  any
    disruption at all to his regime of dialysis will be fatal; there is  no
    suggestion in the evidence that any treatment other than dialysis could
    prevent him from immediate suffering and  death.  That  would  be  true
    whether he is in the United Kingdom or elsewhere but because  he  would
    return to a country where  dialysis  treatment  exists  but  where  the
    likelihood over a short period of  time  of  the  appellant  missing  a
    treatment is very high I am bound  to  conclude  that  his  removal  to
    Gambia will expose him to a breach of his rights under Article 3  ECHR.
    Accordingly (and I stress my decision has  no  application  beyond  the
    very specific facts of this appeal) I find that his  appeal  should  be
    allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the appellant against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
dated 4 May 2017 is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3 ECHR)


Signed                              Date 22 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

