
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04331/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 4th September 2019                |On 16th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                MOHAMMED [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Timpson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant was born on 2nd September 1997 and is a citizen of  Iraq.
     The appellant made application for recognition as a  refugee  and  the
    respondent refused the claim.  In doing  so  the  respondent  issued  a
    Notice of Refusal of leave to enter which  resulted  in  the  appellant
    appealing to the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Herwald on 11th  June
    2019.  The appellant said he was born in Tikrit in the district of  Tuz
    in Iraq.  He said that he left because his father had been a member  of
    the Ba'ath Party and had been some form of spy against  the  Peshmerga.
    He claimed that this would cause him difficulties were he to return  to
    the IKR.  He  also  feared  Hasht-al-Shabi,  a  Shia  militia,  and  at
    paragraph 9 of the judge's determination,  he  sets  out  in  full  the
    appellant's claim.

3.   The judge made adverse findings against the appellant  and  noted  that
    the appellant's mother and sister still lived in  Iraq  and  he  found,
    therefore, that they could  obtain  the  documents  necessary  for  the
    appellant to obtain a CSID.  In doing so he erred in law,  because  the
    appellant is from a disputed area and his mother and sister do not live
    in that area any  longer.   They  would  not  be  able  to  obtain  the
    documents. The judge further erred in law at  paragraph  14(l)  of  the
    determination when he considered the evidence that the  appellant  gave
    about his father.  The judge appears not to have  appreciated  that  in
    answers to questions 16 and 17 of the substantive asylum interview  the
    appellant had already indicated that his father acted as a spy for  the
    Ba'ath Party.

4.   Mr McVeety told me that there was shortly to be a new country  guidance
    case promulgated by the Upper Tribunal in relation to  the  risk  under
    Article 15(c) and he explained that he was not opposed to the  remittal
    of the determination, given the errors on the part of the judge.

5.   I set aside the judge's determination in its entirety.  I believe  that
    the error in relation to credibility contained in paragraph  14(l)  may
    very well have tainted the other credibility findings and it  seems  to
    me much safer to enable a new judge to start making  fresh  credibility
    findings.

6.   I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh  by  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Herwald.  A  Kurdish  Sorani
    interpreter will be required.  Two hours  should  be  allowed  for  the
    hearing of the appeal.


Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
10th September 2019



