
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04142/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th June 2017                              |On 22nd June 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                   mr S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Samra (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ghani, promulgated on 19th January 2017, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham, Sheldon Court on 24th October 2016.  In the  determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on [  ]
    1990.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  14th
    April 2016, refusing the Appellant's claim for asylum and refusing  his
    application for humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of HC 395.



The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he  lived  in  a  village.   He  has  one
    brother in the UK who has refugee status.  However, when he was 9 years
    of age, his father worked for Commander Shiragha in the Afghan military
    and was killed by the Taliban.  He had no  dealings  with  the  Taliban
    until 2015 when he claimed he was abducted from  his  home  with  three
    others and taken to Chardehi.  He was interrogated about  his  father's
    whereabouts and kept for two nights.  He then escaped from the  Taliban
    during an attack by Daesh.  The Respondent,  for  her  part,  has  only
    accepted the Appellant's nationality and his identity.   She  does  not
    accept that the Appellant's father's  positions  was  with  the  Afghan
    military, because this  is  inconsistent  with  the  Appellant's  other
    claims.  The Respondent also  does  not  accept  that  the  Appellant's
    father was a high profile military target for the Taliban.

The Judge's Findings

 4. At the hearing before Judge I J Ghani, the  Appellant  maintained  that
    his father worked for the Karzai Government and assisted  them  in  the
    fight against the Taliban.  He was not sure  what  his  father's  exact
    role was.  However, his father  worked  under  Commander  Shiragha  but
    would not tell him specifically what he did.  He claimed  that  he  was
    not safe in Afghanistan, and this was confirmed by the  fact  that  his
    own brother had been granted refugee asylum status.

 5. The judge held that the fact that  the  Appellant's  brother  has  been
    granted refugee status "does not  necessarily  mean  that  he  is  also
    entitled to refugee status" because when his brother came to the United
    Kingdom he was  age  14  or  15  years  and  would  have  been  granted
    discretionary leave under the relevant policy in respect of minors (see
    paragraph 21).  However, the judge then went on also to say  that,  "it
    is not clear as there is no  evidence  before  me  whether  his  asylum
    application was refused but he was granted  discretionary  leave  as  a
    minor" (paragraph 21).  This apparent  inconsistency  between  the  two
    statements, is a matter that is now taken up by Mr Samra, on behalf  of
    the Appellant in appealing the decision of Judge Ghani.  The judge went
    on to explain how, after the Appellant's father was killed, the  family
    moved to Pakistan in 2007, where they remained until 2012.  There  they
    remained with his uncle.  The evidence then  is  that  when  the  uncle
    passed away, "his mother did not feel safe anymore in Pakistan and they
    decided to move back to  Afghanistan  to  the  same  village  where  he
    started to work  for  a  neighbour".   The  judge  deemed  this  to  be
    problematic for the Appellant because, "on  the  one  hand  it  is  the
    Appellant's claim that they felt unsafe even in Pakistan because of the
    Taliban, yet the whole family decided to move back to the same  village
    where his father was shot at.  I do not find this credible"  (paragraph
    21).

 6. Moreover, the judge went on to say that from 2012  until  2015  nothing
    appears to have happened to  the  Appellant  or  his  family.   It  was
    accepted that they had changed their names, but "his family would  have
    been recognisable by the villagers" and when in 2012 he and his  family
    returned to their village, "he would have been about 14.   As  such  he
    would have been a due target for Taliban recruitment" (22).  The  judge
    went on to say that, "it is simply not credible that the Appellant  did
    not know that they had returned" (paragraph 22).

 7. For  all  these  reasons,  the  claim  was  deemed  to  be  lacking  in
    credibility and the appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in the  following
    respects.  First, he failed to consider the witness  statement  of  the
    Appellant's brother.  He also failed to give adequate reasons as to why
    he did not attach weight to it.  Furthermore it was  rational  that  he
    failed to accept that the Appellant's brother was acknowledged  by  the
    Respondent as a refugee.

 9. On 13th  February  2017,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the
    Tribunal.  First, because the manner in which the judge deals with  the
    position of the brother at paragraph 21  is  inconsistent  because  the
    judge goes on to say that, "it is not clear as  there  is  no  evidence
    before me whether his asylum application was refused but he was granted
    discretionary leave as a  minor".   Second,  the  judge  did  not  give
    tenable reason for failing to attach weight to the brother's statement.



10. A Rule 24 response was entered on 21st February 2017.   It  was  stated
    that at paragraph 21 the judge does observe  that  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's brother was given refugee status does not necessarily  mean
    that the Appellant will be given the same status.  The judge  had  made
    it clear that at the time that the Appellant's brother had  been  given
    refugee status he was a minor and was entitled to discretionary  leave.
    It was open to the judge  to  so  conclude.   Second,  the  judge  made
    various adverse credibility findings which were detailed  and  reasoned
    in the body of the determination  for  why  this  particular  Appellant
    could not succeed.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 8th June  2017,  Mr  Mills  handed  up  the
    decision of 17th August 2010 by the Secretary of State with respect  to
    the Appellant's brother.  It is here asserted (at  paragraph  26)  that
    the Appellant's claim was accepted as being entirely credible in  every
    respect.

12. This decision (see Home Office reference G1166054) that the Appellant's
    brother "was generally consistent throughout his various accounts"  and
    that these accounts "do  not  contain  any  significant  contradictions
    either within any single account or  across  his  accounts"  (paragraph
    18).  In this respect, submitted Mr Mills, the judge was wrong to  have
    concluded that there was no evidence  to  show  that  the  brother  had
    claimed and had acquired refugee status.

13. Mr Samra submitted that, given that this was the case,  the  judge  had
    engaged in a factual error.  The Appellant makes his fears plain,  both
    at paragraph 6 when he explains how his father was  killed  working  in
    the Afghan military by the Taliban (paragraph 6)  and  how  "his  other
    brother Turgul Albikhil is currently in the United Kingdom who has been
    granted refugee status" (paragraph  9).   Second,  the  facts  of  both
    brothers were the same.  They came from the same family, gave the  same
    evidence, and put  forward  identical  claims.   Indeed,  the  evidence
    before the judge was that, "Mr Turgul Albikhil adopted his statement of
    29th August 2008 and 10th October 2016.  He is the Appellant's brother.
     He maintains that his father was involved in a fight with the  Taliban
    and his commander was killed"  (paragraph  18).   That  aspect  of  the
    evidence, as given by the Appellant's brother was simply overlooked  by
    the judge.  Furthermore, at paragraph  20  of  the  determination,  the
    judge  again  refers  to  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  brother,
    concluding that "it is probable that  they  are  related  as  brothers"
    (paragraph 20).  Third, where the judge then goes wrong is at paragraph
    21  where  she  concludes  that  the   Appellant   had   been   granted
    discretionary leave  to  remain  as  a  minor,  when  the  Home  Office
    decision, produced today by Mr Mills, confirms that he was granted full
    refugee asylum status.  Given that  the  fear  was  that  of  the  same
    commander, and the claim was the same, the  judge  at  the  very  least
    ought to have given adequate weight to the brother's evidence, and  the
    failure to do so rendered the decision to  be  erroneous  in  law.   Mr
    Samra submitted that I should make a finding of an  error  of  law  and
    remit this matter back to the First-tier Tribunal.

14. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that, even though there  were  various
    errors in the approach taken by the judge, these were not  material  to
    the ultimate decision because the judge makes it clear that, "the  fact
    that the Appellant's brother has been granted refugee status  does  not
    necessarily mean that he is also entitled to refugee status" (paragraph
    21).  This was  entirely  sustainable  as  the  conclusion.   What  is,
    however, problematic was what is then said about  four  lines  down  in
    that paragraph where the judge states that, "it is not clear  as  there
    is no evidence before me whether is asylum application was refused  but
    he was granted discretionary leave as a minor"  (paragraph  21).   This
    was factually incorrect.  The  Appellant's  brother  had  been  granted
    refugee  asylum  status  and  not  discretionary   leave   to   remain.
    Accordingly, it was accepted that there was an error in this respect.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, the judge failed to have regard to the evidence of the
    Appellant's brother, Turgul  Albikhil,  who  had  adopted  his  witness
    statement of 29th August 2008 and 10th October 2016 at the hearing (see
    paragraph 18 of the determination) and whose  claim  was  identical  to
    that of the Appellant.  Second, the judge expressed himself confusingly
    in relation to whether the Appellant's brother had  been  granted  full
    refugee asylum status or simply had been granted discretionary leave to
    remain "as a minor" (see paragraph 21).   Third,  the  claim  that  the
    Appellant and his brother, together with their  family,  had  fled  the
    area was plainly established before the judge below (see paragraph 21),
    but everything that happened thereafter still needed to be  determined,
    from the period 2007 onwards when they had left to go to Pakistan.  All
    in all, the errors complained of by the Appellant in  this  matter  are
    fundamental and that being so, this  matter  is  remitted  back  to  be
    determined by  a  judge  other  than  Judge  Ghani  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed to the extent that  it  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be determined by a judge other  than  Judge  Ghani,  under
    Practice Statement 7.2(a).

17. An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st June 2017


