
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04442/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 8th January 2020              |On the 17th January 2020             |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     RR
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Najah, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The background:

 1. The appellant is a national of Iran. The appellant arrived in the
    United Kingdom on the 7 December 2018 and made a claim for asylum on
    the following day. He provided a screening interview and later provided
    a statement of evidence (SEF statement) and was interviewed about the
    factual basis of his claim.

 2. The basis of his claim can be summarised as follows. The appellant is a
    citizen of Iran and is of Kurdish ethnicity. He claimed to work as a
    smuggler in Iran, transporting goods over the Iran/Iraq border and had
    been involved in this for approximately 10 years before he left Iran.

 3. In May 2019, he stated that he and five others were ambushed by the
    Iranian authorities whilst smuggling goods into Iran. The appellant
    fled to the house of a relative of his colleague and whilst in hiding,
    he learned that his home and been raided by the security services and
    as they had found materials relating to the PJAK party in the goods he
    was transporting. They suspected him of being involved with that party.

 4. The appellant left Iran a few days later; travelling from Iran to
    Turkey on foot and remaining in Turkey for around 1 to 2 months. He
    continued his journey, during which time he claimed to have been
    arrested and was then put on the back of a lorry and arrived in "the
    Jungle". After one or two months, via a lorry, he arrived in the United
    Kingdom.

 5. Since arriving in the UK, the appellant stated that he had been
    supporting the PJAK party and had attended two demonstrations; one on
    12 May 2019 and one on 9 June 2019 in front of the Iranian embassy in
    London, to express his dissatisfaction of the Iranian government. He
    also posted material on his Facebook account that was also critical of
    the regime.

 6. In a decision letter dated the 26th April 2019, the respondent refused
    his claim for asylum and humanitarian protection. It was accepted the
    appellant was an Iranian national of Kurdish ethnicity but did not
    accept his claim that he had been of interest to the Iranian
    authorities (see paragraphs 39 - 56). As can be seen within those
    paragraphs, the Secretary of State set out a number of credibility
    issues relating to the core aspects of his claim to be of interest to
    the Iranian authorities as a result of his activities in that country.
    As to the issue of illegal exit, the respondent applied the relevant
    country guidance case of SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum
    seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308. Having done so, it was considered
    that there was no real risk of persecution or serious harm on the basis
    of illegal exit alone. Furthermore, as the respondent had rejected his
    account that the Iranian authorities had any interest in him, it was
    considered internally inconsistent that he left Iran illegally.
    Consequently his illegal exit was also rejected. The respondent
    concluded that he was not at risk of persecution or serious harm upon
    return to Iran.

 7. The appellant sought to appeal that decision and his appeal was heard
    on the 4th July 2019.

 8. In a decision promulgated on the 6 August 2019 the FtTJ dismissed the
    appeal having concluded that the appellant had not given a credible or
    consistent account as to his activities in Iran. Furthermore, when
    considering the appellant's activities in the UK, including his
    attendance at demonstrations and the postings on Facebook, the FtTJ
    reached the conclusion that he had "cynically sought to bolster his
    asylum claim" and made use of the Facebook account to pursue that aim.
    He found that the Facebook entries were "self-serving". He concluded
    that the appellant would not be at risk of harm, taking into account
    his Kurdish ethnicity and his stated activities. The judge therefore
    dismissed his protection claim.

 9. Following the dismissal of his appeal, grounds of appeal were issued
    for permission to appeal and that application was granted by Judge Loke
    on the 6th September 2019, 2019 for the following reasons:

         "While the judge found the social media posts to be self-serving,
         it is arguable that, notwithstanding, the judge ought to have gone
         on to consider whether such activity could be perceived as
         political in accordance with the country guidance: Danian [1999]
         EWCA Civ 3000.

10. In a decision promulgated on 31st October 2019 I set out my reasons as
    to why the decision of the FtTJ involved the making of an error of law
    on a point of law. It is re-produced below.

         "Decision on the error of law:

         ...

         32.  ... In reaching my assessment of the grounds, I must bear in
             mind that I should not interfere in the fact-finding of the
             First-tier Tribunal unless persuaded that it is not within the
             range of reasonable responses. It is important not to consider
             specific paragraphs in isolation but to have regard to the
             decision as a whole.

         33.  I set out these two well-established propositions because in
             my judgment the decision of the FtTJ when reaching his
             decision upon the credibility of the appellant as to events
             that occurred in Iran is not one that is vitiated by legal
             error, notwithstanding the submissions made by Miss Mendoza.

         34.  At paragraph 39 the judge reached the conclusion that he
             should draw an adverse inference under section 8 of the 2004
             Act against the appellant having failed to claim asylum in
             safe third countries, namely Italy and France. At paragraph 39
             he considered the explanation that had been advanced by the
             appellant for not pursuing asylum and that he was under
             control of the agent however the judge made reference to the
             evidence that there was no contract that the appellant was to
             be taken to the United Kingdom but to a safe country. The
             judge did not accept that a smuggler, after arrival in a safe
             European country, would insist on continuation of the journey.
             That was a finding that the FtTJ was entitled to reach on the
             evidence.

         35.  The FtTJ did not begin his consideration of credibility with
             the section 8 issue. That is clearly demonstrated by the
             preceding paragraphs and the judge's assessment at paragraphs
             32-37, and also later on at paragraphs 46-47. I therefore
             reject that submission.

         36.  The grounds raise no further arguments concerning the findings
             made by the judge as to the events in Iran beyond that general
             credibility point raised in relation to section 8. The thrust
             of the grounds relate to the judge's assessment of his sur
             place claim and consequent assessment of risk on return.

         37.  I am satisfied that the FtTJ gave adequate and sustainable
             reasons set out at paragraphs 32 - 40 and 46 - 47 as to why
             the appellant had not given a credible account concerning
             events in Iran. Those findings can be summarised as follows:

               1. The appellant had given an inconsistent account. The most
                  problematic was the inconsistency between the account
                  given by the appellant's claim in a screening interview,
                  the account in his statements and in the substantive
                  interview. He had claimed that he had been stopped by
                  authorities while smuggling goods across the border and
                  that the guards had looked at the goods and told him that
                  he was working for the KDP. He told them that he was not
                  working for the KDP was just transporting unknown goods.
                  They told him that as they now had caught him that he had
                  to work for them. He did not want to do so had to leave
                  Iran leaving after a week or two. However, having stated
                  that, the appellant went on to provide a markedly and
                  significantly different account in the rest of his case.
                  The materials were now said to belong to the PJAK party
                  and not the KDP, he was not apprehended by the authorities
                  at all, there was no conversation with the authorities,
                  and he was not asked to work for them. There was no
                  discussion with the authorities about KTP leaflets (at
                  [33]).

               2. The judge found this to be a significant inconsistency in
                  the appellant's account. He took into account the
                  appellant's explanation and the opportunity to clarify the
                  inconsistencies, but the judge found that he had not taken
                  the opportunity to "categorically state that he was not
                  personally apprehended by the authorities and did not have
                  a discussion with at any stage. The appellant simply
                  states that he was ambushed and left his materials behind"
                  (at [34]).

               3. The judge acknowledged that mistakes could happen during
                  interviews but did not accept that the interviewing
                  officer would note down a detailed answer such as that
                  given at 4.1, unless the broad thrust became from the
                  appellant. The judge did not find that this was a case of
                  mistaken word or one sentence that the appellant sought to
                  distance itself from and had been a detailed paragraph of
                  an account. He rejected the suggestion that the
                  interviewing officer would have recorded full answer
                  completely inaccurately as suggested by the appellant (at
                  [35-36]).

               4. As the appellant's encounter with the authorities as a
                  core element of his claim, the discrepancy is a
                  significant one (at [37]).

               5. A further inconsistency arose in the appellant's account
                  in relation to the discovery of the PJAK political
                  materials in the load that he was carrying. It was the
                  appellant's case that following the ambush did not return
                  home which would mean that he would be unable to transport
                  the load that he was carrying to his home. However, the
                  appellant also stated in his substantive interview (Q118 -
                  119) that the security services discovered political
                  materials in the load when they raided his home. The judge
                  found that this could only been possible if the appellant
                  are transported and stored the load at home on the night
                  in question. This position was inconsistent with his
                  evidence (at [46]).

         38.  As stated above, there has been no challenge of any
             particularity either in the grounds or subsequently concerning
             those findings. I therefore find that there is no error of law
             established in relation to those factual credibility findings.

         39.  I now turn to the thrust of the grounds advanced on behalf of
             the appellant which relate to the sur place claim.  Whilst I
             am not satisfied that there is any error of law in the FtTJ's
             assessment of the appellant's claim as to events in Iran, I am
             satisfied that the decision demonstrates the making of an
             error on a point of law when considering the sur place claim.

         ...

         41.  As summarised in the earlier part of this decision, the Judge
             made a number of adverse credibility findings in relation to
             his claim to have been involved in political activity and
             having been of interest to the Iranian authorities before he
             left that country.

         42.  Whilst he accepted that the appellant had had attended
             demonstrations (see findings of fact at [42]) the judge made
             no further assessment of the sur place issue in the context of
             risk on return. Whilst Ms Petterson relies upon the adverse
             findings made by the judge, even if it could be inferred from
             the general adverse credibility findings made, as set out in
             Danian [1999] EWCA Civ 3000, even if his credibility might be
             low, it was still necessary to scrutinise and assess the new
             claim (sur place claim).

         43.  Activities undertaken in bad faith can found a sur place claim
             but careful attention must be given to whether those
             activities are likely to come to the attention of the
             authorities on return - see the reasoning in YB (Eritrea) v
             SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 360.  The real question in, most cases is
             would be what followed for an individual claimant if any
             information reached the authorities. This was a question of
             fact for the judge to assess on the evidence before him. He
             accepted that he had attended demonstrations and even if it
             could be inferred that this was solely to found a sur place
             claim rather than any genuine political commitment, he would
             have to consider whether the appellant in his particular
             circumstances would, as a result of his activities coming to
             the attention of the authorities and be at a real risk of
             serious harm or persecution in Iran and by reference to the CG
             decision of HB.  Part of that assessment would necessarily
             include the commitment shown in the UK, (and whether he would
             be likely to continue that political activity on return.). It
             does not appear that there were any direct questions asked as
             to his motivation and consequently, there was no assessment of
             his likely behaviour on return.

         44.  The second issue relates to the face book posts. The appellant
             is of Kurdish ethnicity and the judge makes reference to the
             appellant's "Facebook posts" and that they had been put up to
             bolster his case. However, in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT
             the Tribunal said this at paragraph 116:-

                  "We are satisfied that the content the appellant's
                  Facebook page would become known to the authorities on
                  return as part of the process of investigation of his
                  background. That is the effect of the expert background
                  evidence before us. It is then, no step at all to the
                  conclusion that this would involve a real risk of
                  persecution and Article 3 ill-treatment in his case"

         45.  The issue to be determined is whether or not the appellant
             would on return be viewed or perceived by the authorities in
             Iran as a person that has been adversely acting against the
             Iranian government by reason of his Facebook posts at the
             point of re-entering the country. The issue not being whether
             or not the appellant was a genuine in his activities, but
             whether the authorities in Iran on his return would,
             irrespective of whether he is a genuine, wish to see his face
             book posts and by reason thereof view him as an individual
             that had acted adversely against the government and would the
             appellant in those circumstances be at risk. Paragraph 23 of
             SSH and HR highlighted that a failed asylum seeker will be
             questioned and that 'if there are particular concerns arising
             from their previous activities either in Iran or in the United
             Kingdom or whichever country they are returned from, then
             there would be a risk of further questioning, detention and
             potential ill-treatment'.

         46.  Neither the FtTJ or the advocates before this Tribunal have
             referred to the decision in  AB (internet activity - state of
             evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 257 (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal
             considered whether the use of social media and internet
             activity placed returnees to Iran at risk of persecution on
             return. Whilst concluding that there was insufficient evidence
             to issue country guidance, the decision was reported for the
             Upper Tribunal's findings on the evidence at that time.

         47.  In summary I am satisfied that the FtTJ did not consider that
             potential risk on return and has therefore failed to make
             material findings on the risk on return.

         48.  Consequently, I am therefore satisfied that the decision
             involved the making of an error on a point of law and it is
             set aside.

         ...

         53.  In the light of my decision above, the findings of fact set
             out at paragraphs 33-40 and 46-47 shall be preserved. The
             issue to determine relates solely to the issue of his sur
             place claim as identified above in accordance with the
             evidence relied upon by the appellant and the relevant legal
             authorities."

The re-making of the appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

11. The resumed hearing was listed for the 8th January 2020. There were two
    bundles of documents; the  first bundle was that provided at the last
    hearing containing fresh evidence relating to his face book account and
    demonstrations attended in the UK, along with a witness statement
    marked "Bundle 1" and a supplementary bundle marked "bundle 2" which
    also contained further material relevant to his sur place activities
    and also copies of the decisions in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 430
    (IAC) and AB and others (internet activity-state of evidence Iran
    [2015] UKUT 00257.  I confirm that I have considered the contents of
    those bundles when reaching my decision. The respondent relied upon the
    original bundle and no further evidence was filed on behalf of the
    respondent.

12. The appellant gave oral evidence through an interpreter and I am
    satisfied that both the interpreter and the appellant understood each
    other and no problems with the interpretation were identified by either
    advocate or the appellant during the hearing.

13. He adopted the contents of the two witness statements filed on his
    behalf dated 30/9/19 and 16/12/19. In his evidence in chief he was
    asked when he had started his Facebook account. He stated that he had
    begun posting approximately in 2018 whilst he was still in Iran. When
    asked to describe what the photographs at pages 54 and 55 depicted
    (respondents bundle) he stated that they were normal photographs
    showing him in the pictures and that he was a "kolbar" which he
    described as a job which delivered goods between the border (in essence
    smuggling goods).

14. In his evidence he stated that the nature of his postings on Facebook
    had changed when he was in the United Kingdom and that he had posted
    political messages on his account. He stated he could not do that
    whilst in Iran as he was not free to do so. As he had freedom in the
    United Kingdom he was able to make those posts. He stated that he had
    attended a number of demonstrations in the United Kingdom principally
    outside of the Iranian embassy. He stated that it was his duty to
    participate. When asked why, he stated that "In Iran we Kurdish people
    have been persecuted and not free to express any political views" and
    that he was "against the regime". When asked to describe why he was not
    "free" in Iran, he stated that as a Kurd in Iran he had suffered many
    problems and that they were not free to be citizens. He was a kolbar
    because he had no right to do any other different job.

15. The appellant was asked to describe the activity in the photographs in
    bundle one. At page 116 (dated 12/5/19), he stated that this was a
    demonstration outside the embassy in London protesting against the
    government hanging and executing people. He was holding a picture of an
    execution taking place. At page 117, he stated that he was a
    demonstration expressing his views and opinions about the government
    and that he had raised the Kurdish flag. In particular he was
    protesting against the authorities killing kolbars in Iran. He said
    that he found out about the demonstrations because he had friends on
    Facebook who shared comments that they would post the day of the
    demonstration. At page 120 (demonstration) he was asked to describe the
    events. He stated it was at the embassy again and that he was burning a
    picture of the leader of the regime and that he was happy to express
    his feelings he said the purpose of the demonstration that day was in
    general to stop young people being the subject of execution and to
    change the regime. When asked to explain what he meant, he stated that
    the minorities in Iran had no freedom and that he sought to demand the
    rights of the Kurdish people and equality between men and women stop
    page 128 was also photograph a further demonstration in London.

16. In cross examination he was asked who had taken the photographs
    exhibited. He stated that many people had cameras and he had asked
    people to take a photograph of him. He stated that he had handed his
    mobile phone to them so they could take photograph. He confirmed that
    the photographs were taken with a mobile phone which he then shared on
    Facebook. At page 121 he confirmed that the photograph on that page was
    taken before the photograph showing him setting fire to a picture. He
    was asked a number of questions about who the person was in the
    photograph which the appellant identified as the "Iranian leader-
    Khomeini." He was asked if he had commented about setting fire to the
    picture on his Facebook postings. He said that he had not commented but
    that on Facebook people had commented and praised him. When asked if
    there was evidence to show the praise that he had received, he could
    not show that from the pictures provided in the bundle. However when
    asked if he had his Facebook open on his phone and when scrolling to
    the day of the demonstration the same picture was found on his Facebook
    page and there were a number of comments concerning that picture which
    were translated as praise and support for the pictures. He had 79 likes
    and 38 comments.

17. When asked about how he had set up the account confirmed that it had
    been done by a friend of his, but he knew how to post photographs and
    share them and also login to Facebook. When asked if he had been shown
    how to delete the account, the appellant stated that he was unable to
    delete. When asked if he was aware he could delete it, the appellant
    stated that he was not. He was asked why he would not if returned to
    Iran the appellant stated that it was not about deleting his account
    but that he would still be at risk on return from his activities. Mr
    Diwncyz read to the appellant paragraph 10 of his second witness
    statement, and it was put to him that the means existed for him to
    delete his account and he was asked why he should not do so. The
    appellant stated that he was in a free country with free speech and
    that he was able to freely express his views and that he would continue
    to do so. He stated that even if he was returned he would tell them why
    he was in the UK and his activities. He was also asked that if the
    authorities asked him if he had an account and he had said he deleted
    it, why would that put him at risk? The appellant stated that in Iran
    there was not a fair system and that he would face ill-treatment. In
    his evidence he also stated that when he was demonstrating outside the
    embassy, there were cameras filming the demonstrators. He said that he
    could see them in the window looking out at them. It confirmed it was
    from the buildings in the embassy and that friend commented that they
    had seen people holding cameras in the windows and that it was
    expected.

18. At the conclusion of the evidence I heard submissions from each of the
    advocates. On behalf the respondent Mr Diwncyz made the following
    submissions. He accepted that there was evidence of the appellant
    attending demonstrations but that in light of the country guidance
    decision, it was not reasonably likely that the Iranian authorities
    would be able to recognise the appellant from his attendance as the
    objective material stated that there was no facial recognition
    technology and that he was one of a crowd. As to the Facebook evidence,
    he made reference to their being unreported decisions of the Upper
    Tribunal which make reference to the deletion of Facebook accounts. He
    recognised that there was no expert evidence before this Tribunal but
    submitted that somebody could delete their account and that it would
    not be reasonable for them not to do so and that operating a Facebook
    account was not a "human right" and it would be reasonable for him to
    take that step. As to his illegal exit, that by itself would not bring
    him to the attention of the authorities therefore he invited me to
    reach the conclusion he would not be at risk on return.

19. Ms Najah on behalf of the appellant submitted that there were four
    issues; what had the appellant taken part in, have the activities come
    to the attention or with a capable of coming to the attention of the
    authorities, how those activities will be perceived and then to assess
    the potential reaction to that information. She submitted that the
    appellant attended demonstrations and had provided a detailed account
    as well as photographic evidence and Facebook posts which were anti-
    regime. She submitted it was therefore likely to come to the attention
    of the authorities when passing through the airport and that he would
    be under scrutiny (applying the decision in AB at paragraph 467). She
    further submitted that there was evidence of Iran monitoring Facebook
    supported by independent evidence. She was not able to point the
    Tribunal to that independent evidence in the materials presented
    however she submitted that in general terms paragraph 116 of the
    decision in HB (Iran) provided support for this. Overall, she submitted
    there would be a very significant risk that the information would come
    to the attention of the authorities and that potentially it could
    already have done so as monitoring of the Internet does take place.

20. In terms of perception of the Iranian authorities, she submitted that
    there would been increased risk given that he would be travelling on a
    special passport and would have a heightened level of suspicion as a
    result of his Kurdish background. Given the "hair-trigger" reaction,
    the multiple postings on Facebook, his Kurdish ethnicity and the
    heightened political atmosphere presently would give rise to a real
    risk of harm. Given that it was an objective test, it is the perception
    of the authorities and not the motivation that is the relevant aspect.

21. As to the deletion of Facebook, she submitted that he had given reasons
    as to why he did not wish to do so but if he had told the authorities
    that he deleted an account it might be seen as an admission. In any
    event, there was no evidence as to how to delete the account nor could
    it be assured that the likes, the shares and comments would entirely
    disappear from other Facebook accounts which could be linked to the
    appellant's account. She therefore submitted that due to the cumulative
    factors in the appellant's case, there was a reason the likelihood that
    his activities when viewed would be seen as anti-regime and would lead
    to a real risk of persecutory harm.

22. The Upper Tribunal in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 430 (IAC) provided
    as follows as summarised in the headnote:

         "(1) SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016]
         UKUT 308 (IAC) remains valid country guidance in terms of the
         country guidance offered in the headnote. For the avoidance of
         doubt, that decision is not authority for any proposition in
         relation to the risk on return for refused Kurdish asylum-seekers
         on account of their Kurdish ethnicity alone.

         (2)  Kurds in Iran face discrimination. However, the evidence does
         not support a contention that such discrimination is, in general,
         at such a level as to amount to persecution or Article 3 ill-
         treatment.

         (3)  Since 2016 the Iranian authorities have become increasingly
         suspicious of, and sensitive to, Kurdish political activity. Those
         of Kurdish ethnicity are thus regarded with even greater suspicion
         than hitherto and are reasonably likely to be subjected to
         heightened scrutiny on return to Iran.

         (4)  However, the mere fact of being a returnee of Kurdish
         ethnicity with or without a valid passport, and even if combined
         with illegal exit, does not create a risk of persecution or Article
         3 ill-treatment.

         (5)  Kurdish ethnicity is nevertheless a risk factor which, when
         combined with other factors, may create a real risk of persecution
         or Article 3 ill-treatment. Being a risk factor it means that
         Kurdish ethnicity is a factor of particular significance when
         assessing risk. Those "other factors" will include the matters
         identified in paragraphs (6)-(9) below.

         (6)  A period of residence in the KRI by a Kurdish returnee is
         reasonable likely to result in additional questioning by the
         authorities on return. However, this is a factor that will be
         highly fact-specific and the degree of interest that such residence
         will excite will depend, non-exhaustively, on matters such as the
         length of residence in the KRI, what the person concerned was doing
         there and why they left.

         (7)  Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are at
         risk of arrest, prolonged detention and physical abuse by the
         Iranian authorities. Even Kurds expressing peaceful dissent or who
         speak out about Kurdish rights also face a real risk of persecution
         or Article 3 ill-treatment.

         (8)  Activities that can be perceived to be political by the
         Iranian authorities include social welfare and charitable
         activities on behalf of Kurds. Indeed, involvement with any
         organised activity on behalf of or in support of Kurds can be
         perceived as political and thus involve a risk of adverse attention
         by the Iranian authorities with the consequent risk of persecution
         or Article 3 ill-treatment.

         (9)  Even 'low-level' political activity, or activity that is
         perceived to be political, such as, by way of example only, mere
         possession of leaflets espousing or supporting Kurdish rights, if
         discovered, involves the same risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-
         treatment. Each case, however, depends on its own facts and an
         assessment will need to be made as to the nature of the material
         possessed and how it would be likely to be viewed by the Iranian
         authorities in the context of the foregoing guidance.

         (10) The Iranian authorities demonstrate what could be described as
         a 'hair-trigger' approach to those suspected of or perceived to be
         involved in Kurdish political activities or support for Kurdish
         rights. By 'hair-trigger' it means that the threshold for suspicion
         is low and the reaction of the authorities is reasonably likely to
         be extreme."

Findings of fact and analysis of the evidence:

23. As set out in the error of law decision, I reached the conclusion that
    there had been no error in the decision of the FtTJ relating to the
    findings of fact and assessment of the events in Iran. Those findings
    were to be preserved for this hearing and are summarised earlier in
    this decision at paragraph 16. It therefore follows that the appellant
    had no adverse profile nor was he of any interest to the authorities
    when he left Iran.

24. Paragraph 339P states:

         "A person may have a well-founded fear of being persecuted or a
         real risk of suffering serious harm based on events which have
         taken place since the person left the country of origin or country
         of return and/or activates which have been engaged in by a person
         since he left his country of origin or country of return, in
         particular where it is established that the activities relied upon
         constitute the expression and continuation of convictions or
         orientations held in the country of origin or country of return."

25. The issue before this Tribunal relates to his activities in the United
    Kingdom and whether those activities are such as to place him at risk
    of persecution or serious harm on return to Iran. The FtTJ had formed
    the view from the evidence before him that the appellant had sought to
    bolster his asylum claim by his use of his face book account on the
    basis that he had posted images of the illegal trade of smuggling. The
    FtTJ did not make any finding as to the nature or motivation of his
    activities in the UK.

26. I have heard further evidence from the appellant and also viewed the
    extracts of his face books posts and photographs of his conduct at
    demonstrations although there was no cross-examination of his general
    motivation. He was able within his oral evidence able to give a
    description of why he had attended the demonstrations to give his
    actions some context which made reference to his Kurdish ethnicity and
    the treatment of those he described as "kolbers" who had been subject
    to serious harm. I am satisfied to the lower standard that he does
    share these views and that he believes that there has been injustice
    shown.

27. Even if I were wrong, activities undertaken in bad faith can found a
    sur place claim but careful attention must be given to whether those
    activities are likely to come to the attention of the authorities on
    return - see the reasoning in YB (Eritrea) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 360.



28. The real question it seems to me is what follows for an individual
    appellant if any adverse information reached the authorities. This is a
    question of fact for the Tribunal to assess on the evidence.

29. The FtTJ accepted that he had attended demonstrations and the evidence
    before me demonstrates that he has continued to attend those
    demonstrations over the past year. He has continued to post material on
    his face book page which, as Ms Najah submits, could only be viewed as
    anti -regime in its contents. Even if it could be inferred that this
    was solely to found a sur place claim rather than any genuine political
    commitment, I would have to consider whether the appellant in his
    particular circumstances would, as a result of his activities coming to
    the attention of the authorities and be at a real risk of serious harm
    or persecution in Iran.

30. I have assessed the issue in accordance with the country guidance
    decision of BA (demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG
    [2011) UKUT 36 which identified the following factors, the nature of
    the sur place activity, identification risk, factors triggering
    enquiry/action on return, consequences of identification and
    identification risk on return.

31. There is no dispute that the appellant has attended a number of
    demonstrations outside the Iranian embassy. There is a schedule of
    those attended at page 114 (bundle 1). Having heard his evidence and
    viewed that in the context of the photographs, there is also no dispute
    that the activities undertaken could properly be described as anti-
    regime.

32. The theme of the demonstrations is to support Kurdish rights in general
    and to protest against the ill treatment and execution of those
    described as "kolbers". The conduct displayed in the pictures also
    references the appellant setting fire to a picture of the Supreme
    leader and it can properly said that the authorities would take
    exception to such demonstrations.

33. Whilst he is present at the demonstrations, he is one of a number of
    other participants. It has not been stated in his evidence that the
    appellant has any particular role at the demonstrations, nor do I find
    him to have such a role as evidenced in the photographs. On some
    pictures he is holding a Kurdish flag and other pictures show him
    holding photographs of executions. It could not be said that the
    appellant has been responsible for organising any of the demonstrations
    or taking a prominent role. I am satisfied that he is seen protesting
    alongside and with a number of other individuals.

34. In the light of the evidence set out in the country guidance decision
    of BA (as cited) at paragraph 30, and paragraph 65 and that the
    Tribunal were also satisfied that the Iranian authorities attempt to
    identify persons participating in the demonstrations outside the
    embassy in London. I am satisfied that this is reasonably likely to
    remain the position and accept the Tribunal's assessment where it is
    stated that there is evidence of direct surveillance of Iranian
    protests abroad by way of filming and that the Iranian authorities may
    operate surveillance on demonstrators. That is also the oral evidence
    of the appellant who stated that he saw people with cameras taking
    photographs from inside the embassy. It is not easy to assess the
    nature of the surveillance of this particular appellant, given that the
    photographic evidence appears to show the appellant some distance away
    from the embassy itself and in the light of the number of protesters.
    However, as submitted by Mr Diwnycz, the Tribunal in BA (as cited)
    concluded that as regards identification of risk back in Iran, the
    ability of the authorities to identify all returnees who have attended
    demonstrations, particularly given the numbers of those who do, remain
    limited by the lack of facial recognition (at [66]). It has therefore
    not been shown that for this particular appellant that his attendance
    at the demonstrations in 2019, and who has no particular role, by
    itself gives rise to any risk of identification.

35. However, this not the extent of his sur place activity and it is common
    ground that the appellant has an active Facebook account, having posted
    both in Iran and whilst in the United Kingdom. The posts have been
    reproduced in part in the bundles of documentation. The Facebook posts
    in part reproduce the photographs showing the appellant's attendance at
    the demonstrations and show his conduct. For example, set out in the
    oral evidence there is a picture of him setting fire to a photograph.
    This has been shared on Facebook and has been the subject of praise
    from other individuals and the subject of comments. Again, there has
    been no dispute that that material could properly be viewed as adverse
    to the Iranian regime or seen as critical of it.

36. Whilst Ms Najah relies upon the  reported case of AB & Others (internet
    activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 257 (IAC) it is not a
    country guidance case and I have reminded myself that the evidence
    considered by the Upper Tribunal in that case therefore must not be
    given any particular weight in the case before me as country guidance
    cases only are exceptions to the general Rule evidence and one case
    cannot be relied in another case (see  AM (Iran) [2018] EWCA Civ 2706).

37. I have therefore considered the evidence set out in the country
    guidance decisions which relate to what has been described as the
    "pinch point" of return.

38. It is common grounds that on return that there is a reasonable
    likelihood that he will be questioned. The decision in SSH and HR sets
    out that the duration of initial questioning would be for a "fairly
    brief period" (at 12]), although I recognise that there is other
    evidence which demonstrates that questioning may take a few hours (see
    [58] of HB(Iran)). What is of relevance in terms of assessment of risk
    is whether during that initial questioning the authorities have any
    particular concerns arising from activities in the UK then there is a
    real risk that there would be further questioning accompanied by ill-
    treatment.

39. It is necessary therefore to consider the individual factors relating
    to a particular appellant and to consider them cumulatively when making
    a decision as to risk on return.

40. In terms of risk factors relating to this particular appellant, there
    is no dispute that the appellant illegally departed from Iran as the
    journey described by the appellant is that he travelled from Iran to
    Turkey by foot and crossing the border illegally ( see Q3.3 of the
    screening interview). I would accept that this would provide an
    additional reason as to why the appellant is likely to be questioned at
    the point of return.  As to the documentation, he arrived without a
    passport and stated in his screening interview that he had never been
    provided with a passport (see Q1.8). Notwithstanding the appellant's
    lack of credibility generally as found by the FtTJ, given the lack of
    dispute on this issue, I accept to the lower standard that he would be
    returning without a passport. Although SB (risk on return - illegal
    exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053 confirmed that illegal exit is not in
    itself a significant risk factor, it could be a factor adding to risk
    if a person otherwise faces difficulties.

41. Therefore it is likely he will be returned without a passport (see
    paragraph [97] of HB (Iran). There is no dispute that he is of Kurdish
    ethnicity. He is additionally a failed asylum seeker.

42. Paragraph 23 of SSH and HR highlighted that a failed asylum seeker will
    be questioned and that 'if there are particular concerns arising from
    their previous activities either in Iran or in the United Kingdom or
    whichever country they are returned from, then there would be a risk of
    further questioning, detention and potential ill-treatment'.

43. The relevance of his Kurdish ethnicity as a risk factor is set out in
    the CG decision of HB (Kurds) (as cited above). Since 2016 the Iranian
    authorities have been increasingly suspicious of Kurdish political
    activities and as a result those of Kurdish ethnicity are regarded with
    even greater suspicion and subjected to heightened scrutiny on return.
    The description in HB (Kurds) at [95] sets out that the evidence before
    the Tribunal indicated that the Iranian authorities demonstrate what
    could be described as a "hair trigger" approach to those suspected of
    or perceived to be involved in Kurdish political activities or support
    for Kurdish rights. As the Tribunal set out at paragraph 95, that means
    that the threshold for suspicion is low and the reaction of the
    authorities is reasonably likely to be extreme.

44. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that his face book posts can
    properly be described as anti-regime and also to be in support of
    Kurdish rights in the light of the photos showing him alongside the
    Kurdish flag. I would agree. The question is whether the authorities
    would become aware of those postings.

45. In his cross examination of the appellant Mr Diwnycz asked him if he
    knew he could delete his face book account. The appellant stated that
    he did not know that. It was put to him that he could take the
    reasonable step of deleting his account so that he would not be at
    risk. In addition it was suggested to him that if he were asked by the
    authorities if he had a social media account, he could say that he had
    deleted it and therefore would not be at risk.

46. The appellant stated in his evidence that he did not see why he should
    delete his account given he is able in the UK to freely state his views
    and freely express them and that he would continue to do this. This is
    consistent with his witness statement at paragraph 10.

47. A number of issues arise from that evidence. As Mr Diwnycz stated in
    his submission, there has been an unreported decision concerning the
    use of Facebook and the information contained in it. The evidence
    included expert evidence. That decision was not put before me and no
    application was made in advance to cite the unreported decision as
    would be required in the light of the practice direction. It is
    therefore not possible to ascertain the status and weight of that
    evidence in this appeal or generally. Furthermore, even if I accepted
    that it was in general terms possible to delete an account, it has not
    been explained by way of evidence or otherwise, whether by adopting
    such a course the shared posts with other individuals and flagging of
    names would still identify the person involved. On the facts of this
    particular appeal, the face book posts have been shared by other
    individuals. I also accept the submission made by Ms Najah that if the
    appellant stated that he had deleted his account that this may be
    viewed as an admission that it had contained adverse material and that
    such conduct would likely be held against him in the light of the other
    risk characteristics and particularly his Kurdish ethnicity. I conclude
    that the issue of face book posts and their deletion may in some
    appeals be an issue which requires full consideration but that this
    does necessitate evidence in which to make that assessment which is not
    before this Tribunal.

48. The expert evidence annexed in HB which at paragraph 7 of that
    decision, the Upper Tribunal confirmed was "essential to the full
    understanding of this decision that full reference is made to the
    summarised expert evidence" indicates that the Iranian authorities have
    a particular interest in Facebook and that merely sharing and liking
    posts on social media is risky.

49. In the light of the appellant's evidence and that he is not expected to
    lie as the Tribunal set out in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT at
    paragraph 116:-

         "We are satisfied that the content the appellant's Facebook page
         would become known to the authorities on return as part of the
         process of investigation of his background. That is the effect of
         the expert background evidence before us. It is then, no step at
         all to the conclusion that this would involve a real risk of
         persecution and Article 3 ill-treatment in his case."

50. That being the case, it is reasonably likely that the nature of the
    material on this face book account would be such to cause the
    authorities to view it as anti-regime. The posts do demonstrate pro-
    Kurdish sympathies and are reasonably likely to be perceived in a
    negative light and risk the adverse attention by the Iranian
    authorities. Even if the activities have been undertaken in bad faith,
    the objective material referred to in the country guidance decisions
    demonstrate that it is reasonably likely that the Iranian authorities
    will be less interested in the reasons or motivation for undertaking
    activities.

51. In my overall analysis of risk, and taking into account the particular
    factors in this appellant's case, I am satisfied that he has
    demonstrated to the lower standard of proof that upon return the
    cumulative effect of the activities undertaken is likely to become
    known upon questioning and from his posts and when viewed in the light
    of his illegal exit and his Kurdish ethnicity, it would give rise to a
    real risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment. I therefore allow
    the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law and is therefore set aside. It is remade as follows: the
appeal is allowed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

     Date 9 /1/2020

     Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
