
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04308/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 April 2019                              |On 07 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 MIRJANA [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant claims to have been born on [~]  1988  and  is  a  female
    citizen of Albania. She the United  Kingdom  in  January  2016  claimed
    asylum. Her two sons are dependent upon her claim; one was born in 2011
    in Albania, the other born in August 2016 in the  United  Kingdom.  The
    Secretary of State refused to grant her international protection  by  a
    decision which is dated 15 February 2018. She appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated  on  20  December  2018,
    dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Both representatives at the initial hearing told me that  both  parties
    consider the judge's decision to be flawed by legal error such that  it
    should be set aside. In particular, the judge has,  for  reasons  which
    are unclear, gone behind the trafficking decision  which  both  parties
    had accepted. The judge's decision to do so was  not  notified  to  the
    representatives at the First-tier Tribunal hearing. First,  the  judges
    given no reason at all for rejecting the appellant's claim that she had
    been trafficked,  a  claim  which  the  Secretary  of  State  accepted.
    Secondly, the judge has perpetrated a procedural irregularity by making
    a finding on a matter which both parties believed had been  agreed  and
    which the judge had not raised with the  parties  at  the  hearing.  In
    addition, at [48] the judge has made a number of unfortunate statements
    which appear to be without any justification  and  which  cast  serious
    doubt upon the quality of his analysis. Given the nature of the errors,
    there is no alternative but for the appeal to be returned to the First-
    tier Tribunal for that tribunal to remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. None of  the  findings
of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal  (not
Judge NMK Lawrence) for that tribunal to remake the decision.


Signed                              Date 1 MAY 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

