
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04729/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 February 2020                  |On 18 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HLH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, instructed by Bankfield Heath,
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1994 and is a male citizen of Iraq.
    He appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  dated  6  May  2019  to  refuse  to   grant   him
    international  protection.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 20 November 2019, allowed the appeal on humanitarian and
    human rights grounds (Article  3  ECHR)  but  dismissed  it  on  asylum
    grounds. The Secretary of State now appeals, with  permission,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's home area of Iraq is Tuz Khurmatu. The judge found [34]
    that  it  was  unsafe  to  return  the  appellant  to  his  home   area
    notwithstanding the fact that she rejected his account of  past  events
    in Iraq. She did not find the  appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness.
    However, in assessing the  reasonableness  of  internal  flight  within
    Iraq, the judge accepted  that  the  appellant  could  not  obtain  the
    necessary identity documents to enable him to relocate safely. At [37],
    she wrote:

         "Despite having found the appellant  lacks  credibility,  there  is
         nothing to suggest that he has his CSID and in the context  of  the
         displacement from his home area I accept that  even  if  he  is  in
         contact with his family may be very difficult for anybody to go  to
         the civil registry in Salah-Al-Din to  try  to  obtain  replacement
         within a reasonable period.  Furthermore,  as  his  home  area  was
         formerly held by ISIS  it  is  possible  that  the  relevant  civil
         registry office is no longer operational. The appellant is from the
         minority community [Kurdish] there is no evidence that he can speak
         Arabic. He has no relatives  or  anyone  who  can  sponsor  him  in
         Baghdad will stop apply all these factors I find that  without  his
         CSID be unduly harsh him to relocate to  Baghdad  or  the  southern
         governates."

 3. The judge went on [38] to conclude that the  appellant  would  also  be
    unable to relocate to the IKR without a CSID or family support.

 4. The problem with the judge's decision is that there  is  a  significant
    tension between her findings in respect  of  internal  flight  and  her
    robust rejection of the appellant's 'fabricated' claim. There  is  also
    inconsistency in her fact-finding. At [29], the judge  found  that  the
    appellant had not been 'honest about his family circumstances in Iraq.'
    Notwithstanding that finding, she proceeded in her analysis of internal
    flight to assume that  the  appellant  would  have  no  family  support
    anywhere within Iraq. The judge has not made any attempt to explain why
    she has, on the one hand, rejected the appellant's credibility only, on
    the other, to  restore  it  in  a  subsequent  part  of  her  analysis.
    Moreover, the judge clearly found [29]  that  the  appellant  had  been
    inconsistent about the whereabouts of his mother and younger  brothers.
    She has left unresolved the question of  where  in  Iraq  those  family
    members may now be living and whether or not  they  would  be  able  to
    assist the appellant  in  obtaining  either  his  original  CSID  or  a
    replacement. Had the judge made firm findings as regards whereabouts of
    the family members and their ability to assist the appellant, then  her
    findings on internal flight may have been sufficient. However, she  has
    made unreasoned assumptions regarding family members in her  discussion
    of internal flight which are at odds with her earlier rejection of what
    the appellant said about his family members in Iraq.  The  analysis  is
    confused and unsatisfactory.

 5. The judge's error is compounded by her rather hazy analysis at [37]  et
    seq. The judge's suggestion that 'it may be difficult for anybody to go
    to the civil registry... To obtain [a] replacement  [CSID]  within  [a]
    reasonable time' does not refer to any item of evidence  or  background
    material which may have led her to make that statement. She also  poses
    the possibility that 'as his home area was formerly held by ISIS it  is
    possible  that  the  relevant  civil  registry  office  is  no   longer
    operational' [37]. Again, the  judge  not  refer  to  any  evidence  of
    background material which led her  to  that  equivocal  observation.  I
    agree with the Secretary of State that it is equally possible that  the
    civil registry office remains  operational.  The  result  is  that  the
    judge's analysis of internal flight is not based on any firm foundation
    of fact-finding.

 6. For the reasons I have stated, I  find  the  judge's  analysis  is  not
    sound. Accordingly, I set aside the decision.

 7. The Upper Tribunal in SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents)
    Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC) at [436] observed that:

         "Mr Knafler invited us to remit this appeal  to  the  FtT  so  that
         further findings of fact can be made.  We consider that to  be  the
         appropriate  course.   Although  the  appellant  has   been   found
         incredible in relation to his account  of  first-hand  difficulties
         with ISIL, it was accepted that he is  a  Kurd  from  Tuz  Khurmato
         which is, as we have recorded above, an area with particular ethno-
         sectarian conflict.  It is arguable (we put it no higher than that)
         that the appellant might, as a result of  his  particular  profile,
         demonstrate that he has a sufficiently enhanced risk  profile  that
         he is entitled to a conclusion that  his  return  to  Tuz  Khurmato
         would engage Article 15(c)  and  that  considerations  of  internal
         relocation  arise.   We  could  potentially  have  resolved   those
         questions ourselves but we received no  specific  argument  on  the
         points.  That is not a criticism of the appellant's legal team;  as
         Mr Knafler  noted  in  his  submissions,  he  was  unable  to  make
         submissions on the assessment of risk before he knew how  we  would
         decide the CG issues."

 8. In the light of the particular difficulties which still  exist  in  Tuz
    Khurmatu it will be necessary for there to be a  fact-finding  analysis
    of such risk, if any, which the appellant may face  on  his  return.  I
    consider that judge's findings that [29] constitute a sufficient  basis
    for the finding that the appellant still has family members  living  in
    Iraq with whom he remains in contact. That finding shall form the basis
    of any new analysis. The next judicial decision maker will need to deal
    not only with risk to the appellant should he reach  Tuz  Khurmatu  but
    also, on the basis that he has contact with his family in Iraq, whether
    he will be able to obtain the necessary identity  documentation  before
    he leaves the United Kingdom either from  Iraq  or  by  application  to
    Iraqi consular services in this country. It will be necessary  for  the
    Tribunal to make firm findings on these issues.  That  fact-finding  is
    likely to be  extensive  and  it  may  be  necessary  to  hear  further
    evidence. For that reason, the appeal is  returned  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The  judge's
    findings regarding the appellant's account of past events in  Iraq  are
    preserved. The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal  for  that
    Tribunal to remake the decision following a hearing. That hearing  will
    proceed on the basis that the  appellant  is  in  contact  with  family
    members in Iraq.




    Signed                                           Date 16 March 2020
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.












