
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
PA/04556/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                             Decision
and Reasons Promulgated
On 28th March 2019                                                 On 08th
May 2019



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                   MR D R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                 Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr M Sowerby, Counsel, instructed by Freedom
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1. The appellant made a claim for protection on the 27th June 2017. He
      claimed to have arrived in the United Kingdom the day before. He said
      he was a national of Iran and was a Kurd. He made a living lawfully
      transporting goods across the border with Iraq. On 7 June 2015 his
      vehicle was stopped by a group of men in traditional Kurdish dress.
      They totalled 6. He subsequently learned that they were members of
      PJAK.They commandeered his vehicle, taking the appellant with them as
      a passenger. They later encountered a checkpoint and fire was
      exchanged.


   2. They managed to drive away and later stopped the vehicle and the
      appellant and the men got out. The men returned his mobile phone. He
      left his identity documents in the vehicle. They had stopped near the
      house of one of his friends who allowed him to stay overnight. He made
      contact with his family the following day and his mother advised him
      that the authorities of been to their home looking for him. They had
      arrested his father. He then made his way to his sister's house. His
      father was released the following day and from what the appellant
      learnt it was felt he was in danger and should leave the country.
      Since then he has been in contact with his family but did not discuss
      events.

   3. The respondent refused his claim 21 March 2018. It was accepted he was
      a Kurdish national of Iran. The truth of his underlying claim however
      was not accepted.

   4. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan at
      Birmingham on 9 May 2018. In a decision promulgated on 17 May 2018 it
      was dismissed.

   5. Permission to appeal was sought on 2 grounds. The 1st was that the
      judge made a negative credibility finding without putting operative
      matters to the appellant for comment. Secondly, it was contended the
      judge made a factual error as to the timescale as to when he learnt of
      his father's detention. The judge had commented, as a negative
      credibility factor, the apparently very short timescale between the
      incident and the authorities going to the appellant's home.

   6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane.
      Permission was not granted on the grounds advanced. Rather, First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Keane granted permission on the basis it was arguable
      the judge erred in the overall credibility assessment. The judge had
      accepted the appellant's account was broadly consistent with the
      objective evidence about events in Iran. Furthermore, the actual
      account was consistent and the appellant has not sought to embellish
      it. Points made by the respondent where discounted by the judge.
      However, First-tier trade Tribunal Judge Keane then felt the judge may
      have erred by expressing concerns about the plausibility of the
      account. This included an adverse inference from his failure to claim
      asylum in Austria where he had been arrested. First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Keane found it was arguable that the judge had not arrived at
      his conclusion on the basis of a global assessment of all the
      evidence.

The Upper Tribunal

   7.  Mr Sowerby continue to argue that the judge materially erred by not
      putting certain matters to the appellant. For instance, the judge had
      questioned why on the account given the PJAK members would have taken
      the appellant in the 1st place. On the basis set out in paragraph 36
      his presence could constitute a danger for them. For instance, he
      could have resisted; he could have learnt more about them; if they
      meant him no harm then why take him in the 1st place? At paragraph 39
      the judge had questioned why, having escaped the firefight the vehicle
      was subsequently abandoned with the occupants fleeing on foot.
      Regarding the second-ground advanced, he made the point that the
      appellant's timescale of the authorities finding out about him and
      detaining his father related to the following day and not immediately
      thereafter.

   8. Mr Melvin opposed the appeal, stating there was no material error
      demonstrated. The judge had carried out a global assessment and he
      submitted there was no merit in the grounds advanced. The judge
      clearly indicated why the appeal was being rejected. The only issue
      arising in the appeal was the appellant's credibility. If he was found
      not to be credible and the appeal could not succeed.

   9. The judge had made the point that the fact the account may be
      consistent did not necessarily mean it was true. Mr Melvin suggested
      that the consideration of the appeal should be restricted to the
      grounds advanced in the application for permission. There had been a
      subsequent issue in relation to Facebook material but he submitted
      this had not been an issue before the original decision maker or the
      judge and it was open to the appellant to make a fresh claim on this.

Conclusion

  10. I have considered the decision in its entirety. In my view this is a
      carefully prepared decision which is sustainable. At paragraph 5 the
      judge accurately sets out the claim being made. At paragraph 8 he sets
      out the appellant being arrested and fingerprinted in Austria. He made
      a claim for protection there but did not remain. Then, at paragraph 10
      and 11 the judge accurately sets out the points taken in the refusal
      letter. This is replicated in the summary of the presenting officer's
      submissions at paragraph 22.

  11. The judge identified that the case turned upon the appellant's
      credibility. This is not been challenged. At paragraph 29, under the
      heading `Analysis, findings and conclusions' the judge emphasised that
      he was looking at all of the evidence and refers to a jigsaw of
      evidence, the cumulative impact of which led him to find the account
      was not credible. At paragraph 30 he again emphasised the need to
      consider the evidence as a whole. The judge made the very sensible
      point that the fact the appellant maybe uneducated did not mean he was
      unintelligent.

  12. The judge demonstrated an open-minded approach in considering the
      evidence. He took certain points in the appellant's favour. For
      instance, at paragraph 32 the judge referred to the absence of
      documentary evidence in support of the claim but drew no adverse
      inferences because of this and in the circumstances found it plausible
      that documentation would not be available. At paragraph 35 the judge
      acknowledged that some points taken by the respondent were without
      merit. These relate to peripheral matters, such as to who engaged the
      agent. At paragraph 42 the judge accepted that the account of the
      early release of his father could have happened if he was in poor
      health. At paragraph 44 the judge acknowledged that a failure to claim
      protection in a safe country did not automatically damage credibility,
      albeit in this case the judge did find it to be damaging.

  13. The judge acknowledged that the appellant's account was consistent at
      paragraph 34. The judge accepted he had not sought to embellish this
      simple account. The account given was also consistent with the
      background information about events in Iran and skirmishes between the
      authorities and the PJAK. All these factors however did not make the
      account necessarily true. Again, this was a common-sense point to make
      by the judge. The judge then gave specific examples which called into
      question the claim.

  14. At paragraph 36 the judge questioned why the PJAK members would take
      him with them. One of their members, on his account, had driven the
      vehicle so he was not needed as a driver. At paragraph 37 the judge
      pointed out the risks to PJAK in taking the appellant with them. He
      could have resisted or if the opportunity arose, alerted the
      authorities. The longer he was with them the more he could find out
      about them. If they did not mean to do him harm and was was suggested
      on his behalf then they could simply have left behind. On the face of
      it therefore there was no obvious reason for taking him with them.
      This was a matter of common sense to draw from the case presented. It
      is not necessary for a judge to put to the appellant conclusions drawn
      on the claim and no unfairness occurred. There was no surprise about
      what the judge did and the observations were based upon the claim
      made.

  15. The other point taken by the judge was the claimed abandonment of the
      vehicle. At paragraph 39 the judge questioned why this would be done
      when they could have continued to drive on. Again, the judge shows an
      even-handed approach by suggesting possibly they may have been
      concerned that at that stage the authorities would be tracking the
      vehicle.

  16.  However, a compounding feature was there leaving the appellant. The
      judge made the point that if he were detected he might be able to give
      information about them.

  17. A further point was the authorities returning his telephone. The judge
      did not find it plausible that in the circumstance PJAK would be so
      concerned about his loss of contact details and photographs that they
      would do this. The appellant had sought to suggest returning the phone
      did not present a risk and there was an issue as to whether the
      battery was flat or whether the battery was removed. In any event, the
      judge made the point that he could telephone from any nearby house.
      Again, these are common sense observations from the case made. The
      judge did not see the need to specifically put them to the appellant.

  18. At paragraph 41 the judge did comment as a negative credibility point
      the apparent speed with which the authorities could identify him. The
      appellant did not have any profile before the incident. It was
      improbable that he would have been identified at the scene. It was
      suggested he could have been identified through the vehicle and a
      driving licence left. However, this would require the vehicle being
      found in the 1st place and then checks made. At paragraph 41 the judge
      refers to this being unlikely to have taken place by the time he
      reached the house of his friend Sherwan. It is argued on behalf of the
      appellant that the judge has misunderstood the timescale in that the
      raid upon the family home did not take place immediately but occurred
      the following morning. The judge has in fact recorded this at
      paragraph 18.


  19. I do not find any material error of law in relation to this. This was
      only one feature amongst many. The judge at paragraph 41 had commented
      as being improbable that the authorities but have identified him and
      being is home by the time he reached the house of his friend Sherwan.
      The appellant's claim was he did contact his home using Sherwan's
      phone the following morning. I do not find it established that the
      judge has made a factual error but in any event, the overall point
      made was the improbability of the speed with which the authorities had
      been to his home. In the context of the reasons as a whole I do not
      find any material error arising.

  20. In summary this to be a carefully prepared decision in which the judge
      has properly evaluated the evidence and come to conclusions open to
      them. The judge properly addressed section 8. Whilst pointing out at
      paragraph 44 it was not automatically damaging to credibility, went on
      to find on the facts the appellant's explanation for not remaining in
      Austria was flimsy. Consequently, on the facts it did damage his
      credibility. Again, this was something open to the judge.

Decision.

No material error has been established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge O'Hagan. Consequently, the decision dismissing the
appellant's appeal shall stand.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.                  dated 06 May 2019
