
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04635/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 November 2019                  |On 10 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                            HIS HONOUR JUDGE BIRD
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    S S H
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant
    or members of his family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Gherman, Counsel, instructed by Virgo
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moore ("the judge"), promulgated on 4 September 2019, in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    refusal of his protection and human rights claims.

 2. In brief terms, the Appellant, an Iraqi national of Kurdish  ethnicity,
    claimed that he was at risk from members of a particular  tribe  called
    the Zebaris, whom, it is said,  wished  him  harm  on  account  of  his
    father's previous activities under the regime of  Saddam  Hussein.  The
    Appellant asserted that the Zebaris were very closely connected to  the
    President of the IKR and had sufficient interest and resources to  find
    him wherever he might go. Indeed, the Appellant claimed that members of
    the tribe had in fact tracked him down in the past and threatened  him.
    In  refusing  the  claims,  the  Respondent  accepted  the  Appellant's
    nationality, but rejected all other material aspects of his account. It
    was concluded that the Appellant was not  at  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm in his home area or elsewhere and that  in  any  event  he
    could internally relocate. Furthermore, the Appellant could not succeed
    on Article 8 grounds.

The judge's decision

 3. In summary, the judge  rejected  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    account in all material respects  (see  [22]-[28]).  As  a  result,  he
    concluded that the Appellant was not at risk of persecution or  serious
    harm anywhere  within  Iraq  or  indeed  the  IKR,  and  that  internal
    relocation was an option. The Article 8 claim was disposed of in  short
    terms.

 4. Of particular relevance in this appeal is what the judge says  in  [22]
    and [23]. In respect of the former, the judge stated what he considered
    to be a material change in the Appellant's account  over  time,  noting
    that initially the claimed fear was of  the  father's  enemies,  whilst
    subsequently this apparently shifted to a fear only of members  of  the
    Zebari tribe. In [23] the judge stated that the appellant apparently no
    longer claiming to be afraid of his father's enemies because of a feud,
    and that the focus is only on the Zebari tribe.

 5. In subsequent paragraphs, the judge  finds  against  the  Appellant  in
    respect of the location of his home area, the  claimed  involvement  of
    the father with the Ba'ath Party, and the account of being tracked down
    by members of the Zebari tribe and threatened.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. In essence, the grounds challenge  the  judge's  credibility  findings,
    asserting, amongst other  matters,  that  he  erred  in  regarding  the
    Appellant's account as inconsistent.

 7. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McClure on 16 October 2019.

 8. The Respondent has not provided a rule 24 response.

The hearing

 9. At the outset of the  hearing,  Mr  Walker  accepted  that  there  were
    material errors  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision,  with  particular
    reference to [22]  and  [23].  He  acknowledged  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence as to whom he feared had in fact been  essentially  consistent
    throughout: the father's enemies had always been members of the  Zebari
    tribe. Mr Walker categorised the judge's approach to this core  element
    of the Appellant's account as a "misunderstanding" of the evidence.  In
    addition, he accepted that the Appellant had never expressed a fear  of
    the Ba'ath Party, contrary to what the judge appears to have  believed,
    with reference to [25]. It was conceded that there was  a  real  danger
    that the erroneous credibility findings may have infected  the  overall
    assessment of the Appellant's evidence. In light  of  this,  Mr  Walker
    agreed that a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal would be appropriate.

Decision on error of law

10. In light of Mr Walker's stated position in this  appeal,  we  can  deal
    with the error of law decision briefly. In our view,  he  was  entirely
    right to have accepted the existence of material errors.

11. Having looked at relevant  aspects  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  for
    ourselves, it is clear that the core element of  his  account  had  not
    changed over the course of time. It had always been put on the basis of
    a fear of his father's enemies, who were members of the  Zebari  tribe.
    The judge did misunderstand  the  evidence,  at  least  to  a  material
    extent, and reached an important adverse finding on credibility that is
    unsustainable.

12. The judge was also wrong to have believed that the Appellant  had  ever
    stated a claimed fear of the Ba'ath Party.

13. Flowing from these errors is the distinct danger that other aspects  of
    the Appellant's account were rejected, at least in part, on account  of
    a cumulative assessment which included flawed elements. Indeed, in [24]
    the  judge  makes  reference  to  "numerous  inconsistencies"  in   the
    Appellant's case. Although these are not  specifically  identified,  at
    least two of them, one being  the  central  plank  of  the  Appellant's
    account, were not in fact inconsistencies at all.

14. Whilst we have of course read the judge's decision sensibly and in  the
    round, the errors identified lead  us  to  conclude  that  the  judge's
    decision must be set aside.

Disposal

15. A remittal to the First-tier Tribunal is the exception to  the  general
    presumption that matters should be  retained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Whilst both representatives  are  agreed  that  the  matter  should  be
    permitted, we have considered the question for ourselves. In  light  of
    para 7.2 of the Practice  Statements  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, we conclude
    that this appeal must indeed be remitted, given the nature  and  extent
    of the fact-finding  now  required  and  in  light  of  the  overriding
    objective.

16. Therefore, this appeal shall be remitted with no preserved findings  of
    fact.

17. One additional matter arises. A new Country Guidance case  on  Iraq  is
    imminent   (SMO   and   Others   PA/08722/2017,   PA/09241/2017,    and
    PA/00142/2015). In light of the nature of the Appellant's claim, it  is
    highly desirable that the remitted hearing does not occur  until  after
    promulgation of that decision.

Anonymity

18.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  order.  In   all   the
    circumstances, we continue that  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

We remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

    1. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (the Taylor  House
       hearing centre);

    2. The remitted appeal shall be conducted  by  way  of  a  complete  re-
       hearing, with no preserved findings of fact;

    3. The remitted appeal shall not be heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Moore;

    4. The remitted appeal shall not be heard before the promulgation of the
       Upper  Tribunal's  Country  Guidance  decision  in  SMO  and   Others
       PA/08722/2017, PA/09241/2017, and PA/00142/2015.


Signed      [pic]            Date: 5 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

