
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/04380/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15th January 2018                       |On 06th February 2018            |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

For the Respondent:    Mr N Paramjorthy (instructed by S Satha & Co
Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to a Decision and Reasons promulgated on  20th  June  2017  by
    Judge Coutts after a hearing at Hatton Cross on  6th  June  2017.   The
    case involved a protection claim by a Sri Lankan national born in March
    1996.  He claimed that he was at  risk  of  persecution  in  Sri  Lanka
    because of family links to the LTTE and matters that  had  taken  place
    whilst in Sri Lanka.   The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  accept  the
    Appellant's involvement with the LTTE as credible and therefore did not
    accept that he had been arrested on three occasions as he claimed.

 2. The Decision and Reasons is by any standards extremely  brief  and  the
    reasoning similarly so.  The Judge found the Appellant's  claim  to  be
    credible on the lower standard and found it reasonably likely  that  he
    would be at risk on return.

 3. The grounds, which are indeed very lengthy,  start  with  an  assertion
    that the Judge had failed to take into account the contents of  a  June
    2017 report which was not in front of the Judge.  The Judge  cannot  be
    guilty of an error of law in failing to take into  account  a  document
    which the Secretary of State failed to put before him.

 4. However, the challenges to the credibility  findings  I  find  do  have
    merit.   There  were  considerable  credibility   challenges   to   the
    Appellant's account set out at paragraph 3 of the grounds which I  find
    have considerable force and are just  simply  not  dealt  with  by  the
    Judge.  The Judge does not deal with any of the  Secretary  of  State's
    credibility challenges and simply finds that he would be  at  risk  and
    that his claim was credible.

 5. Paragraph 3.1 talks about the Judge failing to make any findings as  to
    why the Appellant, as a 10 year old boy, would be involved in the  LTTE
    or why he would be involved when his father had left the LTTE in  1987,
    nine years before the Appellant was born.

 6. Similarly, with regard to the way that the Judge  has  dealt  with  the
    medical report, I find considerable force in  the  point  made  by  the
    Secretary of State that the Appellant gave  comprehensive  evidence  at
    his asylum interview only two months prior to the hearing and also  for
    the purposes of a psychiatric report and yet was  apparently  unfit  to
    give evidence at the hearing.  That should have been explored.  I  will
    not go into each and every item listed in the grounds, which as  I  say
    are extremely long, but the fact  that  the  Judge  has  made  positive
    credibility findings without engaging with any of the challenges by the
    Secretary of State I find is a material error of law which means that I
    must set the decision aside.  As I am setting it aside in its  entirety
    it is appropriate to remit it to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full
    rehearing

Notice of Decision

 7. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the
    extent that the decision is set aside for inadequacy of  reasoning  and
    the matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full  rehearing
    on all matters.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 2nd February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
