
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04406/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2018                          |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                    A S R
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Berry of Counsel instructed by Irvine Thanvi
Nata Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This case comes back before the Tribunal to remake the decision in  the
    appeal pursuant to the 'error of law' decision made after a hearing  on
    1 May 2018.


2.   The text of the 'error of law' decision is set out below  as  an  Annex
    to this Decision and should  be  read  as  an  integral  part  of  this
    document. The Appellant's immigration history is set out therein, as is
    the background to his protection claim. In this context  it  should  be
    also noted that the primary findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    respect of events in Bangladesh prior to the Appellant's entry  to  the
    UK were preserved, as were  findings  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    attendance at demonstrations in the UK.  The  focus  for  remaking  the
    decision was to be the Appellant's sur place activities, his  political
    conscience, and risk in the event of return to Bangladesh.


3.   Further to the 'error of law' decision Directions were  issued  by  the
    Tribunal for the future conduct of the appeal, including in respect  of
    the filing of further evidence. (The Directions are also reproduced  in
    the Annex as part of the 'error of law' decision.)


4.    Pursuant  to  the  Directions  the  Appellant  has  filed  a   further
    supplementary bundle (including a further witness statement  -  "second
    supplementary witness statement" - dated 19 October 2018), to accompany
    the supplementary bundle filed at  the  time  of  the  'error  of  law'
    hearing, which in turn supplements the bundle that was before the First-
    tier Tribunal. The  Respondent  relies  upon  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Respondent's bundle together with three Country Policy and  Information
    Notes. All such documents are a matter of record on file and I refer to
    them as is incidental for the purposes of this Decision.


5.   I heard evidence from the Appellant, who participated  in  the  hearing
    with the assistance of an interpreter - I ensured mutual  understanding
    at the outset and no language difficulties became apparent  during  the
    course of the hearing. I also heard  evidence  from  Mr  Gulam  Robbani
    Ahmed (who provided a witness  statement  dated  8  July  2018  (latest
    bundle  at  pages  482-484).  I  then  heard   submissions   from   the
    representatives. A careful note of the  evidence  and  submissions  was
    made in the record of proceedings; I have had regard to  all  that  was
    said at the hearing in reaching my decision.


6.   The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the Appellant had  been  involved
    in sur place activities by way of attending demonstrations in the UK  -
    characterised as "blatant protesting by him in public places  where  he
    has made himself very conspicuous  by  standing  at  the  front  whilst
    waving banners" (paragraph 21). The First-tier Tribunal found that such
    matters put the Appellant at risk in the event of return to Bangladesh.
    However, what significantly informed the 'error of  law'  decision  was
    the apparent lack of careful analysis as  to  why  such  activities  as
    accepted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge would have  resulted  in  the
    Appellant 'coming to the attention of the  authorities',  and  moreover
    why mere attendance at  a  rally  or  demonstration  in  the  UK  would
    reasonably likely put him at risk in circumstances where  such  rallies
    and demonstrations were permitted in Bangladesh.


7.   The Appellant now puts  his  case  primarily  on  the  basis  that  his
    further activities  take  his  participation  in  protest  against  the
    government of Bangladesh beyond mere attendance at demonstrations,  and
    moreover that he now has evidence that indicates he  has  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities in Bangladesh.


8.   Over and above the relatively low level  activity  with  no  particular
    political  profile  or  organisational  influence  -   as   essentially
    identified by the  First-tier  Tribunal  -  the  Appellant  now  places
    particular emphasis on his involvement in two incidents:

         (i) An alleged attack  on  the  Bangladesh  High  Commission  on  8
    February 2018.

         (ii) An alleged attack on a Deputy Minister visiting the UK, on  19
         April 2018  near  the  Queen  Elizabeth  II  Conference  Centre  in
         Westminster  during  protests  outside  a  Commonwealth  Heads   of
         Government Meeting attended by the Bangladesh Prime Minister.


9.    I  pause  to  note  that  in  the  Appellant's  supplementary  witness
    statement dated 16 March 2018 he gave details of  further  activism  in
    addition to the two incidents listed above. However it seems to me that
    these latter incidents that  are  of  particular  significance  in  the
    overall evaluation of the Appellant's protection claim.


10.  For completeness and context I should also add that the  Appellant  has
    produced a very significant body of evidence showing his  participation
    in various activities with the BNP.  He  also  gave  oral  evidence  in
    response to cross-examination as to his regular attendance at committee
    meetings.  In  my  judgement  such  evidence  does  indicate  that  the
    Appellant is more involved  in  the  BNP  than  simply  turning  up  at
    demonstrations.


11.  In this context I also note that Mr Avery cross-examined him as to  his
    political beliefs and any distinction that he might  make  between  the
    policies and objectives of the  BNP  compared  with  the  policies  and
    objectives of the Awami League. I accept that to a certain  extent  his
    answers were  general  in  nature  making  aspirational  references  to
    serving the Bangladeshi people, championing human rights and democracy,
    and building a better Bangladesh. It seems to me  that  there  is  some
    substance  to  Mr  Avery's  suggestion  in  cross-examination  that   a
    supporter of the  Awami  League  might  make  just  such  observations.
    However, whilst I accept that the Appellant does not present as a  deep
    political thinker, and may not be able to articulate  in  sophisticated
    terms the basis of his political beliefs, I do  not  accept  that  that
    necessarily undermines his subjective enthusiasm and commitment to  the
    party to which he has - as I find - closely  aligned  himself.  Indeed,
    when asked about specific policy matters, the  Appellant  spoke  as  to
    agricultural initiatives at a village level.


12.   Irrespective  of  any  question  over  his  initial  motivations,  and
    irrespective of the evidence and findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    indicating  no  previous  political   engagement   whilst   living   in
    Bangladesh, I accept that the Appellant's involvement with the  BNP  in
    the UK has resulted in  a  genuine  commitment  to  the  interests  and
    objectives of the party.


13.  In reaching such a conclusion I  have  had  regard  to  the  supporting
    testimony of Mr Gulam Ahmed. Mr Ahmed explained his own position within
    the UK BNP, and the current hiatus whereby  the  ruling  committee  had
    been dissolved and not yet reconvened. He was  frank  in  acknowledging
    that the Appellant did not have an official position within the  party,
    but  nonetheless  characterised  him  as  "a  full-time  activist".  He
    confirmed the Appellant's regular attendance at meetings of the  party,
    as well as his participation in demonstrations.


14.  Although Mr Ahmed was cross-examined as to detail, it seems to me  that
    the veracity of his testimony was not directly challenged. I accept him
    to have  been  a  witness  of  truth,  and  thereby  to  have  provided
    corroborative evidence of the nature  and  extent  of  the  Appellant's
    political activism.


15.  Looking at all of the available evidence 'in the round' I am  satisfied
    that the level and extent of the Appellant activism is consistent  with
    a genuine interest and commitment to the politics of the BNP, and  goes
    significantly beyond that  which  might  be  expected  from  a  cynical
    manipulator anxious only to garner material  to  support  a  protection
    claim.


16.  In his witness statement of 16 March 2018  the  Appellant  related  his
    involvement in a  protest  at  the  Bangladesh  High  Commission  on  8
    February 2018 in relation to the arrest of Khalida Zia.  The  Appellant
    states that he and his fellow protesters wanted to deliver a memorandum
    to the government highlighting their grievance, but that the  officials
    at the High Commission refused to take the letter, and claims that they
    "treated us in a heavy-handed way" (witness statement at paragraph 7).


17.  Notwithstanding the Appellant's version of events, he  has  produced  a
    report from a Bangladesh publication 'Manab Zamin' dated 2  March  2018
    (supplementary bundle at pages  5-6)  which  refers  to  this  incident
    having  been  discussed  between  representatives  of  the   Bangladesh
    government and the British Foreign Secretary. It is reported  that  the
    Bangladesh authorities have made a  formal  complaint  to  the  British
    police, and wish to bring "London BNP activists under the law  for  the
    attack on the High Commission". It is  also  reported  that  names  and
    photographs ("List and  Fotez"  in  the  sometimes  difficult  to  read
    translation) of both leaders and workers active in London  are  in  the
    hands of the government: the Appellant's name appears in  the  list  of
    workers.


18.  This incident is also referenced in the expert report of  Dr  Ashraf-Ul
    Hoque (Appellant's latest bundle pages 3-62, page  43),  and  a  report
    from a different news source - bdnews24 - is quoted. This latter report
    refers to the protesters entering the High Commission  and  vandalising
    photographs of the Prime Minister and "Father of the Nation Bangabandhu
    Sheikh Mujibur Rahman".


19.  It is  convenient  to  note  at  this  juncture  that  Dr  Hoque  makes
    reference  to  the  "particularly  pronounced"  level  of  protest  and
    activism against the Awami League in the UK, and  the  significance  of
    the UK as "an important arena for Bangladesh politics since  it  houses
    the largest Bangladeshi diaspora in the world" (page 45).


20.  The Appellant has produced a number of reports of  an  incident  on  19
    April 2018 near the Queen Elizabeth II Conference  Centre:  see  latest
    bundle at pages 424 et seq.). I bear in mind that for present  purposes
    the exact truth of what might have happened is perhaps  less  important
    than the way in which it has been reported  and/or  is  perceived.  The
    reports produced are from a number of different  publications:  I  have
    been provided with Internet print outs and it is not clear to me  which
    if any of these publications also have a physical existence. Be that as
    it may, the common theme is that a visiting Deputy Minister, Arif  Khan
    Joy was attacked by, variously, "BNP men", "some  BNP  activists",  "UK
    BNP  leaders  and  workers".  The  Deputy   Minister   was   apparently
    accompanying the Bangladesh Prime Minister to a Commonwealth  Heads  of
    Government Meeting. The reports suggest that some BNP members sheltered
    the Minister from his assailants.


21.  The Appellant features prominently in photographs  of  the  incident  -
    although  his  role  in  the  incident  is  not  apparent   from   such
    photographs. Nor is he directly named in such reports.


22.  However in other reports of protests outside the Commonwealth Heads  of
    Government Meeting - which appear to run over the whole period  of  the
    conference (e.g. see page 464), the Appellant is both photographed  and
    named (e.g. see page 468).


23.  I am satisfied that the Appellant attended and  was  involved  in  both
    incidents. His evidence has been consistent  in  this  regard,  and  is
    supported by the various reports on file. Such involvement  places  him
    in  a  relatively  small  group  of  supporters  of  the  BNP  who  are
    significantly  more  active  than  others  who  might   merely   attend
    occasional demonstrations.  Indeed  many  of  the  photographs  of  the
    Appellant attending party meetings and events, appear to place him in a
    relatively small cohort. In my judgement this is  consistent  with  the
    notion of him being a full-time activist as described by Mr Ahmed,  and
    not a mere 'hanger on'.


24.  I am also satisfied that the evidence  shows  that  the  Appellant  has
    been named in numerous reports as a 'worker' for the BNP, and that this
    includes his identification as possibly having  been  involved  in  the
    incident at the High Commission in February 2018. I also  find  that  I
    cannot rule out the possibility that he has been  identified  from  his
    photograph as being involved in the incident outside  the  Commonwealth
    Heads of Government Meeting in April 2018.


25.  Such matters occur in the milieu of  the  UK  being  perceived  by  the
    ruling party in Bangladesh as a centre of BNP activism. The concern  as
    to the nature and extent of such activism is manifest in the nature  of
    the reports in relation to the attack on the High Commission.


26.  Whilst I do not consider that the Appellant could be  characterised  as
    a leader, mobiliser, or  organiser  of  political  activities  (cf.  BA
    (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return)  Iran  CG  [2011]  UKUT  36
    (IAC)), his more recent activities take  him  beyond  being  simply  'a
    member of the crowd'. Moreover the nature of  these  recent  activities
    are such that I do not consider  it  likely  that  the  authorities  in
    Bangladesh would seek to make any distinction between the Appellant and
    any other activist pursuing such conduct, on the  basis  of  a  nuanced
    exploration as to motive. The First-tier Tribunal's findings  establish
    that  the  Appellant  was  a   regular   participant   in   anti-regime
    demonstrations; in my judgement his more recent activities - which  are
    of sufficient profile to have attracted  a  degree  of  media  coverage
    including identification of the Appellant by name - put him at risk  in
    the event of return Bangladesh.


27.  For the avoidance of any doubt I find nothing in  any  of  the  further
    evidence that has been filed that would justify a different  conclusion
    from that of the First-tier Tribunal  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    engagement in political activities in Bangladesh prior to his entry  to
    the UK, or a different conclusion in respect of the  Judge's  rejection
    of the Appellant's claim to have been the subject of false  charges  by
    reason of such activities. Necessarily implicit in  this  is  that  the
    Appellant has only become engaged in the politics of  Bangladesh  since
    his arrival in the UK. The extent to which this was initially motivated
    by a genuine interest in the politics of  his  home  country,  and  the
    extent to which it may have been motivated by no more than  a  wish  to
    have material to support an asylum application  is  ultimately  a  moot
    point.  Irrespective  of  motivation,  I  accept  that   the   evidence
    adequately demonstrates (to the Sivakumaran standard)  the  Appellant's
    involvement in activities at a level which is likely to put him at risk
    in the event of his return to Bangladesh at the present time.


28.  Whilst Mr Avery did not seek to  deny  the  principal  that  sur  place
    political activities can establish an entitlement to protection even if
    motivated by bad faith, the nature  of  his  cross-examination  of  the
    Appellant, and much of his closing submissions, were  directed  to  the
    argument that the Appellant was not genuine in his political commitment
    and  therefore  would  not  be  politically  active  if   returned   to
    Bangladesh.


29.  As indicated above I have found that  the  Appellant  has  developed  a
    genuine political commitment to the BNP, and it seems to me  reasonably
    likely that he would continue such activism if returned to  Bangladesh.
    Whilst I am not persuaded that the sort of activism identified  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal - attendance at demonstrations - would likely  give
    rise to a real risk of persecution, for the reasons explored  above  it
    seems to me that the Appellant's involvement in activism has  now  been
    shown to go beyond mere attendance at demonstrations. In any event, and
    more particularly, I find  that  the  evidence  indicates  that  it  is
    reasonably likely that the  authorities  in  Bangladesh  will  have  an
    adverse interest in the Appellant upon  his  return  arising  from  the
    incidents in February and April 2018, and that  such  adverse  interest
    carries with it a risk of persecutory treatment.


30.  In this latter context I did not understand the  Respondent  -  whether
    through the Country Policy and Information Note 'Bangladesh: Opposition
    to the government' (version 2.0, January 2018), or through Mr  Avery  -
    to deny that the government in Bangladesh uses state power to  suppress
    political  opposition,  and  opposition  leaders  and  activists   face
    harassment and intimidation perpetrated by  both  the  law  enforcement
    agencies and activist of the Awami League (e.g. see CPIN at 2.2.4).


31.  Again for the avoidance of any doubt, I acknowledge  that  inherent  in
    the rejection of the Appellant's account of events prior to his arrival
    in the UK is a finding that the knowingly employed documents which were
    not reliable evidence of the truth of  their  contents.  Necessarily  I
    have  factored  such  a  matter  into  my  overall  evaluation  of  the
    credibility of the Appellant's claim.


Notice of Decision

32.  The appeal is allowed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 13 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis





To the Respondent
Fee Award (This is not part of the determination)


Although I have allowed the appeal I have done so primarily on the basis  of
events  and  evidence  that  post-date  the  Appellant's   application   for
protection, and post-date the Respondent's decision. In the circumstances  I
do not consider that a fee award is  appropriate,  and  accordingly  do  not
make one.

Signed:                                 Date: 13 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)




                                    ANNEX

                        TEXT OF ERROR OF LAW DECISION
                        (promulgated on 12 June 2018)




1.   This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Clarke promulgated on 17 January 2018 in which she allowed  the  appeal
    of ASR against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department dated 2 May 2017 to refuse protection.


2.   Although before me ASR is the respondent and  the  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department is the appellant, for the sake  of  consistency
    with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I  shall  hereafter
    refer to the Secretary of State  as  the  Respondent  and  ASR  as  the
    Appellant.


3.   The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born  on  13  February  1984.
    He entered the United Kingdom on 25 June 2009 with leave to enter as  a
    visitor which in the ordinary course of events would have conferred six
    months' leave.  He did not leave the United Kingdom at the end of  this
    period of time, and nor did  he  seek  to  regularise  his  immigration
    status.  He became an overstayer.  He made an application for asylum on
    18 November  2016.   His  application  was  based  upon  his  political
    involvement in Bangladesh.  The application was refused for reasons set
    out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 2 May 2017.


4.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


5.   The appeal was allowed on protection grounds for  reasons  set  out  in
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke.


6.   The Respondent applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lever  on  8  February
    2016.


7.   The Appellant has  filed  a  Rule  24  response  dated  16  March  2018
    resisting the Respondent's challenge.  I have also been provided with a
    'Note' similarly resisting  the  Respondent's  challenge  by  Mr  Berry
    today.


8.   The issue in the appeal is now a narrow one.  The  appeal  was  allowed
    on the basis of the Appellant's sur place activities, that  is  to  say
    his  political  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Necessarily  the
    Respondent's challenge focusses on this aspect.


9.   Nonetheless it is helpful to set out something  of  the  background  to
    the claim which included a narrative account of activity in  Bangladesh
    initially with the Jamiat-e Islami Party and subsequently with the BNP.
     The Appellant's narrative account included a claim  that  he  had  had
    false charges made against him on two separate occasions, and  that  in
    respect of one such set of charges he had been convicted and  sentenced
    to imprisonment in his absence.  In support of his  claim  he  produced
    amongst other things documents purportedly chronicling  the  course  of
    the respective charges against him.  Those documents,  and  indeed  the
    substance of the Appellant's claim were rejected for reasons set out in
    the Respondent's RFRL.  The RFRL includes detailed  analysis  of  those
    documents and finds them not to be reliable.


10.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge also rejected the  Appellant's  narrative
    account of events in Bangladesh.  Inherent in that is that she rejected
    the Appellant's claim to have  been  the  subject  of  accusations  and
    charges, and to have been convicted in his absence.   Necessarily  also
    inherent is a finding  to  the  effect  that  the  Appellant  knowingly
    employed documents which were not reliable evidence  of  the  truth  of
    their contents.


11.  I pause to note that in this context I brought to the attention of  the
    parties' representatives a further matter in respect of these documents
    which did not appear to have been identified or commented  upon  either
    by the Respondent in the RFRL or by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The
    document that appears at F3 of the Respondent's bundle purports  to  be
    an 'Order Sheet' and has the case heading 'The State  v  Kohinoor  Miah
    and Others'. However, Kohinoor Miah's name does not appear  in  any  of
    the other documents as an accused individual. The  case  title  on  the
    Order Sheet is on its face inconsistent with other  documents  produced
    purportedly in relation to the same proceedings. I have not  heard  any
    evidence, and I do not make any finding in this  regard.  The  apparent
    discrepancy  may  have  arisen  for  some  innocent  reason   such   as
    mistranslation or misuse of templates by the translator;  on  te  other
    hand this apparent error may reveal that some  of  the  documents  have
    been altered, or otherwise fabricated.  For the moment I merely flag up
    this additional issue with the documents lest at some future point  the
    documents require to be revisited in the  context  of  considering  the
    Appellant's claim in wider or different circumstances.


12.  Be that as it may, and in any event, as I  have  already  observed  the
    Appellant's entire account of  the  matters  in  respect  of  political
    activism in Bangladesh that he claimed had caused him  to  flee  abroad
    was rejected by the First-tier Tribunal.  In my judgement the reasoning
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  this  regard,   whilst   brief,   is
    sustainable. Moreover the conclusion is far from surprising  given  the
    difficulty that the Appellant appeared to  be  under  in  presenting  a
    coherent narrative account during the course of his asylum interview.


13.  However, the Appellant succeeded on his appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis of his activities in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Appellant placed before the First-tier Tribunal a number of photographs
    of him attending various demonstrations together with a membership card
    for the UK BNP. He also provided testimony as  to  the  nature  of  his
    activities by way of his witness statement, and  a  letter  purportedly
    from the 'Bangladesh National Party (BNP)  UK'  dated  4  October  2017
    signed by the UK president (page 10 of the  Appellant's  bundle  before
    the First-tier Tribunal).


14.  It may be observed that there are two  elements  to  the  letter  of  4
    October 2017: the Appellant's supposed activism in Bangladesh, and  his
    supposed activism in the UK.


15.  In the former regard the references are thin.  Nonetheless  the  letter
    states in general  terms  that  it  is  written  to  confirm  that  the
    Appellant is an activist, and comments that the Appellant  is  a  "very
    dedicated  politician  and  committed  to  the  belief  in  Bangladeshi
    Nationalist Party's ideology.  He was a former student leader whilst he
    was in Bangladesh."  The First-tier Tribunal Judge made  the  following
    observation in this regard:

         "[The letter] reads that the Appellant was a former student  leader
         while he was in Bangladesh but it has never  been  the  Appellant's
         claim that he was a student leader and I place little  weight  upon
         this aspect of the  letter  which  describes  the  Appellant  being
         politically active in Bangladesh" (paragraph 16).


16.  However, the Judge did not thereafter address any other aspect  of  the
    letter,  notwithstanding  that  it  also  spoke  of   the   Appellant's
    activities in the United Kingdom.


17.  The nature of the Appellant's activities in the  UK  described  in  the
    letter appear relatively limited: "He has been attending demonstrations
    and meetings in the UK against the violation of human rights,  torture,
    extrajudicial killing, forcefully disappearance in Bangladesh."  It  is
    additionally stated in general terms that the Appellant has  "expressed
    his  views  against  the  present  dictator  Sheikh  Hasina   and   her
    illegitimate  government".   The   letter   otherwise   makes   general
    observations  and  offers  opinions  about  the  political   scene   in
    Bangladesh.


18.  The reference to  the  Appellant's  attendance  at  demonstrations  and
    meetings in the letter does not seem to take the case meaningfully  any
    further than the photographs  showing  the  Appellant's  attendance  at
    demonstrations.  The  author  of  the  letter  does  not  identify  the
    Appellant to be active in any other specific way in the UK, for example
    as a party worker. Perhaps it was for this reason - and bearing in mind
    that the Judge had in substance found the author of the  letter  to  be
    unreliable in respect of the Appellant's  activities  in  Bangladesh  -
    that the Judge  did  not  return  to  the  letter  in  the  context  of
    evaluating the Appellant's sur place activism.


19.  Be that as it may the Judge had sight of the various  photographs.  The
    Judge made the following finding:

         "The Appellant has provided a lot of photographic evidence  showing
         his sur place activities in the UK.  I find that the Appellant  has
         drawn attention to himself in so doing, by standing at the front of
         demonstrations, by waving banners challenging the regime,  and  the
         objective evidence states at" (paragraph 18).

     The paragraph ends with word 'at', and to that  extent  is  incomplete.
    However, it seems to me that this  may  be  no  more  than  a  slip  of
    drafting and editing  because  the  following  two  paragraphs  in  the
    Decision make reference to the objective evidence.


20.  Paragraphs 19 and 20 are in these terms:

         "19. The COIR describes the situation in Bangladesh and little  has
             changed since the writing of it.  Paragraph 1.3.6  reads  that
             harassment,    arbitrary    arrests,    detention,    enforced
             disappearances,  extra-judicial  killings   and   torture   of
             opposition activists, occurred throughout 2013/2014 and  early
             2015.  Paragraph 1.3.9 reads that  membership  or  support  of
             groups opposed to the current government does  not  of  itself
             give rise to a well founded fear of persecution, and paragraph
             1.3.11 reads that perceived political opponents whose fear  is
             of serious harms at the hands of the state on account of their
             political opinion or activities  and  who  have  come  to  the
             attention  of  the  authorities  would  be  unable  to   avail
             themselves of protection from the authorities.


         20.  Paragraph 1.3.12 reads that in cases on fear of  ill-treatment
             by members  of  opposing  political  parties  or  in  fear  of
             opposing factions within their own party, it is unlikely  that
             effective protection would be  available  from  the  governing
             authorities.  The summary at 1.4 reads that mere membership of
             a group opposed to the current government does not  of  itself
             give rise to a well-founded fear of persecution, and  internal
             relocation may be an option depending upon whether the fear is
             of opposing factions within their own party or opposing party,
             where the localised threat does not exist and it is not unduly
             harsh to relocate."

     (The Judge does not identify the COIR by date but it is  common  ground
    before  me  that  she  was  referring  to  the   Respondent's   Country
    Information and Guidance 'Bangladesh: Opposition to the government'  of
    February 2015.)


21.  It may be seen that  in  broad  terms  these  two  paragraphs  envisage
    slightly different scenarios.  Paragraph 19 refers to risk at the hands
    of the state on account of political opinion: such risk  may  arise  to
    those who "have come to the attention of the  authorities".   Paragraph
    20 addresses the risk from members of  opposing  political  parties  as
    distinct from the state itself.  Both  paragraphs  identify  that  mere
    membership of a group opposed to the government would not in itself put
    an individual at risk.


22.  Having set out her finding in respect  of  the  Appellant's  sur  place
    activities (paragraph  18),  and  summarised  aspects  of  the  country
    information (paragraphs 19 and 20), the Judge states her conclusion  at
    paragraph 21:

         "Therefore, whilst I do not  find  the  Appellant  was  politically
         active for the BNP in his country, I find that he has  built  up  a
         sur place claim because of the blatant protesting by him in  public
         places where he has made himself very conspicuous  by  standing  at
         the front whilst waving banners, and  the  surveillance  used,  and
         regardless of his intentions and whether he has a genuine  interest
         in the BNP or not, I must allow his appeal."


23.  The Judge is silent as to the Appellant's genuine  political  opinions.
    Such silence is in the context of having  disbelieved  him  as  to  his
    claimed political activism in Bangladesh. It might be thought that  the
    language used in paragraphs 18 and 21 - "drawn attention  to  himself",
    "has built up... a claim", "blatant protesting", "has made himself very
    conspicuous" - carries with a tone of cynicism as  to  the  Appellant's
    motives in attending demonstrations.


24.  If the  Appellant  had  developed  a  genuine  interest  in  Bangladesh
    politics since his arrival in the  UK  -  notwithstanding  no  previous
    interest - then this may have  been  relevant  in  evaluating  risk  on
    return irrespective of any risk by reason of sur  place  activities.  A
    genuine commitment to  the  ideology  of  the  BNP,  and  a  consequent
    motivation to activism as  a  matter  of  political  conscience,  would
    require consideration of an HJ (Iran) type argument as to  future  risk
    in Bangladesh.  Of course if the Appellant has no interest in  engaging
    in further political activism, then it becomes  irrelevant  that  there
    might be a risk to political activists either from opposing factions or
    from the state in Bangladesh. The fact that the Judge did not  consider
    risk on return  by  reference  to  continuing  activism  in  Bangladesh
    underscores the notion that she did not accept that the  Appellant  was
    genuinely politically motivated in  attending  demonstrations  but  was
    'blatantly' 'building' a sur place claim.


25.  The Judge has in substance determined that the  Appellant  is  at  risk
    for no reason other than the fact that he blatantly protested in public
    places and made himself very conspicuous in so doing.


26.  Bearing in mind what is set out at paragraph 19 of the Decision, a  key
    element in the Judge's conclusion must have been that it was reasonably
    likely  that  the  Appellant  had  'come  to  the  attention   of   the
    authorities'.


27.  In my judgement there is a lack of exploration as to what the  guidance
    in the COIR at paragraph 1.3.11 (cited by the Judge  at  paragraph  19)
    means by "have come to the attention of the authorities", and a lack of
    exploration as to the means by which a demonstrator  in  the  UK  might
    come to attention. The analysis of the First-tier Tribunal is too brief
    to allow the reader to understand  fully  the  basis  upon  which  such
    marginal activity as conducted by the Appellant is  considered  to  put
    the Appellant at risk  upon  return.   I  find  that  the  decision  is
    insufficiently reasoned.



28.  In this context I make the following observations:

     (i) The Judge acknowledged in  terms  that  membership  or  support  of
    groups opposed to the current government was not  in  itself  something
    that would put an individual at risk from the state.

    (ii) Whilst it may be that attendance at demonstrations  in  Bangladesh
    will put somebody at risk of being caught  up  in  violence  when  such
    demonstrations are put down by the police or attacked by opponents, the
    same risk does not apply to sur place demonstrations. The Judge did not
    otherwise conclude that the Appellant would be at risk consequent  upon
    possible continuing activism on return.


     (iii) Paragraph 1.3.4 of the COIR states  "Rallies  and  demonstrations
    are permitted by the government and occur regularly...", although these
    may be "prevented... during periods of political protest  and  unrest",
    and may be disrupted by  political  opponents  and/or  law  enforcement
    agencies.  In context, it is to be recalled that Bangladesh  is  not  a
    one party state.  It is a democracy. Albeit, as Mr Berry puts it, there
    may have been a  'stiffening  of  the  arteries'  of  democracy,  there
    remains a vigorous political scene with activists of numerous hues  and
    colours advancing their particular causes and  opinions.   The  country
    information is clear that the holding and voicing of  opposition  views
    is permitted, and mere membership or support of opposition groups  does
    not give rise to risk.

    (iv) Given the foregoing it is difficult to see why visible  attendance
    - even if accompanied by the blatant drawing of attention to oneself  -
    at a demonstration in London would excite such attention  in  Dhaka  or
    elsewhere in Bangladesh, that  there  would  be  a  consequent  adverse
    interest in such an individual.


    (v) The Judge has made a grammatically clumsy reference to surveillance
    at paragraph 21. However nothing  is  identified  in  the  Decision  by
    reference to background evidence, or country information, in respect of
    surveillance.


    (vi) The analysis of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is  devoid  of  any
    consideration of the cases of YB (Eritrea)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  360,  KS
    (Burma) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 67
    or BA (demonstrations in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011]  UKUT
    37 (IAC).   It  is  unfortunate  that  it  would  appear  that  neither
    representative drew such cases  to  the  attention  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  It would perhaps have been instructive for  the  Judge
    if they had done so.


    (vii) In YB (Eritrea), at paragraph 18, Lord  Justice  Sedley  observed
    that where there  is  evidence  that  a  particular  regime  suppresses
    political opponents it requires little or no evidence or speculation to
    arrive at a strong possibility  that  its  foreign  legations  film  or
    photograph nationals who demonstrate in public against the  regime  and
    have informers amongst the expatriate oppositionist  organisations  who
    can name the people filmed or  photographed.   Similarly,  it  requires
    little  affirmative  evidence  to  establish  a  probability  that  the
    intelligence  services  of  such  regimes  monitor  the  internet   for
    information about oppositionist groups.  However, it seems to  me  that
    it may  not  be  such  a  safe  and  ready  inference,  that  the  same
    circumstances apply in a multi-party democratic state: it  may  require
    further  exploration  and  consideration  before  concluding  that  the
    instruments of the security services are used by the  government  of  a
    democracy to monitor the activities of  diaspora  communities  who  are
    doing no more in their announcements and protestations  than  the  same
    party organisations are doing in Bangladesh itself.


    (viii) The cases of KS and BA make reference to the concept of 'hangers-
    on', albeit in the context of Burma and Iran. Just as it may  be  na�ve
    to suggest that authoritarian states do not monitor the  activities  of
    foreign-based activists, in my judgement in the absence of any evidence
    to the contrary it would be na�ve to suggest that such regimes are  not
    sophisticated enough to be able to identify those that are  significant
    players from the 'hangers-on', or that they would seek to  waste  their
    time or resources in persecuting somebody or pursuing somebody  on  the
    basis of an essentially disinterested attendance at a demonstration  or
    demonstrations or other meetings.




29.  Had the preceding matters been more fully in the  mind  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge it seems to me that  the  outcome  in  this  appeal
    might have been very different. On  its  face  it  seems  a  surprising
    conclusion that mere activity of the type described - public protesting
    (no matter how blatant or deliberately conspicuous) - by a person  with
    no previous political profile or activism should trouble the regime  in
    Bangladesh to an extent that the  Appellant  would  become  a  targeted
    person, or 'marked man'.


30   As it stands I find that the Judge: has not adequately  reconciled  and
    reasoned those aspects of the country information  that  indicate  that
    support of an opposition group does not in itself put a person at  risk
    with the conclusion that showing such support  at  a  demonstration  in
    London does give rise to risk;  has  not  identified  any  evidence  in
    relation to surveillance or other mechanism by  which  the  Appellant's
    activities in the UK might be known to the authorities; has  failed  to
    have regard to relevant guidance from case law in respect  of  security
    agencies'  abilities  to  distinguish  between  those  that  might   be
    perceived as a concern or threat and those that are mere  'hangers-on';
    and/or has otherwise not  provided  adequate  reasons  as  to  why  the
    Appellant's activities in the UK would make him of adverse interest  to
    the authorities in Bangladesh. Accordingly I find material error of law
    such that the decision in the appeal in respect  of  the  risk  to  the
    Appellant on the basis of sur place activity is to be set aside.


31.  The decision in the appeal requires to be remade.


32.  The Appellant has filed further evidence in respect of  his  activities
    in the UK since the time of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The evidence in part consists of further photographs of his  attendance
    at various meetings and demonstrations.  There is  nothing  further  by
    way of written supporting evidence from the  party  itself  to  suggest
    that his activities are any more involved than they were  as  described
    in the letter of 4 October 2017.


33.  Be that as it may, the Appellant has  also  sought  to  introduce  into
    evidence a newspaper report from a Bangladesh  publication,  the  Daily
    Manobzamin, dated 2 March 2018 in which reference is made to him  being
    a party worker, and  in  which  it  is  suggested  the  authorities  in
    Bangladesh have started an action to prevent him (along with  a  number
    of other named individuals) from being able to return to Bangladesh  in
    consequence of alleged involvement in what is described as an attack on
    the Bangladesh High Commission in London.  The import of this document,
    its provenance, and its reliability are all matters that will  need  to
    be evaluated.  The Respondent has not to date had a proper  opportunity
    to consider it.




34.  In the circumstances I do not proceed to remake  the  decision  in  the
    appeal now.  It seems to me that a further hearing is necessary, albeit
    that the hearing  is  to  be  confined  to  matters  arising  from  the
    Appellant's sur place activities.  The parties are to  be  afforded  an
    opportunity to file any further evidence in respect of surveillance  or
    monitoring of diaspora activity further to  the  discussion  above,  as
    well as other country information relevant to risk  on  return  in  the
    particular circumstances of the Appellant's case. A  finding  may  also
    need to be made as regards the development or otherwise  of  a  genuine
    political ideology since  the  Appellant's  arrival  in  the  UK.   The
    Appellant may wish to file further evidence from other  persons  -  who
    may also wish to attend to speak on his behalf - as to the  nature  and
    extent of his political involvement, knowledge and conscience.  The new
    hearing will require evidence to  be  heard  from  the  Appellant,  and
    possibly others, as well as consideration of the further documents.


35.  I am not minded that this matter  should  go  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on what is a narrow issue.  The matter will be retained in the
    Upper Tribunal.



                                 Directions

    1. The Appellant is to file and serve within 21 days of the date  shown
    above as the sending date of this Decision,  a  paginated  and  indexed
    bundle of all evidence upon which he wishes to rely in support  of  his
    case to be at risk if returned to Bangladesh at  the  present  time  in
    consequence of political activities in the UK.

         (i) The Appellant should seek to address the  issue  identified  at
         paragraph 11 above in  respect  of  the  'Order  Sheet'  and  other
         documents previously relied upon.

         (ii) In so far as the Appellant wishes to rely upon a risk  arising
         on  return  to  Bangladesh  by  reason  of  his  genuine  political
         conscience  over  and  above  any  risk  by  reason  of  sur  place
         activities, he should include  within  the  same  bundle  all  such
         material as he relies upon in this regard. In particular he  should
         seek to provide evidence as to the  development  of  his  political
         conscience bearing in mind that the First-tier Tribunal Judge found
         that he had not been  politically  engaged  as  claimed  whilst  in
         Bangladesh and was seemingly not persuaded as to the genuineness of
         his motivation for involving himself in political activities in the
         UK.

         (iii) The Appellant  should  include  in  his  bundle  any  country
         information relied upon, and should seek  to  provide  evidence  in
         respect of monitoring and/or  surveillance  of  diaspora  political
         activists by the Bangladesh authorities.

         (iv) The Appellant is to provide with his bundle a covering  letter
         indicating the names of those witnesses he intends to call  at  the
         hearing, and specifying whether an interpreter is  required  either
         for  himself  or  any  of  his  witnesses,  and  if  so   in   what
         language/dialect.


    2. The Respondent is to file and serve within 35 days of the date shown
    above as the sending date of this Decision,  a  paginated  and  indexed
    bundle of any country information  or  other  evidence  upon  which  he
    wishes to rely. The Respondent  should  seek  to  provide  evidence  in
    respect  of  monitoring  and/or  surveillance  of  diaspora   political
    activists by the Bangladesh authorities.

         (i) In so far as the Respondent may  dispute  the  authenticity  or
         reliability of  any  of  the  evidence  filed  and  served  by  the
         Appellant he should state in writing the basis of such dispute  and
         provide any supporting evidence for his position.


    3. The Appellant and the Respondent  are  to  file  and  serve  written
    submission at least 7 days prior to the resumed hearing.


Notice of Decision

36.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


37.  The decision in the appeal is to be remade by the Upper Tribunal.


38.  The findings of the First-tier Tribunal in respect  of  the  events  in
    Bangladesh prior to the Appellant's entry to the UK are preserved.  The
    findings in respect of the Appellant's attendance at  demonstration  in
    the UK are also preserved. The Upper Tribunal will consider any further
    evidence in respect  of  the  Appellant's  sur  place  activities,  his
    political conscience, and the consequent risk/s arising.



                         ------ End of Annex ------
