
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/04727/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision & Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 20 December 2017                        |  On 29 January 2018           |



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                     t k
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri of Counsel instructed by A & P
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Manyarara promulgated on 3 July 2017 dismissing the Appellant's  appeal
    against a decision of the Respondent dated  3  May  2017  refusing  his
    application for protection in the United Kingdom.


2.   I am grateful to both representatives for  the  helpful  and  realistic
    discussion that was had during the course  of  the  hearing  such  that
    common ground was reached as to disposal of the appeal before the Upper
    Tribunal - essentially that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge should be set aside and the decision in the appeal remade  before
    the First-tier Tribunal in front of a different Judge with  all  issues
    at large.  In circumstances where the parties are in general agreement,
    I do not propose to go into quite so  much  detail  in  rehearsing  the
    background to the appeal as  I  might  otherwise.   Nonetheless  it  is
    appropriate to set out some of the more essential facts.


3.   The Appellant left Sri Lanka on 18 August 2016 travelling by  airplane,
    in the first instance to Dubai.   Later  he  travelled  to  Russia  and
    thereafter traversed a number of unknown countries before  arriving  in
    the United Kingdom on 10 October  2016.  He  applied  for  asylum  upon
    arrival.


4.   The substance of the Appellant's  asylum  claim  involves  a  narrative
    account referring in particular to three separate incidences  where  he
    encountered difficulties with the authorities in Sri Lanka.  The  first
    such incident took place in September 2013: the Appellant says  he  was
    arrested after trying to film an assault on a Tamil male by police.  He
    says that he was released after  three  days  following  payment  of  a
    bribe.


5.   A second incident is said to have taken place in August 2014  following
    the Appellant discussing an incident about which he  had  read  in  the
    newspapers concerning a sexual assault by a navy officer on the wife of
    a former LTTE member.  The Appellant claims  that  subsequent  to  this
    discussion he was assaulted by members of the army and  pushed  down  a
    well.  This resulted, he claimed, in a head injury  and  a  broken  hip
    requiring  treatment  both  at  Point  Pedro  Hospital  and  at  Jaffna
    Hospital.


6.   The Appellant refers to a third episode in July  and  August  of  2016.
    He says that in July he had seen a protest whilst travelling  with  his
    uncle and aunt, and had taken photographs  which  he  had  uploaded  to
    Facebook.  Subsequently, he claims, he was  arrested  and  held  for  a
    number of days before being released upon payment of a  bribe.   During
    this period of detention it is the Appellant's case that  he  was  ill-
    treated, and in particular he  was  burned  with  cigarettes.   Shortly
    after his release arrangements were made for  his  departure  from  Sri
    Lanka - and as I have indicated above it is said that in due course  he
    departed on 18 August 2016.


7.   It may be seen that there are substantial  periods  between  the  three
    incidents narrated by the Appellant where he does  not  claim  to  have
    been the subject of any particular adverse attention  on  the  part  of
    authorities.  In such circumstances it is understandable that it  might
    well be said, for example, that after the first incident there  was  no
    reason to believe that  the  authorities  had  any  ongoing  continuing
    adverse interest in him in respect of the filming episode.  However, to
    counter this it has been said on behalf of the Appellant that whilst he
    does not rely on the earlier two incidents as per se  determinative  of
    the issue of risk, they inform a consideration of his profile  and  how
    he might be perceived by the authorities - that is to say as  a  person
    who has taken a position in respect of support for members of the Tamil
    community.  More particularly what has been  said  on  the  Appellant's
    behalf is that the  incident  in  July  2016  is  a  relatively  recent
    incident and as such is a significant indicator as to the likelihood of
    the Appellant being the subject of further adverse interest on the part
    of the authorities in the event of his return.  In this regard it is to
    be noted that at paragraph 8 of the Skeleton Argument before the First-
    tier Tribunal (drafted by Ms Amanda Walker of Counsel who appeared  for
    the Appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal),  considerable  emphasis
    was put on the nature of the  situation  in  Sri  Lanka  in  the  post-
    conflict  period.   In  particular  a  report  about  Tamil  separatism
    published in August  2014  was  quoted  at  some  length  with  certain
    passages of  the  quotation  emboldened  by  way  of  highlighting.  In
    particular the following matters are emboldened,

         "... the state machine of Sri Lanka is extremely  paranoid  and  is
         trying to contain any resurgence of this group, or the  germination
         of tendencies of independence alongside the Tamils.   This  concern
         has direct repercussions on all of the Tamils in the North and East
         because their ethnicity could indicate possible  proximity  to  the
         LTTE." (paragraph 8);

         And


         "Targeted for these violations are LTTE suspects or those perceived
         as having been connected to, or supporters of, the LTTE" (paragraph
         10)


8.   To that extent, and bearing in mind the  relatively  recent  nature  of
    the Appellant's last claimed arrest, it  was  also  argued  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant could make out a risk to himself
    irrespective of the direct  applicability  or  otherwise  of  the  non-
    exhaustive risk factors identified in the case of GJ and others  [2013]
    UKUT 319.  To this end it might fairly be considered that at  paragraph
    73 of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  the  Judge  was
    unduly dismissive in stating, "All of the events the  appellant  relies
    on in support of his claimed circumstances in Sri  Lanka  are  said  to
    have occurred after the LTTE became a spent force".


9.   More particularly, however, it seems to me that the Judge was in  error
    in seemingly  treating  the  country  guidance  in  GJ  and  others  as
    determinative of the Appellant's appeal:

    "Even if I  were  to  accept  the  appellant's  claim  about  his  past
    experiences I find that his circumstances do not fall within  the  risk
    categories identified in the country guidance case" (paragraph 70).


    In my judgement this indicates that the Judge did  not  recognise  that
    the risk factors in GJ and others were not  exhaustive.   Moreover  the
    Judge did not engage with Counsel's submissions as to risk beyond those
    factors.


10.  Mr Bramble very properly acknowledged that there was a concern  on  the
    part of the Respondent in this regard to the effect that the First-tier
    Tribunal had failed to engage with the basis of the Appellant's case as
    it was being put.


11.  Mr Bramble also  acknowledged  that  there  was  a  legitimate  concern
    raised in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal in respect of the
    Judge's approach to the  medical  evidence  filed  in  support  of  the
    Appellant's case.  The Appellant had provided a report from Dr Andres I
    Martin (Appellant's bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal,  pages  14-
    30).  The report is dated 17 June 2017  and  is  based  on  a  date  of
    examination of 8 June 2017.   The  Judge  gave  consideration  to  this
    report at paragraphs 56-68 of the Decision.   Having  referred  to  the
    fact of the report at paragraph 56, and having made  reference  to  the
    case of AAW (expert evidence - weight) Somalia [2015] UKUT 00673  (IAC)
    (paragraph 57), the Judge went on to state

    "I have considered Dr Martin's findings in light  of  the  case  of  KV
    (scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC) and the
    principles established therein" (paragraph 57).


    The difficulty with this approach, as  identified  in  the  grounds  of
    challenge, was that the decision of the Upper Tribunal in KV  had  been
    overtaken by a decision in the same case by the Court of Appeal KV (Sri
    Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    119. Whilst elements of the Upper Tribunal's consideration were upheld,
    there was much that the Court of Appeal rejected.  The  fact  that  the
    Court of Appeal had sat in judgment in the case  of  KV  was  expressly
    alluded to in the Appellant's Skeleton Argument before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal - see paragraph 20, "It is important to note that the Court of
    Appeal has recently set aside the Upper Tribunal's determination in the
    case of KV (scarring)...".  Indeed passages from the Court of  Appeal's
    judgement were quoted at length.  It is also abundantly  clear  that  a
    copy of the Court of Appeal's judgement was provided to the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.


12.  In the circumstances it was a plain error for the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to apply the no longer completely valid reasoning  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and to fail to consider the medical evidence in  the  context
    of the Court of Appeal's decision.


13.  It is accepted by Mr Bramble that this was more than a defect of  form,
    and that it was material given in particular the focus  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge with regard to various aspects of the  decision  of
    KV addressing the possibility of so-called 'self infliction  by  proxy'
    ('SIBP').


14.  I note that the First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded  that  Dr  Martin's
    report "Does not add any weight to the appellant's claim in relation to
    the claimed interest in him and subsequent treatment by the Sri  Lankan
    authorities" (paragraph 68).  Bearing in mind the error of approach  in
    respect of KV, and in any event  given  the  convoluted,  difficult-to-
    follow, reasoning across paragraphs 57-68,  I  am  entirely  unable  to
    conclude that the Judge's conclusion that no weight  at  all  could  be
    accorded to Dr Martin's medical report as supportive of the Appellant's
    claim to have been ill-treated during the course of the third incident,
    is lawfully sustainable.


15.  The materiality of this error is underscored by the  proximity  of  the
    third incident to the Appellant's departure from Sri Lanka  and  indeed
    the appeal decision.  If the Appellant was indeed ill-treated  at  that
    time for the reasons he has claimed, then  that  was  a  very  material
    consideration in determining whether he would be  at  risk  on  return.
    Necessarily therefore it became a  matter  of  particular  scrutiny  to
    consider the extent to which the medical evidence might  or  might  not
    support his claim in this regard.


16.  In my judgment the matters above  are  plainly  sufficient  to  justify
    setting aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  However,  there
    are a number of other grounds pleaded on behalf of  the  Appellant.   I
    will address two of those in  particular  as  seeming  to  me  to  have
    particular merit - indeed Mr Jaisri, although not the  drafter  of  the
    grounds, also sought to place particular reliance on these grounds.


17.  The first such matter is in  respect  of  the  Appellant's  account  of
    having been pushed down a well by members of the army during the second
    incident that took place in  August  2014.   At  paragraph  47  of  the
    Decision the Judge says in part this,

         "I find that if the appellant were pushed down a 15 foot well  head
         first then the consequences may have been fatal.  It  is  therefore
         not credible that the appellant spent just over a month in hospital
         before being advised to rest.  The  appellant  does  not  refer  to
         having received specialist neurological input."


18.  No indication is given as to  the  basis  upon  which  the  Judge  felt
    sufficiently informed or experienced to evaluate the expected  injuries
    from such a fall, or was otherwise in a position to determine that  the
    injuries described  by  the  Appellant  -  and  in  part  supported  by
    evidence, irrespective of the view that the Judge in due course took of
    that evidence - were in any way incompatible with such a fall, or  were
    so unlikely as to render the Appellant's account in  this  regard  "not
    credible".  I accept that this constituted a plain error of reasoning.


19.  The other matter that is particularly troubling in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is in  relation  to  the  third  incident  and  the
    Appellant's account of  the  authorities  having  closed  his  Facebook
    account in  consequence  of  his  actions.   The  Judge  says  this  at
    paragraph 53:

         "The appellant's explanation for the absence of any evidence in the
         form of a Facebook page is that the Sri Lankan  authorities  closed
         his Facebook account.  I do not accept this explanation.   This  is
         because the deactivation of a Facebook account would not remove all
         evidence of the existence of such an account.  I find that even  if
         the Sri Lankan authorities were able to log on to  the  appellant's
         Facebook  account  in  order  to  deactivate   his   account,   the
         reactivation of the account is something that can  be  achieved  by
         entering one's username and password in the account.  The  deletion
         of the account does not  remove  any  images  associated  with  the
         account as these are the possession of Facebook.  I find  that  the
         absence of any evidence of having uploaded any photographs  showing
         a demonstration is because the appellant  did  not  upload  such  a
         photograph."


20.  Complaint is made of this in two respects.  Firstly,  this  matter  was
    not put to the Appellant. Certainly it features nowhere in the decision
    of the Respondent, and there is nothing to indicate that there was  any
    exploration of this matter during the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, or any indication that the Judge's raised her view as to  the
    way in which Facebook  operated.   Secondly,  there  is  no  evidential
    support for the comments and observations of the Judge as to the way in
    which Facebook operates.  In  this  regard  it  is  also  raised  as  a
    possibility that  a  method  of  blocking  access  to  an  individual's
    Facebook account if one has the facility to log-on, is simply to change
    the log-on details - which would render the user unable to  access  the
    details unless they were in some way  able  to  crack  the  new  log-in
    details.  Be that as it may, I accept that procedural fairness required
    that the Appellant be afforded a due and proper opportunity to  address
    any such concerns as to the manner in which Facebook operates. Moreover
    the Judge should not have in substance  acted  as  a  witness  offering
    evidence and opinion as to the  operation  of  a  Facebook  account  in
    circumstances where it seems to me that matters  are  likely  far  more
    nuanced than  are  suggested  in  the  Judge's  brief  observations  at
    paragraph 53.


21.  Bearing in mind that the Facebook issue relates to the third  incident,
    its materiality is again particularly pertinent.



Notice of Decision

22.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.


23.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with all issues at large by any Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Manyarara.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.



Signed:                                 Date: 26 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis


