
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04375/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 23rd November 2018  On 10 January 2019



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MR. R R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the appellant:     Miss S Jegarajah, Counsel, instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mrs L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant has permission to appeal the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Davidson. In the decision promulgated on 31st May 2018
      the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's
      refusal of his claim for protection.

   2. He is a Sri Lankan Tamil, born in December 1987. He came here as a
      student in June 2010 and obtained further leaves until 28 June 2015.He
      completed his Master's programme. On 26 June 2015 he applied for leave
      to remain based on family and private life. This was refused in
      October 2015. Thereafter, he overstayed. On 6 December 2016 he was
      notified that he was liable to removal. The same day he made his claim
      for protection. The claim was he was at risk from the authorities
      because of his actual or perceived association with the LTTE.

   3. He said that following the tsunami of December 2004 he went to the
      coastal area with friends for few days. He was approached by an LTTE
      member about giving support. He agreed to return for several weeks
      physical training. Thereafter he said he helped the group by
      delivering money parcels and helping arrange accommodation. Code names
      were used. He said he was not an LTTE member but was a supporter. He
      became frightened with the escalating violence and in 2006 went back
      to his studies and then came to the United Kingdom. He returned to Sri
      Lanka in 2011, visiting his parents for several weeks without any
      problems. He then returned to the United Kingdom.

   4. He claimed that in April 2015 the Sri Lankan authorities came to his
      home and questioned his parents about him. He suggested the police
      might have obtained his name from an informant within the LTTE. Then,
      in November 2016, his father was required to attend the police station
      and swear an affidavit and to produce the appellant's identity card.
      His father subsequently told him that if he returned he would be on a
      Stop List and would be arrested. He said there was a 3rd visit to the
      family home in March 2017.

   5. His claim was refused on 15 March 2018. Credibility was in issue. The
      respondent took the view that on his account he had little involvement
      with the LTTE and believed it was improbable that the police would
      visit his home on 3 occasions between 2015 and 2017. The country
      guidance decision of GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri
      Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) identified how a person might be at
      risk. It was felt none applied to the appellant's claim.

   6. The respondent relied upon section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration
      (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004, pointing out the appellant claimed
      the authorities came to his home in April 2015 and yet he did not make
      his claim until December 2016. Furthermore, the timing of the claim
      was significant. It was made after his Visa had expired and his
      subsequent application for leave to remain had been refused and he was
      at risk of removal. The subsequent application for leave to remain on
      the basis of article 8 contradicted his claim that but for fear he
      intended to return to Sri Lanka.

   7. In his substantive interview he was asked if he had any documents to
      submit. At screening he had mentioned he would seek a letter from his
      father's lawyer in Sri Lanka but was still awaiting it. The appeal
      notice refers to the appellant including a letter from a lawyer in Sri
      Lanka and a copy of that person's identity card. He states those
      documents were sent to the respondent and had not been considered in
      the decision. The grounds of appeal state that the respondent failed
      to verify the authenticity of documents submitted in support of the
      claim. There is a copy of a membership card for the Bar Association of
      Sri Lanka in respect of a Mr SHK. There is also a letter dated 8 May
      2007 to the appellant solicitors from this person. He confirmed
      attending the police station with the appellant's father and that he
      was questioned about his son and links with the LTTE. It was suggested
      that he played a significant role in money-laundering and that his
      time in the United Kingdom was sponsored by Tamil diaspora.

   8. There is no reference to any letter in the refusal letter. However, if
      the appeal bundle before the First-tier Tribunal is considered item 2
      is a letter from a Sri Lankan lawyer. It is dated 8 May 2017. It
      states the appellant's father has been known to the writer for several
      years and refers to him seeking the lawyers assistance in April
      2015.This followed a visit to his residence by the authorities in
      relation to the appellant. There is reference to his father being
      required to attend at the police station in November 2016. Details of
      that visit are then relayed. There is a reference to the police team
      requesting the appellant's father to provide an affidavit and there
      was mention of police advising his father that steps should be taken
      to detain him.

   9. The appellant's representative said this was the process whereby Stop
      Notices are initiated. I am satisfied that this document was before
      the judge. This is apparent from paragraph 6 of the judge's decision
      where reference is made to a bundle of documents including a letter
      from a lawyer in Sri Lanka.

The First tier Tribunal

  10. At para 5 of the decision the judge refers to the appellant's evidence
      as being that in November 2016 his father was required to attend at
      the police station. He surrendered the appellant's identity card and
      completed an affidavit. The appellant had said he was unable to
      produce the affidavit at hearing because the lawyer in Sri Lanka was
      on holiday.

  11. At paragraph 6 the decision referred to the appellant's appeal bundle
      including a letter from a lawyer in Sri Lanka.There is reference to
      the letter being sent to the respondent on 30 May 2017 by registered
      post and being signed for on 2 June 2017. The judge commented it does
      not appear to have reached the respondent's file. The judge records at
      paragraph 25 that in submissions the appellant's representative
      referred to the letter from the lawyer in Sri Lanka, stating that this
      was independent evidence which had been sent to the respondent on 30
      May 2017 to make enquiries if they so wished. The respondent had not
      challenged the letter.

  12. At hearing I was advised that the appellant's Counsel directed her
      instructing solicitors to seek the affidavit referred to at paragraph
      7. The judge refers to having received an affidavit dated 11 November
      2016 being after the hearing had concluded. The judge made the point
      that the respondent's representative had not had an opportunity to
      make representations on this. Nevertheless, the judge went on to
      comment on the affidavit. At paragraph 33 the judge again refers to
      this affidavit and did not accept the appellant's explanation for its
      late submission and indicated that little weight was being placed upon
      it.

  13. The judge referred to the time lag between the claimed activities in
      2005/6 and the claim the authorities became interested in him from
      2015. The suggestion advanced on his behalf was that in 2005 he used
      an assumed name but the authorities may later have become aware of his
      identity and involvement from an LTTE informer. The judge dismissed
      this as speculation. The judge found that section 8 applied. The judge
      found he had not shown he would be of interest to the authorities. At
      the time of his claimed involvement there were no hostilities taking
      place and his claimed level of involvement was low. Reference was made
      to the country guidance decision which indicated that it was only
      those whose history would suggest they might be threatening to the
      unitary Sri Lankan state or government who would be of interest.

The Upper Tribunal.

  14. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis the judge was wrong to
      reject the account for the recent interest in him by the authorities
      amounted to no more than speculation. Reference was made to
      information that former combatants had become informants. It was also
      contended that the judge erred in concluding the appellant was someone
      with low-level involvement. The grounds contend that money laundering
      for the LTTE would place someone at risk. Reference was made to the
      letter from the lawyer and how the judge dealt with the lawyer's
      letter was also challenged.

  15. Ms Jegarajah submitted that the decision was defective because the
      reasoning was so brief and did not properly address the claim. She
      submitted that the suggestion that an informer revealed the
      appellant's identity years later was perfectly credible. She submitted
      that it was known that operatives used false names. The appellant she
      submitted was in a risk category bearing in mind the contents of the
      lawyer's letter. She made the point that English is commonly used
      among Sri Lankan lawyers

  16. In response Mrs L Kenny submitted that the judge did deal with the
      lawyer's letter in the decision at paragraph 7 and it was a matter for
      the judge what weight should be attached to it. The judge was entitled
      to refer to the delay in claiming and it was for the appellant to show
      he came within one of the risk categories identified. She did
      acknowledge that the decision was brief and the judge did not make
      findings in respect of the lawyer's letter submitted or that the
      affidavit was appraised. She submitted it was for the appellant to
      demonstrate that he was in one of the risk categories identified
      albeit there was a low standard of proof.

Consideration.

  17. There is a time gap between the appellant's claimed activities in 2005
      and his claim of police interest in 2015. He does not know why they
      became interested in him. He says he suspects it is because a former
      colleague has identified him to them. This is speculation but I found
      it questionable for the judge to dismiss this out of hand rather than
      considering whether the speculation could have some foundation. This
      however is a secondary issue.

  18. The real issue is whether the appellant could be in one of the risk
      categories identified in the country guidance case. On the basis of
      the evidence from the Sri Lankan lawyer he could.  Ms Jegarajah said
      that he was not simply a `trench digger' but was involved in money
      laundering. Furthermore, the lawyers letter indicates he is now on a
      Stop List.

  19. It is most unsatisfactory for the appellant's representatives to have
      submitted evidence after the hearing unless there was good
      justification. This could require a hearing to be relisted and an
      issue of a wasted costs arising. Extreme caution was required on the
      part of the judge in dealing with any such evidence received post
      hearing. An obvious reason is that one party to the appeal had not
      seen it and at that stage the appeal had effectively concluded. Had
      the judge for instance accepted that evidence and allowed the appeal
      without permitting further comment from the respondent this would have
      been a material error of law. In this instance the appeal was not
      allowed and the judge was dismissive of the evidence given the late
      stage at which it had arrived and the fact the respondent had not
      therefore an opportunity to carry out checks.

  20. However, the evidence from the Sri Lankan lawyer and the affidavit was
      central to the assessment of the risk. In the circumstance I find is
      was not sufficient for the judge simply to dismiss it because of when
      it arrived. A greater explanation was required in the evaluation of
      this document and the earlier lawyers letter. Most likely this would
      have required a further relisting.

  21. The evaluation of the claim elsewhere is limited. The claim is set out
      in the summary of the evidence given and then the respondent's
      submission. The evaluation does not begin until paragraph 30 when
      there is comment about the time lag between activity and the
      authorities interest. The judge was entitled to refer to the
      circumstances under which the claim was made. However, I found the
      assessment of the potential risk in relation to the categories
      identified in the country guidance case to be inadequate. As stated
      the information from the lawyer and the appellant's father was central
      to this and was dismissed out of hand Looking at all of these factors
      is my conclusion be unsafe for the decision to stand. Consequently, it
      should be remitted for a de novo hearing.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson dismissing the
appellant's appeal materially errs in law and is set aside. The matter is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




Directions

   1. Relist for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton
      Cross excluding First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson.
   2. A Tamil interpreter will be required.
   3. The appellant's representatives are to prepare an updated bundle. This
      should contain an index identifying clearly the evidence being relied
      upon. It should identify precisely what documentary evidence is being
      relied upon.
   4. In relation to the documents from Sri Lanka the respondent should
      consider the guidance in MA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for the
      Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 175
   5. It is anticipated the hearing should take around one and a half hours.


Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

