
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04639/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 September 2019                  |On 08th November 2019                |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                    H P Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Panagiotopoulou
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1987 and is a female citizen of the  People's
    Republic of China. She appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 1 May 2019 refusing  to  grant
    her international protection. The First-tier Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 5 July 2019, dismissed the  appeal.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are three grounds of appeal. First, the  appellant  asserts  that
    the judge made unclear findings of fact. The appellant claimed  that  a
    demonstration taken place on 22 November 2010. The  appellant  had  not
    been involved in the demonstration but have been arrested by the police
    on 23 November 2010 because they considered  that  she  may  have  been
    involved in organising the demonstration. The grounds assert  that  the
    judge's findings  at  [30]  are  unclear.  The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's evidence was confused. The appellant claimed that  she  had
    not paid a fine to secure  her  release  but  had  paid  a  bribe.  The
    appellant's husband claimed that the sum paid was different  from  that
    stated by the appellant. However, the judge noted that the husband  had
    not been in China at the time so the weight attaching to  his  evidence
    was limited. The judge also noted that the appellant said,  when  asked
    why the police had been interested in her, that  the  police  may  have
    believed that she had given 'advice, I called the  demonstration.'  The
    judge  noted  that,  'given  that  [the  appellant]  was  a   part-time
    administrative assistant, not  legally  qualified  and  engaged  for  a
    couple of weeks before the demonstration, this seemed to  me  to  be  a
    stretch. There was simply no basis to assume that the appellant was  in
    any way involved in the demonstration and  it  seems  to  me  that  her
    release is evidence of that fact.' The grounds complain that the  judge
    here appears to be  accepting  that  the  appellant  was  detained  and
    released and yet, simultaneously, refusing to accept that the appellant
    had been detained in connection with the demonstration.

 3. I do not find that the judge has  fallen  into  error  for  the  reason
    asserted. It was entirely open to the  judge  to  be  doubtful  of  the
    appellant's  claim  to  have  been  arrested  in  connection   with   a
    demonstration which she had not attended  and  which,  as  a  part-time
    administrative assistant, it is unlikely that the police would  believe
    she had organised. The meaning of the last sentence of [30]  is  clear:
    if the appellant  had  been  detained  for  organising  or  helping  to
    organise a demonstration, then it is not credible that she  would  have
    been released and the payment of a bribe. There is no contradiction  in
    the findings of the judge at [30].

 4. Secondly, the appellant asserts that the judge failed to have regard to
    the evidence. The appellant claims to have been involved with LML,  the
    sister of a jailed lawyer. LML had sought the appellant's assistance in
    getting have brother released from prison. The appellant claimed  that,
    some five years after the brother's law firm had closed down,  LML  had
    been able to contact the appellant. The judge did not consider that  it
    was likely she would have been able to do  so.  In  her  evidence,  the
    appellant claimed that LML had been 'around  my  house  and  my  family
    contacted me via video link.' I have no  reason  to  believe  that  the
    judge has ignored this part of the appellant's evidence but, equally, I
    have no doubt that it was open to the judge  to  observe  that  it  was
    implausible that LML would, several years after the closure of the  law
    firm, have been able to obtain contact details for the appellant or her
    family.

 5. The appellant also asserts that the judge at [34] has misunderstood the
    answers which she gave in her asylum interview.  At  question  30,  the
    appellant had said the lawyer's 'older sister gave me a  few  names  of
    human rights organisations last with the contact them at the last  them
    to rescue him from jail.' In answer to question 33, the appellant said,
    'I provided the addresses of international human rights groups  to  his
    older sister and I provided information to  her  to  rescue  her  older
    brother.' The judge noted that the appellant in her evidence had denied
    that answered question 30 was correct. The appellant's  solicitors  had
    written to the respondent following the interview to make a  number  of
    corrections but the judge observed  that  they  had  not  substantially
    altered the text in respect of the appellant's  answers  to  these  two
    questions. The grounds of appeal assert that, in  answer  the  question
    33, the appellant had herself corrected the answer which she had  given
    to question 30. That is simply  not  the  case.  The  two  answers  are
    entirely different but there is nothing in the answer  to  question  33
    which indicates that the appellant was seeking to alter the  answer  to
    question 30. I do not find that the judge has erred in his analysis  of
    the appellant's interview evidence.

 6. The appellant also asserts that the judge  at  [35]  misunderstood  the
    evidence. LML had, according to be  appellant,  insisted  upon  certain
    information being sent by post rather than relayed through an  internet
    communication application (QQ). The grounds complain that the judge has
    penalised the appellant for refusing to speculate as to why LML  wanted
    the information dealt with in this way. The criticism is not fair.  The
    judge simply notes that a conversation by QQ had taken  place  directly
    between the appellant  and  LML  regarding  the  same  information  and
    accordingly he questioned why LML was reluctant to  speak  directly  to
    the appellant in respect of the same matter  again.  That  was,  in  my
    opinion, an entirely reasonable observation.

 7. The appellant complains that the evidence of  the  appellant's  husband
    had not been given sufficient weight.  The  judge  observed  that  'the
    difficulty with the husband's evidence is that it was  almost  entirely
    what he been told by his wife.' The grounds state that the husband  was
    present with the appellant in the United Kingdom  and  had  independent
    evidence to provide regarding the appellant's dealings with LML.  I  do
    not consider that the judge has overlooked that fact. I note,  however,
    that the judge states that the husband's evidence was 'almost' entirely
    what he had been told by his wife which, so far as I can see  from  the
    file, is an accurate statement. In any event, the judge's assessment of
    the limited evidence given by the husband is entirely adequate  and  it
    is difficult to see how a  more  thorough  analysis  of  the  husband's
    evidence could possibly have led to a different outcome of the appeal.

 8. In the circumstances, I find that none of the grounds  of  appeal  have
    merit. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed



    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 12 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




































