
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04775/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 25 September 2019             |On the 18 October 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     SN
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H. Davies, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms R. Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.



 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka. He appeals with permission
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal (Judge Holmes) ("FtTJ"),
    promulgated on the 28 December 2017 dismissing his appeal against the
    decision to refuse his protection and human rights claim.



The procedural background:

 2. The appellant applied for a tier 4 student Visa on the 6 September 2010
    which is granted into 1 December 2013.

 3. He entered the United Kingdom on 25 September 2010. On the 1st February
    2013 the tier 4 sponsor revoked their sponsorship but on 17 December
    2013 the appellant was granted further leave remain as a student until
    30 November 2015.

 4. On 25 November 2015 the appellant claimed asylum. The basis of his
    claim was that if returned to Sri Lanka he would face ill-treatment as
    a result of imputed political opinion in that the authorities believed
    that he was trying to resurrect the LTTE. He claimed that between 2004
    and 2009 he was a member of the LTTE and was an informer because he
    spoke Sinhalese, Tamil and English. He would tell a friend about troop
    movements and the friend would then tell the LTTE. He received basic
    training and learn karate but was not taught how to use weapons and was
    never involved in fighting.

 5. On 18 November 2006 he went to India because he had been threatened by
    the army. He left using his own passport and returned after one week.
    He then went to Colombo.

 6. He claimed to have helped members of the LTTE escaped between 2009 and
    2010.

 7. He was detained on 20 June 2010 for a period of 10 days during which
    time he was ill- treated and made to confess that he was in LTTE Cadre.
    He was released when his family paid a 15-lakh bribe. He was told to
    report to the army in three months' time but remained for two months
    and 20 days before coming to the UK on 20 September 2010 as a student.

 8. The respondent refused his claim for asylum in a decision letter issued
    on 28 April 2016. In that decision the Secretary of State did not
    accept his claim that he was a member of the LTTE or that he was
    involved in informing against the Sri Lankan army. The Secretary of
    State set out a number of credibility points adverse to the applicant
    including the period of six years delay in claiming asylum. The
    respondent also considered his claim at its highest and by reference to
    the recent political developments in Sri Lanka and the new government
    in place. It was said that the background evidence demonstrated that
    the current situation had vastly improved since the installation of the
    new government in January 2015 and that the current government was
    taking steps to combat malpractices and human rights violations in the
    security establishment. It was also noted that senior commanders of the
    LTTE had been released by the government after undergoing
    rehabilitation and/or after acquittal and as such, it was not
    considered that given the evidence which post-dated the country
    guidance decision in GJ and others that someone of the appellant's
    profile would be subjected to treatment amounting to persecution on
    return to Sri Lanka.

 9. The appellant submitted grounds of appeal and the appeal came before
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hands) on 22 December 2016. In a
    decision promulgated on 5 January 2017 the FTT J dismisses appeal on
    all grounds.

10. The appellant then sought permission to appeal that decision and
    permission was refused on 10 April 2017 but on renewal to the Upper
    Tribunal was granted on 9 May 2017.

11. Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul granted permission for the following
    reasons:

         "it is arguable, in the light of UB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2017] EWCA
         Civ 85, at [23] in particular (a decision not available to FTT J
         Easterman when refusing permission) that FTT J Hands erred in the
         assessment of the risks the appellant on account of his involvement
         with the TGTE, a prescribed organisation. While there is less merit
         in the other grounds, I do not consider it appropriate to limit the
         grant of permission. Permission is granted on all grounds."

12. Following the grant of permission, the appeal came before deputy Upper
    Tribunal Judge Doyle on 31 July 2017.

13. In his decision promulgated on 8 August 2017 he considered the grounds
    advanced on behalf of the appellant. He reached the following
    conclusions on those grounds:

      i) The first ground of appeal relied upon the case of UB (Sri Lanka) v
         SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 85. The deputy UTJ recorded that in that case
         both the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal had not been
         referred to the 2014 Home Office policy guidance entitled "Tamil
         Separatism" which was material to the decision and might
         realistically have affected the outcome. The appellant, in that
         case, had claimed membership of the TGTE and the material in the
         policy guidance indicated that to be an organisation proscribed by
         the Sri Lankan government. He further recorded that that decision
         had been handed down after the promulgation of the FtTJ 's
         decision. The deputy UTJ considered the decision of the FtTJ at
         paragraphs 27 - 29 and reached the conclusion applying the case of
         UB (Sri Lanka) that the judge was "prevented from making a full
         assessment of the risk created by the appellant's place activities
         because the respondent did not refer the judge to the respondent's
         own country information guidance data December 2016. The judge's
         fact-finding was hampered because neither parties' representatives
         referred to that country information and guidance" (see paragraph
         [11]).

     ii) The grounds also asserted that the credibility findings made by the
         FtTJ were flawed. The deputy judge considered those submissions but
         reached the conclusion that the findings of fact made at paragraph
         21 were findings that were open to the judge to make on the
         evidence before her. The deputy judge therefore rejected the second
         third and fourth grounds of appeal stating that the judge had given
         "clear reasons for drawing her conclusions. The judge carefully
         analyses each strand of evidence and provides adequate reasons for
         drawing the conclusion is that she does. The conclusions are well
         within the range of reasonable conclusions available to the judge.
         The second, third and fourth grounds of appeal amount to nothing
         more than a disagreement with the facts as the judge found them to
         be" (see paragraph 12).

    iii) As to the fourth ground, it had been argued on behalf of the
         appellant that the FTT J incorrectly applied Section 8 of the
         Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants et cetera) Act 2004.
         The deputy judge stated that the FtTJ had set out a "comprehensive
         fact-finding exercise. Between paragraphs 22 and 24 of the decision
         the judge considered the psychiatric evidence. At paragraph 25 the
         judge takes a holistic view of each strand of evidence before
         concluding that the appellant is neither a credible nor a reliable
         witness. It is only then that, at paragraph 26, the judge turned
         her attention to section 8 of the 2004 Act. She reminds herself of
         the limits of the application of section 8 of the 2004 act, before
         finding the delay as a factor which undermines the appellant's
         credibility. There is nothing wrong with the judge's assessment of
         credibility. The fourth ground of appeal has no substance" (see
         paragraph 14).

     iv) At paragraphs 15 - 20, the deputy judge then summarised the issues
         and the basis upon which the remittal to the FtT was to be made.
         The deputy judge said this:

         "15. Although there is no flaw in the judges fact-finding,
             difficulty that is created is that, because parties agents
             agree that the judge did not have the benefit of the
             respondents country information guidance, and because I am
             told that the country information guidance could have made a
             difference to the decision, there is a flaw in the judges
             assessment of risk. An error in the assessment of risk is a
             material error of law. I therefore set aside the decision.

         16. Although I set the decision aside, I preserve the judge's
             findings of fact (contain between 21 and 26 of the decision).
             Even though this appeal succeeds on the basis of the
             respondent's up-to-date country information guidance is
             critical to the risk assessment, that up-to-date country
             information guidance is not made available to me today by
             either representative.

         17. What is required in remaking of this decision is a fully
             informed assessment of the risk. There is nothing wrong with
             the judge's fact-finding. The judge's findings of fact between
             21 and 26 of the decision therefore stand. It is the risk
             created by sur place activity which requires reconsideration".

      v) the deputy judge set out the practice statement AT [18] and at
         paragraph 19 stated:

         "19. In this case I have determined that the case should be
             remitted because both parties require the opportunity to lodge
             and make submissions on the up-to-date country information
             guidance so that the assessment of risk can be completed."

14. It is therefore plain from that decision of the deputy UTJ that he had
    rejected the grounds of appeal advanced on behalf of the appellant save
    for ground one where it was accepted that in the light of the decision
    of UB (Sri Lanka)  (as cited), that relevant country information and
    guidance had not been put before the FtTJ when reaching his conclusions
    on the issue of the appellant's asserted sur place activities and the
    consequent risk on return against that background material .

15. It is also plain from that decision that the judge found that the
    findings of fact made at paragraphs 21 - 26 of the decision were to be
    preserved findings of fact and were the starting point of the risk
    assessment that was to be carried out by the FtT when the case was to
    be remitted (see paragraphs 12, 15 and expressly paragraph 16).

16. The deputy judge set out the basis upon which the remittal was
    therefore to take place before the FtT.



The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes:

17. The appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal judge Holmes on 19
    December 2017. He recorded at paragraph 2 that the challenge to the
    decision reached by Judge Hands had only been partially successful
    before the Upper Tribunal in 2017 and that the findings of fact were
    preserved and there was no remittal of the Article 8 ground of appeal.

18. At the hearing before FtTJ Holmes, it was argued on behalf of the
    appellant that the remittal of the appeal extended to Article 8. The
    FtTJ considered that argument but made a legal ruling that this was not
    open to the appellant because the grounds of the application for
    permission to the Upper Tribunal had not raised a challenge to the
    decision upon this ground and also that the decision of the Upper
    Tribunal did not extend to a decision to set aside the dismissal of the
    article 8 ground of appeal  (see the determination at paragraph 4).
    Following this legal ruling, the appeal was adjourned because Counsel
    sought to rely upon further evidence which was either illegible or had
    not been translated.

19. When the appeal came before the FtTJ for hearing, he set out that there
    was no issue over the scope of the remittal in the light of the
    decision of the deputy judge of 8 August 2017 and on the basis that he
    was not seized with any challenge to the decision to dismiss the
    article 8 appeal and that he had not set aside that aspect of the
    decision.

20. At paragraph 11 he set out his summary of the preserved findings of
    fact as follows:

      i) The appellant's claim to have been recruited by the LTTE as an
         informer whilst living in Sri Lanka in 2004 was untrue.

     ii) The appellant been able to acquire a legitimate Sri Lankan passport
         through legitimate means, and been able to travel to India in 2006,
         passing through Colombo airport on both the outward and return
         journeys. He had no difficulty doing so, and had not needed to
         resort to bribery to be able to do so.

    iii) The appellant's claim to be detained by the authorities in Sri
         Lanka was untrue.

     iv) The appellant was of no interest to the Sri Lankan authorities when
         he left Sri Lanka for the UK in 2010.

      v) The appellant entered the UK in 2010 having acquired a student
         visa. He had no difficulty in doing so and did not needed to resort
         to bribery to be able to do so. Nor had he needed to do so to pass
         through Colombo airport.

     vi) The appellant had not completed any course of study in the UK and
         gained no qualifications in the UK as a result.

    vii) The appellant had undertaken no sur place activity within the UK
         prior to 2016.

   viii) In 2016 the appellant had attended one demonstration held in
         support of Tamils in Sri Lanka, where he had been one of about
         20,000 people attending. He had photographic proof of his presence,
         but he was not an organiser of the event, or one of those who'd
         acted out roles for the event. It was not suggested to FtTJ Hands
         that the appellant's presence at the event (by use of his name or
         his photograph), was evidenced by any website content.

     ix) The appellant did not claim asylum until 25 November 2015.

21. At paragraphs 22 - 24 the FtTJ recorded the appellant's case. In
    particular, that the appellant did not accept the preserved findings of
    FtTJ Hands and maintained that the account given in evidence was true
    and sought to rely upon it.

22. As to the sur place issue, the appellant claimed have become in the UK
    a member of the TGTE, a proscribed organisation and that his activities
    were evidenced in photographs publicly available on the Internet.
    Therefore as a consequence, he had already come to the adverse
    attention of the Sri Lankan authorities and faced detention and ill-
    treatment upon return. In support of this he relied upon a letter from
    his mother. It was also stated that his commitment to the aims of the
    TGTE are genuine and he wished to pursue those political beliefs and on
    return he would be unable to do so without attracting the adverse
    attention of the authorities.

23. At paragraphs 25 - 29, the judge recorded the case on behalf of the
    respondent. It had been argued that the appellant was "demonstrably one
    who was prepared to lie to the Tribunal in evidence" that the Tribunal
    should approaches evidence of caution. That he had grossly exaggerated
    the nature of his political activity within the UK and that the
    Tribunal could not be satisfied that he genuinely held any real
    political conviction. There was no real risk that had come to the
    adverse attention of the authorities as a suspected LTTE activist and
    if he has come to their attention, it would only be as one who is
    seeking to create a bogus asylum claim. It was recorded at paragraph 28
    that to the extent that it was accepted that the appellant had attended
    any TGTE meetings or events within the last three months, then he is
    simply a face in the crowd and has never held any position on behalf of
    the TGTE and is not a member. The Tribunal should be slow to accept
    that any of the material relied upon is publicly available or available
    to the authorities.



Summary of the finding of facts made by FtTJ Holmes:

24. The FtTJ set out his findings of fact at paragraphs 30 -69 of the
    decision.

25. The FtTJ began his consideration of the assessment of the evidence by
    relying on the preserved findings of fact made by Judge Hands which he
    stated were a "series of findings that he lied to her in evidence"
    about his experiences in Sri Lanka and were the "starting point for an
    assessment of his evidence concerning his sur place claim". The FtTJ
    stated, "I approach his evidence on the basis that he is perfectly
    comfortable with lying when he considers it expedient to do so" (see
    paragraph [31]).

26. As to the evidence of Mr K, set out in a letter dated 7 October 2017,
    the FtTJ recorded that Mr K did not suggest that he had any knowledge
    of the appellant undertaking any sur place activity in the UK. He had
    not attended the hearing, had not been tendered for cross-examination
    and that "even if it were open to me to revisit the findings made by
    Judge Hands in relation to the appellant's account of his experiences,
    I would be unable to place any significant weight upon the evidence of
    Mr K."

27. As to the appellant's evidence of sur place activity in his witness
    statement, the FtTJ set out that appellant gave no details of any
    event, meeting protest or demonstration he attended in the UK but
    states that he is involved with them but makes no claim to membership
    and whilst he claimed to be an active supporter campaigning on its
    behalf by issuing leaflets and collecting signatures, he provided no
    details of when and where he did so. The judge recorded his oral
    evidence paragraph 35 that he only travelled to London to participate
    in any TGTE activity when a friend gave him the bus money. However
    there is no evidence from such friend and there is no documentary
    evidence of activity in his bank account to explain when he travelled
    and to tie his travel to the events when they occurred (see paragraphs
    [34 - 35]).

28. The appellant relied upon a supporting letter written by his mother
    dated 11 November 2017 in which it was claimed that the authorities had
    visited the family home asking for the appellant and warning that he
    was wanted by the authorities because they knew that he was working
    against the government. The letter was relied upon as evidence that his
    sur place activities and come to the attention of the Sri Lankan
    authorities and therefore he was at risk on return.

29. The FtT J observed that this was not the first letter said to have been
    written by the appellant's mother and that an earlier letter (although
    plainly written by another hand) dated 19 December 2016 was before FtTJ
    Hands. It purported to confirm the appellant's account of his
    experiences in Sri Lanka, his LTTE involvement and detention. At
    paragraphs 40 - 41 the FTT J set out that the appellant accepted that
    his mother and two unmarried sisters continue to live in the family
    home, that he remained in telephone contact with them whilst he claimed
    that the telephone calls were intercepted by the army and that they
    were then visited by the army and questioned, he was unable to explain
    why the army would travel to ask his mother where he was if they were
    intercepting his calls and/or knew that he was in the UK undertaking
    activity on behalf of a Tamil separatist organisation.

30. The FtTJ then considered the evidence of Mr NS, who did not attend the
    hearing. The judge reviewed the documents that the appellant claimed to
    be genuine and written by him dated May 2016 and November 2017. His
    findings in relation to these documents are set out at paragraphs 43 -
    46 and summarised as follows:

        . There is no evidence one way or another to suggest that he is the
          same person who had written letters in support of the applicant
          in UB;

        . whilst the letters purported to be written by an MP of the TGTE
          (a senior member), neither letter stated in terms of the author
          having ever met the appellant, nor does either letter details
          source of the information presented within it.

        . The letter dated May 2016 purported to confirm that the appellant
          been an activist promoting the TGTE for 22 months (since July
          2014), but offered no explanation of what (if any) check the TGTE
          had undertaken upon him before accepting me as an activist; no
          details of the dates of the meetings he is said to have attended,
          their location or the subject. It gives a bold assertion that he
          distributed leaflets and raised awareness amongst the public of
          Tamil genocide, without offering any information about when and
          where and how we did so.

        . The same points were made in relation to the letter dated 27
          November 2016 but suggested in addition, without any detail, that
          the appellant had taken part in organising demonstrations and
          giving logistical support. The FtTJ observed that given that he
          had not claimed to have undertaken any political activity in the
          area which is currently housed in claimed that he could only
          travel to London occasionally to attend a TGTE event if someone
          gave the money, it is difficult to identify what the author of
          the letter meant by this. The appellant made no claim in his most
          recent witness statement or oral evidence that he taken part in
          organising demonstrations and indeed he denied it in cross-
          examination.

        . The judge also observed that while the letter provided
          information that the appellant seems to get tired and go into a
          depression but was able to overcome it because of his passion,
          the judge did not think he could attach any significant weight to
          it.

31. The FtTJ then considered the photographs -loose. He produced a colour
    photocopy of a photograph showing him standing within a room talking to
    6 seated men who appear to be of Tamil ethnicity. Behind there was a
    poster entitled "in the name of Buddha." The appellant claimed that
    this had been taken on 17 December 2017 at a TGTE meeting in London (at
    their offices). However the judge noted, there was no evidence from the
    individual who took the photograph or from anyone else within it or who
    was present at this location upon that occasion. The witness statement
    made on 15 December 2017 made no reference to any such forthcoming
    occasion and it was not suggested by the appellant that his name as a
    speaker at any event ever been published nor did he suggest that the
    photograph had ever appeared on any publicly available website. The
    judge also recorded the appellant's response to having been asked how
    he had obtained the photograph. The appellant initially said it was
    sent to him by someone within a WhatsApp group which he was a member
    but the FTT J observed that no evidence had been reduced to identify
    the members of the group, the content of the discussion/messaging or
    the material circulated between them all the privacy settings apply to
    their social media contact. The judge also recorded that in re-
    examination, the appellant's evidence went further claiming the
    photograph was taken by a TGTE MP and circulated within a WhatsApp
    group of which he is a member.

32. The FtTJ then considered a website which included colour photographs.
    This was an article said to have been published upon the TGTE website
    on the 12 December 2017 concerning a conference held by them in
    December of that year. There are nine photographs within the article
    and one photograph appears twice which shows the appellant seated in
    the front row of a room full of people. The judge recorded "he is not
    shown in any of the photographs of the speakers at the event." The
    judge recorded that the appellant accepted that his name did not appear
    within the article and he had made no claim in evidence that his name
    appeared in any relevant website or article. There was no evidence from
    the individual who took the photograph or from anyone else who was
    present at the location upon this occasion. The appellant's own witness
    statement (December 2017) made no reference to this occasion. Whilst it
    was argued on behalf of the appellant that the article appeared on a
    publicly available website, there was no evidence to show that the page
    was freely available rather than accessible only to a restricted group.

33. The judge then turned to a further document said to be an article
    published upon another website. This was a six-page document containing
    11 colour photographs. The date of the publication is not identified.
    At paragraph 55 the FtTJ recorded the appellant's evidence that the
    article and photographs contained therein relate to a demonstration at
    Downing Street on 30 August 2017. He claimed the demonstration was
    organised by the TGTE and the article's content suggested some
    involvement by the TGTE.  There were 11 photographs and the appellant
    appears once at the head of the article. His not shown in any
    photograph as being a speaker but is shown holding a photograph. The
    judge observed that this was not an enlargement of the photograph that
    appeared at the head of the article, but a photograph taken from a
    quite different angle which places the appellant at the centre. It
    shows him as having lowered the photograph he was holding and the other
    in the shown to be wearing one of the yellow/red polo shirts worn by a
    large proportion of the crowd present. The appellant accepted his name
    did not appear within the article in question. The judge found that
    there was no evidence from the individuals who took the photograph, or
    anyone else present at the location. The witness statement made only
    the "baldest reference" to this occasion, stating simply that the
    appellant attended the protest. Whilst it been argued that the article
    in the photographs appeared upon a publicly available website, there
    was no evidence to show the page would be freely available rather than
    accessible only to a restricted group.

34. At paragraph 61 to 63, the FtTJ considered to photographs of the
    appellant beside a pedestrian crossing which was said to have been
    taken on 30 August 2017. He claimed that they recorded him as being
    with a TGTE MP (not Mr S). The judge observed that it did show him
    alongside another man, but the photographs recorded no interaction
    between them and there was no other evidence as to who the individual
    was or whether he had ever met the appellant or knew who he was. The
    judge recorded also "the appellant is clearly placed centrally to the
    photographs and knows that they are being taken - the same cannot be
    said for the man recorded and standing alongside at that moment." The
    FtTJ considered that there was no evidence from the individual who took
    photographs or from anyone else present stop the witness statement made
    no reference to and it was not clear how the appellant acquired these
    photographs or why they were taken. It was not suggested they appeared
    on a publicly available website.

35. At paragraph 64 - 67 the judge considered four photographs said to
    recorded TGTE blood donation event. They consisted of two further
    colour photographs showing the appellant wearing a white TGTE sports
    and community T-shirt and to close ups of the banner alongside which is
    standing. He said they were taken on 22 November 2017 at a TGTE event
    and the appellant was clearly placed centrally and alone in one of
    these photographs and have been "clearly been taken to record his
    presence". There was no evidence from the individual took the
    photographs or anyone else who was present at the location. The witness
    statement made no reference to them or what they showed but simply
    stated that he attended the event. There was nothing to corroborate the
    appellant's claim made for the first time in re-examination that he
    acquired his photographs to his Facebook page once someone had "tagged
    him" as being present. He claimed individuals are TGTE MP, it is not
    suggested on the p behalf they appeared on a publicly available website
    or that his Facebook page is publicly accessible.

36. At paragraph 68 the FtTJ considered a single page containing four
    photographs printed from the website of an event held at Downing
    Street. However, it is not suggested that the appellant appeared in any
    of the photographs nor was it clear what event had been recorded from
    them.

37. Paragraph 69 considered to photographs said to be taken on 18 May 2016.
    These were documents before judge Hands. The FTT J recorded that the
    photographs were so poor that nothing could be discerned from them.

38. Having conducted a thorough assessment of all the material provided to
    the Tribunal since the decision of Judge Hands, the FtTJ then
    considered the evidence as a whole when reaching his conclusions which
    were set out at paragraphs 70 - 85.



The conclusions reached by FtTJ Holmes:

39. Those conclusions were as follows:

               1) he could not place any significant weight on the
                  appellant's evidence and the evidence given to FtTJ Hands
                  and repeated in this hearing concerning experiences in Sri
                  Lanka were untrue. Consequently the FtTJ found that the
                  appellant had no adverse profile with the Sri Lankan
                  authorities when he came to the United Kingdom and was not
                  of interest to them. He found that he had not been
                  detained by them as claimed (at [70]).

               2) The FtTJ was not satisfied that the appellant undertook
                  any involvement in LTTE events upon arrival in the UK. Nor
                  did he claim asylum until much later. The judge found that
                  both of these elements were "cogent indications" that he
                  had then no genuine political conviction in panel
                  separatist politics and was not committed to the breakup
                  of the Sri Lankan state ( at [71]).

               3) The FtTJ was not satisfied that the appellant ever became
                  an officer of the TGTE or a member. He could not place any
                  significant weight upon the letters purportedly written by
                  Mr S and he was not satisfied that he had any personal
                  first-hand knowledge of the appellant. He was not
                  satisfied that there was any reliable evidence of the
                  appellant undertaking any activity on behalf the TGTE in
                  2014 or 2015 as claimed (at [72]).

               4) The FtTJ found that if the appellant genuinely been an
                  activist or a leafleteer or anyone who had helped organise
                  events or meetings as claimed then it would be expected
                  for him to be able to give clear details of when this
                  occurred and what precisely he did. The judge found that
                  the appellant had not been able to offer any such details.
                  The appellant lived 300 miles away from the centre of the
                  TGTE operations and accepted that he is dependent upon
                  someone giving him bus fare to travel and does not claim
                  to have undertaken activity on behalf of the organisation
                  in the area in which he lived since making his asylum
                  claim. The judge stated, "put simply I am not satisfied
                  that he has told the truth when making these claims" ( at
                  [73]).

               5) The judge found that it was extremely difficult to
                  identify any date for any other event within the UK that
                  is said to give rise to a sur place claim until 18 May
                  2016; that event follows the refusal of the asylum claim
                  on 20 April 2016 and the inference drawn is that if the
                  appellant did genuinely attend the event held on that
                  occasion, he did so purely in response to the refusal of
                  his asylum claim and with the aim of bolstering his case
                  and appeal. The judge stated, "the chronology is in my
                  judgement a cogent indication that he had prior to May
                  2016 no genuine political conviction and no interest in
                  Tamil separatist politics" (at [74]).

               6) The appellant was one of 20,000 people who attended the 18
                  May 2016 event (according to FtTJ Hands decision). Judge
                  Holmes was not satisfied that even if he did attend, that
                  he was an organiser of that event or that he did anything
                  whilst present at it that would have drawn attention to
                  himself or would have been likely to create a real risk
                  that he will be perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as
                  an activist for either the TGTE in particular or more
                  generally for Tamil separatism (at [74]).

               7) As to sur place events thereafter the appellant offered no
                  dates for any other event within the UK until 30 August
                  2017, which was after the DUTJ's decision that remitted
                  the appeal. The clear inference drawn is that even if the
                  appellant did genuinely attend events on 30th August 22nd
                  November 10th December and 17 December 2017 he did so
                  purely to bolster his case this appeal hearing. The judge
                  stated "the chronology is in my judgement a cogent
                  indication that he still holds no genuine political
                  conviction and no genuine interest in the promotion of
                  Tamil separatist politics, or the creation of a separate
                  Tamil state, or more generally the overthrow of the Sri
                  Lankan regime" (at [76]).

               8) The appellant's presence at the events on 30th of August
                  and 10th of December is recorded in photographs that are
                  said to be published upon the Internet but that there was
                  no evidence that satisfied the FtTJ that the webpages were
                  publicly available rather than hidden behind security
                  walls or password protected. In the alternative, even if
                  they were publicly available (as the appellant contended)
                  the text that accompanied the photographs does not
                  identify him by name and the activity recorded in the
                  photos of him holding a photograph of the demonstration or
                  of sitting in the front row at a conference would not be
                  sufficient to place him at risk of being perceived as an
                  activist for the TGTE or one committed to the breakup of
                  the unity of the Sri Lankan state or the resumption of the
                  Civil War ( at [77]).

               9) The FtTJ considered the ability of the authorities to
                  undertake within the diaspora in the UK sophisticated
                  intelligence gathering and the monitoring of opposition
                  activities. The judge concluded that if it was the
                  position, then the authorities would be well aware that
                  the appellant's mere presence in the photographs was not
                  indicative of a larger role and that "in short they would
                  see him for what he is, someone who is simply seeking to
                  create a sur place claim, without any genuine interest in
                  the activities of the TGTE or Tamil separatism and
                  generally" (at [78]).

              10) The FtTJ was not satisfied that the photographs said to
                  show the appellant standing alongside a TGTE MP on 30th of
                  August or at a blood donation event on the 22 of November
                  or at a meeting on the 17th December are publicly
                  available. Nor was he satisfied that the man shown beside
                  the appellant either knew him or that the male presence
                  alongside one another in a public street would indicate
                  that they knew each other to any observer. Giving a blood
                  donation would not of itself indicate a commitment to
                  Tamil separatism or the resumption of the Civil War. Nor
                  was the judge satisfied that the photograph of the
                  appellant speaking to others recorded the TGTE event or
                  that is anything other than a "staged photograph for the
                  purposes of this hearing". The judge stated that he was
                  unable to identify any reason why any of those photographs
                  had come to the attention of the authorities or why they
                  would do so in the future ( at [79]).

40. His omnibus conclusions were set out at [80-81]:

             "80. Drawing these findings together, I am not satisfied that
             the appellant has yet come to the adverse attention of the Sri
             Lankan authorities, or that there is a real risk that he is
             currently perceived to be a member or activist or officer of
             the TGTE. It follows that I am not satisfied that the
             appellant's name appears upon a "stop list", or that he faces
             the prospect detention at the airport upon return he does not
             for within the category of persons listed in paragraph 7 or 9
             to the summary guidance in GJ (post-Civil War returnees) CG
             [2013] UKUT.

             81. As a Tamil returned from the UK, the appellant is, I
             accept, likely to be perceived as a failed asylum seeker. Even
             as such the appellant is not likely be questioned at the
             airport upon return beyond securing confirmation of his home
             address in xxx, and his return to his family residence there
             will be then in due course be verified by the CID or police
             subsequently. No risk of harm attaches to that process of
             itself."

41. The FtTJ then turned to what was described as the appellant's "fallback
    position" based upon the country guidance case. The judge recorded that
    counsel for the appellant accepted that she could not advance the
    appeal on the basis that the situation within Sri Lanka had
    deteriorated to any significant extent since the guidance was issued.
    The judge stated that the guidance confirmed that the real focus of the
    shellacking authorities is to identify Tamil activists in the diaspora
    working for Tamil separatism, and for the destabilisation of the unity
    of the Sri Lankan state, in order to prevent the resurgence of the LTTE
    or any similar organisation, and the revival of the Civil War. Thus any
    enquiries, or any monitoring of the activities, of returnees is
    undertaken with that focus.

42. The FtTJ set out Counsel's argument at [83] that as the appellant was
    generally a Tamil activist and interested in the promotion of such a
    state of affairs, any monitoring would reveal that and even if he could
    travel to his home area there would be a risk of detention and ill-
    treatment. In the alternative it was argued that as he was genuinely
    committed to such beliefs, if unable to pursue them through fear of
    consequence of doing so. he will be entitled to protection relying on
    HJ(Iran).

43. The judge concluded as follows:

    "84. In my judgement the appellant will not be obliged to lie to the
    Sri Lankan authorities if ever questioned about his diaspora
    activities; he is not a member of the TGTE, is not an officer of it,
    and has undertaken no organisational role on its behalf. He has grossly
    exaggerated to me his activities on its behalf. He is not in my
    judgement generally committed to the breakup of the Sri Lankan state,
    Tamil separatism, or a resumption of the Civil War. Accordingly I am
    not satisfied that he will actually do or say anything upon return to
    his home in xxx that would create the perception that he was, to anyone
    tasked with monitoring his activities. In turn I am not satisfied that
    he faces a future risk of detention or ill-treatment in his home area."



The appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

44. Following the dismissal of his appeal, grounds of appeal were issued
    for permission to appeal but on 23rd January 2018 the First-tier
    Tribunal refused permission. On renewal, the application for permission
    was granted by a Judge of the Upper Tribunal (see the decision dated
    22nd March 2019).

45. On the 31st May 2019, the Upper Tribunal heard the appeal against the
    decision of FtTJ Holmes. The UTJ recorded that the appellant was not
    present at the hearing and therefore heard the appeal in his absence
    and in his decision he gave reasons to why the FtTJ did not err in law.

46. An application was made to challenge the decision of UTJ Storey by way
    of an application for permission to the Court of Appeal.

47. On the 25th July 2019, UTJ Mandalia considered the grounds which
    included the reasons given for the applicant's non- attendance, it
    being asserted that the representatives had not been served with the
    notice of hearing and therefore an order was made by UTJ Mandalia
    setting aside the decision of UTJ Storey.



The grounds:

48. It is as a result of that decision and order that the appeal comes
    before the Upper Tribunal. The grounds advanced by the appellant are
    those originally provided, and Mr Davies, Counsel on behalf of the
    appellant, relied upon the grounds which had formed the application.

49. The first ground asserts that the FtTJ erred in law in his assessment
    of the appellant's sur place activity and that he had inadequately
    engaged with whether the Sri Lankan authorities would perceive the
    appellant to be involved in post-war separatism in a significant
    manner. It is submitted that the appellant's actual involvement with
    the TGTE is not wholly determinative of risk.

50. It is further submitted that the judge failed to engage with the June
    2017 Home Office guidance (CPIN) relating to Tamil separatism which
    demonstrated that the Sri Lankan government have a presence at pro-LTTE
    sur place activity. Mr Davies directed the Tribunal's attention to
    paragraph 13.1.2 -3 which cited a July 2015 ITJP Sri Lanka report on
    Sri Lanka's survivors of torture and sexual violence 2009 - 2015.

51. The grounds also challenge paragraphs 79- 80 of the FtTJ's analysis in
    which he set out that he was not satisfied that the appellant would be
    perceived to be a member, officer or activist of the TGTE and that his
    involvement with TGTE was staged and tactical. In this context it is
    submitted that the judge failed to engage with the evidence which
    showed him depicted in a series of photographs and that they had
    appeared on a number of websites. It is submitted also that the judge
    engaged with that evidence in an irrational manner by suggesting that
    there was no evidence of the websites readily accessible and that the
    websites might be restricted to a certain group.

52. The second ground relied upon is that the FtTJ failed to engage with
    the appellant's evidence that websites are not exclusive to any
    particular group. It is asserted at paragraph 8 of the grounds that the
    author was able to access websites with relative ease.

53. Mr Davies behalf of the appellant referred to the decision in UB (Sri
    Lanka) at paragraphs 23 and 24 where it was stated that the risk to the
    appellant did not turn merely on him showing that he was actually a
    member of the TGTE but relies on that membership being detected on
    arrival in Sri Lanka. In this context he submitted that he would be
    detected upon arrival as a result of the photographs and would be of
    interest to the authorities.

54. As to his activities, the grounds assert that the photograph submitted
    by him showing that he attended TGTE events and in the presence of LTTE
    flags and that the judge did not engage with the evidence. Furthermore,
    whilst the FtTJ made adverse findings against the appellant, even if
    his motivation was questionable, the judge failed to engage with the
    fact that the photographs of the appellant are readily accessible on
    the websites which show him being present at pro- LTTE events and
    events organised by an organisation opposed to the Sri Lankan state. As
    the guidance conceded that the authorities have a presence at such
    events the failure to engage with the guidance and his activity of sur
    place activity demonstrated a material error of law.

55. Ms Petterson on behalf of the respondent relied upon the rule 24
    response opposing the appeal. In that document it stated that post
    hearing research cannot establish that the FtTJ was not entitled to
    make findings on the evidence as it was presented at the hearing. In
    any event, the judge did consider the appellant's account even if the
    website was publicly available to view (see paragraph 77).

56. It was further submitted that the judge had given valid reasons for
    finding that the Sri Lankan authorities alongside the preserved
    findings from the previous decision, demonstrated that they would have
    no prior interest in the appellant nor do they have any interest now
    other than as an opportunist who is disingenuously attending
    demonstrations in the United Kingdom.

57. In her oral submissions Ms Petterson submitted that the grounds did not
    engage with the clear and detailed findings of the FtTJ and that at
    paragraph 77 the judge analysed all of the photographs and those said
    to be published upon the Internet. He found that there was no evidence
    that the webpages were publicly available rather than hidden behind
    security walls or password protected but went on to state that even if
    they were publicly available, the text that accompanied the photographs
    do not identify by name and that the activities recorded in those
    photographs were not sufficient to place them at risk of being
    perceived as an activist for the TGTE. She submitted that paragraph 78
    the judge made reference to the issue of monitoring and whilst counsel
    for the appellant made reference to the 2017 CPIN the FtTJ was aware of
    this but reached the conclusion that any assessment made by the
    authorities of any activities would demonstrate to them that he was
    someone who did not have any genuine interest in the activities of the
    TGTE (see paragraph 78).

58. In her submissions she distinguished the decision in UB (Sri Lanka) and
    that the issue was whether there was material which would properly
    demonstrate a fresh claim and the conclusion reached was the material
    could furnish a risk to the appellant. However, this does not take this
    appellant's case any further because the judge analysed the material
    and reach the overall conclusion that it would not be at any risk from
    the authorities should he come to their attention. She therefore
    submitted that decision should be upheld.



Decision on the error of law:

59. Having heard the submissions of the advocates and in the light of the
    issues raised in the papers before the Tribunal, I am not satisfied
    that the decision of the FtTJ demonstrates the making of an error on a
    point of law. I shall set out my reasons for reaching that conclusion.

60. The grounds assert that the FtTJ erred in or in his assessment of the
    appellant's sur place activity and that he had inadequately engaged
    with whether the Sri Lankan authorities would perceive the appellant to
    be involved in post war separatism in a significant manner. The grounds
    advanced on behalf of the appellant center upon the activities carried
    out and the evidence that was before the FtTJ and whether that evidence
    would be accessible to the Sri Lankan authorities thereby leading to a
    risk on return.

61. This was a determination in which the FtTJ made a series of detailed
    findings of fact and analysis of risk based on all of the evidence that
    was before him, both the written documentation, photographs and the
    oral evidence of the appellant. Those findings are consistent with the
    guidance given in GJ and others which stated as follows:

    "(1) This determination replaces all existing country guidance  on  Sri
    Lanka.

    (2) The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern has changed  since
    the civil war ended in May 2009. The LTTE in  Sri  Lanka  itself  is  a
    spent force and there have been no terrorist incidents since the end of
    the civil war.

    (3) The government's present objective is to identify  Tamil  activists
    in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism and to destabilise
    the unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in Amendment  6(1)  to  the  Sri
    Lankan  Constitution  in  1983,  which  prohibits  the  'violation   of
    territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka. Its focus is  on  preventing  both
    (a) the  resurgence  of  the  LTTE  or  any  similar  Tamil  separatist
    organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.

    (4) If a person is detained by the Sri Lankan security  services  there
    remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring  international
    protection.

    (5) Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka for a  person
    at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the government  now
    controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils are required to return to  a
    named address after passing through the airport.

    (6) There are no detention facilities at the airport. Only those  whose
    names appear on a "stop" list will be detained from  the  airport.  Any
    risk for those in  whom  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  are  or  become
    interested exists not at the airport, but after arrival in  their  home
    area, where their arrival will be verified by the CID or police  within
    a few days.

    (7) The current categories of persons at real risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in detention or otherwise,
    are:

    (a) Individuals who are, or are  perceived  to  be,  a  threat  to  the
    integrity of Sri Lanka as a  single  state  because  they  are  or  are
    perceived to have a significant role in relation to post conflict Tamil
    separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal of  hostilities  within
    Sri Lanka.

    (b) Journalists (whether in print  or  other  media)  or  human  rights
    activists,  who,  in  either  case,  have  criticised  the  Sri  Lankan
    government,  in  particular  its  human  rights  record,  or  who   are
    associated with publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.

    (c) Individuals who have given evidence  to  the  Lessons  Learned  and
    Reconciliation Commission implicating the Sri Lankan  security  forces,
    armed forces or the Sri Lankan authorities in alleged war crimes. Among
    those  who  may  have  witnessed  war  crimes  during   the   conflict,
    particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May  2009,  only  those  who  have
    already identified themselves by giving such evidence would be known to
    the Sri Lankan authorities and therefore only they are at real risk  of
    adverse attention or persecution on return as potential or  actual  war
    crimes witnesses.

    (d)  A  person  whose  name  appears  on  a  computerised  "stop"  list
    accessible at the airport, comprising a  list  of  those  against  whom
    there is an extant court order or  arrest  warrant.  Individuals  whose
    name appears on a "stop" list will be stopped at the airport and handed
    over to the appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in  pursuance  of  such
    order or warrant.

    (8) The Sri Lankan authorities'  approach  is  based  on  sophisticated
    intelligence, both as  to  activities  within  Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
    diaspora. The Sri Lankan authorities know that many Sri  Lankan  Tamils
    travelled abroad as economic migrants and also  that  everyone  in  the
    Northern Province had some level of involvement with  the  LTTE  during
    the civil war. In post-conflict Sri Lanka, an individual's past history
    will be relevant only to the extent that it is  perceived  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities as indicating a present  risk  to  the  unitary  Sri
    Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.

    (9) The authorities maintain a  computerised  intelligence-led  "watch"
    list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not  reasonably
    likely to be detained at the airport  but  will  be  monitored  by  the
    security services after his or her return. If that monitoring does  not
    indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist working to  destabilise
    the unitary Sri Lankan state or revive the internal armed conflict, the
    individual in question is not, in  general,  reasonably  likely  to  be
    detained by the security forces. That will be a  question  of  fact  in
    each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out by such  an
    individual."

62. The Judge's findings are entirely consistent with the guidance given in
    GJ, and in particular the following propositions: (a) the GOSL's
    concern now is not the past membership or sympathy, but whether a
    person is a destabilising threat in post-conflict Sri Lanka (paragraph
    311); (b) it is not established that previous LTTE connections or
    sympathies (whether direct or familial) are perceived by the GOSL as
    indicating now that an individual poses a destabilising threat in post-
    conflict Sri Lanka (paragraph 325); and (c) an individual's past
    history will be relevant only to the extent that it is perceived by the
    Sri Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary Sri
    Lankan state which lacks in Government (paragraph 356).

63. The country materials indicate that the Sri Lankan authorities'
    approach is based on sophisticated intelligence, both as to the
    activities within Sri Lanka and the diaspora. The authorities know that
    many Sri Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and that
    everyone in the Northern Province had some level of involvement with
    the LTTE during the civil war post-conflict.

64. An individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent that
    it is perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as indicating a present
    risk to the unity of the Sri Lankan state or Sri Lankan Government.
    Similarly, in terms of political activities in the diaspora, it was not
    considered by the Upper Tribunal in GJ as indicated in paragraph 336 of
    the determination that the attendance of demonstrations in the diaspora
    alone would be sufficient to create a real risk or reasonable degree of
    likelihood that a person would attract attention on return. An
    attendance at one or even several demonstrations is not by itself
    evidence that a person is a committed Tamil activist seeking to promote
    Tamil separatism within Sri Lanka. It was not for the political
    indifferent to seek to bolster an asylum claim by opportunist
    participation. Rather the concern is with genuine demonstrators who may
    be put at risk as a result of surveillance and video recording or
    photography. This was particularly so given the level of sophistication
    in the intelligence gathering.

65. The judge did not accept that the appellant had demonstrated by
    reference to his account as to events in Sri Lanka that there was any
    extant court order or arrest warrants against him or that he had been
    of any adverse interest to the authorities before he left Sri Lanka.
    The judge also rejected the appellant's evidence that following his
    attendance at events in the United Kingdom that members of his family
    had been visited by the authorities.

66. The risk category within which the appellant's circumstances prima
    facie would merit consideration would be whether he was a person who
    is, or is perceived to be, a threat because they are or are perceived
    to have a significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil
    separatism

67. In this context, the grounds assert that the judge failed to engage
    with the parts of the CPIN dated June 2017 at paragraphs 13.1.2 and
    13.1.3.

68. Those paragraphs read as follows:

"13.1.2 in several cases witnesses mentioned that they or their family
members had been questioned about their participation in anti-government
protests or war commemoration events abroad. Some reported the Sri Lankan
security forces showed them, or their families, photographs of themselves
at these protests. This indicates the Sri Lankan security forces are
monitoring these gatherings outside the country. In the UK at least, some
Tamil diaspora organisations have responded by banning cameras at annual
Heroes Day commemorations for the safety of the participants."

    "13.1.3 In a January 2016 report on survivors of torture and sexual
    violence in 2015, the same organisation reported that: "there is
    evidence that the intelligence services have continued in 2015 to show
    detainees who have returned to Sri Lanka photographs of themselves
    attending heroes Day events and other commemorations abroad. This
    suggests there is continuing interest in surveillance of diaspora
    events."

69. However in my judgement, it is implicit from the FtTJ's decision that
    he had regard to that material in his assessment of risk and this is
    demonstrated by the detailed findings and his analysis of all of the
    evidence. As can be seen from the summary of the detailed findings set
    out earlier in this decision, the FtTJ began his consideration of risk
    by analysing the chronology and the events and the nature and type of
    activity undertaken. While the grounds appear to assert that the judge
    failed to have regard to the photographic evidence and the relevance of
    them, this is not the position. The judge properly assessed the
    photographic evidence in the context of the appellant's overall account
    and reached conclusions that were open to him as to the extent of those
    activities.

70.  In his summary findings the FtTJ found that the appellant had no
    involvement in Sri Lankan politics prior to his arrival nor in the six
    years before he claimed asylum. He was not satisfied that he was ever
    an officer or even a member of the TGTE and placed no weight on the
    evidence from Mr S for the reasons that he gave. The judge found that
    the appellant was not genuinely involved in any activities given his
    inability to give clear details of any activities undertaken. While the
    judge accepted that he had attended an event on 18 May 2016, the
    appellant was one of 20,000 people and had not drawn any attention to
    himself at that event. As regards the events in August, November and
    December, the judge was not satisfied that those photographs were
    published on the Internet or that the websites were publicly available
    rather than hidden behind security walls or password protected. In any
    event, and if they were accessible, he found that the text accompanying
    the photograph did not identify him by name and the activities
    undertaken (such as holding a photograph or sitting in the front row of
    a conference) would not be sufficient to place him at risk of being
    perceived as an activist or one committed to the breakup of the unity
    of the state or the resumption of the Civil War.

71. At paragraphs 77 and 78, the judge is summarised his findings on the
    evidence and at paragraph 78 expressly made reference to the Sri Lankan
    authorities' ability to undertake within the diaspora "sophisticated
    intelligence gathering" and the "monitoring of opposition activities".
    Consequently the FtTJ did consider those highlighted paragraphs of the
    CPIN concerning the abilities of the authorities to undertake
    intelligence gathering at events. The grounds do not make reference to
    it, but the FtTJ expressly rejected the appellant's claim that his
    mother had been visited by the authorities as a result of any activity
    carried out in the UK. Furthermore, the FtTJ was entitled to take into
    account that against the background of this particular appellant and
    the findings of fact made, that the authorities would be aware that his
    presence in the photographs was not indicative of any real role and
    that as the judge stated at paragraph 78 "in short they would seem that
    what he is, someone who simply seeking to create a sur place claim,
    without any genuine interest in the activities of the TGTE or Tamil
    separatism generally."

72. The judge also considered the claim made that the photographs were on
    accessible websites. It was open to the judge to find on the evidence
    before him that the appellant had not shown that the photographs were
    publicly available. Whilst the grounds refer to the author of them
    being able to access certain websites, this was not the evidence put
    before the FtTJ nor has it been demonstrated by any material attached
    to the grounds or before this Tribunal. In any event, the FtTJ went on
    to consider that even if those photographs were accessible, the text
    which accompanied the photographs did not identify the appellant by
    name and that the nature of the photographs (holding a photograph at a
    demonstration and sitting in the front row of a conference) would not
    be sufficient to place him at risk of being perceived as an activist
    for the TGTE or one committed to the breakup of the unity of the Sri
    Lankan state.

73. It is correct as the grounds contend that the FtTJ made strong adverse
    findings concerning the appellant's credibility and motivation and it
    is equally correct that even if his motivation to attend events was
    questionable, the activity undertaken by the appellant still had to be
    considered in the analysis of risk. However this is the analysis
    undertaken by the FtTJ who did engage with all of the evidence, both
    documentary and the oral evidence, concerning the appellant's
    activities which the judge had found to be "grossly exaggerated" (at
    [84]), and photographic evidence such as it was did not identify him by
    name. He concluded that when viewed as a whole it would not be
    indicative of any real role and that he would not be perceived or
    viewed as someone with a genuine interest in the activities of the TGTE
    or someone committed to the breakup of the unity of the Sri Lankan
    state.

74. Mr Davies raised a point that was not raised in the grounds based on
    the photographic evidence being available at the airport. However, the
    FtTJ considered this argument in his analysis at paragraphs 81-84. It
    had been accepted by Counsel that the situation in Sri Lanka had not
    deteriorated since the decision in GJ and others and that the real
    focus remained on those working for the destabilisation of the unity of
    the Sri Lankan state and that any enquiries or any monitoring of
    activities would be undertaken with that focus. Thus the FtTJ's
    findings of fact concerning his past history and profile, that he was
    not on any stop list  and the level and extent of those activities were
    relevant to this issue and in the light of those findings it was open
    to the FtTJ to reach the conclusion that the appellant would not be
    perceived or viewed as someone with a genuine interest in the
    activities of the TGTE or someone committed to the breakup of the unity
    of the Sri Lankan state, if either questioned or when viewed in his
    home area and that he would not be at risk  on return.

75. For those reasons, it is not been demonstrated that decision of the FTT
    J does not involve the making of an error on a point of law and
    therefore the decision stands.




Notice of Decision

76. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of
    the FtTJ stands.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


                                Date    16 /10/2019

                                    Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds




