
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04336/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Hatton Cross                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30 November 2017                      |On 28 December 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     n H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K M E Mawla, Solicitor from Lexpert Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ford (the judge), promulgated on 4 April 2017, in  which
    he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision
    of 18 April 2016, refusing his human rights and protection claims.

 2. The Appellant's case was based on the assertion that he was a  Rohingya
    Muslim who had been brought up in Bangladesh,  and  that  he  had  been
    either trafficked to the United Kingdom and/or been exploited whilst in
    this country over the course of many years.

The judge's decision

 3. The Appellant's appeal had previously been adjourned in November  2016.
    This was on the basis that he had intended  to  complete  paperwork  in
    respect of a referral to the National Referral  Mechanism  relating  to
    his claim to have been trafficked to the United Kingdom.  At that point
    he had yet to complete the relevant documentation and therefore a judge
    agreed to adjourn.  When the matter came  back  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 3 April 2017, Judge Ford refused a further  application  to
    adjourn the  case.   The  judge  noted  the  previous  adjournment  but
    concluded that he was able to  undertake  his  own  assessment  of  the
    relevant evidence and issues relating  to  trafficking.   He  concluded
    that it was not unfair or unjust to proceed notwithstanding the absence
    of a decision under the NRM (see paragraph 13).

 4. Having assessed the evidence before him  the  judge  rejects  all  core
    elements of  the  Appellant's  account,  finding  him  to  be  entirely
    untruthful.  He  specifically  finds  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    Rohingya Muslim, was not trafficked to the United Kingdom, had not been
    in this country as long as he had claimed, and had not been a victim of
    trafficking whilst here.  The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. There are five grounds of appeal, relating to the alleged unfairness in
    failing to adjourn, particular factual findings set out  in  paragraphs
    30 and 31, and the judge's approach to Article 8.

 6. Permission to appeal on all grounds was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Plimmer on 20 September 2017.

The hearing before me

 7. At the outset of the hearing  Mr  Mawla  confirmed  that  he  was  only
    relying on grounds 1 to 3.   In  respect  of  the  judge's  refusal  to
    adjourn pending a decision by the NRM,  Mr  Mawla  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal could "only" undertake an assessment of  a  trafficking  issue
    for itself if there had already been an NRM decision.   He  then  moved
    away from that position somewhat and submitted that it would  at  least
    have been better for the judge to  have  had  an  NRM  decision  before
    making his own assessment of the relevant issues in the context of  the
    Appellant's appeal.  Mr Mawla submitted that the  judge  was  wrong  in
    paragraph 30 to have found that the Appellant's Muslim faith  supported
    a conclusion that he was Bengali and not a  Rohingya,  given  that  the
    Rohingyas themselves were of the Muslim faith.  In respect of paragraph
    31 Mr Mawla submitted that the judge should not have taken the  failure
    to approach the UNHCR or  Red  Cross  as  undermining  the  Appellant's
    credibility.

 8. Mr Walker submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  able  to  make
    findings on trafficking issues for itself without having  to  wait  for
    any decision by the NRM.   He  accepted  that  the  judge's  reason  in
    paragraph 30 was poor but submitted that  this  was  not  material.  In
    respect of paragraph 31 Mr Walker submitted that the judge was entitled
    to rely on this particular point.

Decision on error of law

 9. As I informed the parties at the hearing, I conclude that there are  no
    material errors of law in the judge's decision.

10. In respect of the refusal to adjourn the appeal for a second time,  the
    judge clearly had the correct  test  of  fairness  well  in  mind  when
    considering the  application.   Having  regard  to  relevant  case  law
    including MS [2016] UKUT 00226 and AS  (Afghanistan)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    1469 (neither of which was apparently cited  to  him),  the  judge  was
    entitled to proceed on  the  basis  that  he  could  undertake  a  full
    assessment of the trafficking issues within the context of  the  appeal
    before him.  I do not read the case-law as requiring  there  to  be  an
    existing decision  by  a  competent  authority  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal has any jurisdiction to evaluate  issues  of  trafficking  for
    itself.

11. Trafficking claims arise under the head of the  Refugee  Convention  or
    Articles 3 and/or 4 ECHR on a fairly  regular  basis.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal is well-able to assess evidence  and  make  relevant  findings
    thereon.  I appreciate that if there is an existing NRM  decision  this
    will be relevant to the Tribunal's task.  I also  acknowledge  that  if
    the judge had accepted that the Appellant had in fact  been  trafficked
    then relevant  materials,  including  the  Trafficking  Convention  and
    procedural safeguards under  Article  4  ECHR  would  come  into  play.
    However, the absence of an NRM decision does not preclude the  Tribunal
    from making an assessment of the relevant issues.  Further,  the  judge
    in this case decisively rejected the Appellant's claim of  having  been
    trafficked to the United Kingdom and having been exploited whilst here.
     I also note the passage of time between the initial adjournment of the
    appeal in November 2016 and the appeal before the  judge  in  April  of
    this year.  The Appellant would clearly have been aware of  the  nature
    of his case and the need to prepare for an appeal hearing  accordingly.
    In summary there was no unfairness  on  the  part  of  the  judge  when
    refusing to adjourn the appeal for a second time.

12. In respect of paragraph 30 of his decision, I find that the  judge  did
    err in relying on the  reasons  stated  therein  that  the  Appellant's
    Muslim faith tended to show that he was Bengali,  the  inference  being
    that this counted against him being Rohingya.  It is of course the case
    that the Rohingya are identifiable in large part by their Muslim faith.
     Therefore, the reason provided in  fact  neither  detracted  from  the
    Appellant's case nor added to it.  Although there is an  error  here  I
    agree with Mr Walker that it is in  no  way  material  to  the  judge's
    findings as a whole.

13. In respect of paragraph 31, the judge was in my view entitled  to  take
    into account the failure of the Appellant to even  approach  the  UNHCR
    and/or the Red Cross in order to try and  locate  his  family.   It  is
    clear from the wording of the paragraph that the judge was  relying  on
    this point only as a fairly peripheral reason and it did not  form  the
    core basis for his rejection of the Appellant's claim as a whole.

14. As mentioned earlier, the grounds relating to Article 8 have  not  been
    pursued before me.   Even  if  they  had  been,  there  are  no  errors
    whatsoever in the judge's approach to Article 8.  He took all  relevant
    maters into account and correctly directed himself to the relevant law.



Notice of Decision

There are no material errors of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   [pic]                  Date: 21 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   [pic]                               Date: 21 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

