
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: PA/04291/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 10th May 2017                     |On: 8th June 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                Ahmed Mohamed
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mrs Chawdhery, Counsel instructed by Broudie
Jackson &
                       Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Egypt, born in  1991.  He  appeals  with
    permission the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Tully)  to
    dismiss his appeal on protection and human rights grounds,  a  decision
    promulgated on the 11th November 2016.


 2. The basis of the Appellant's protection claim was that he was a gay man
    who would face persecution in Egypt for reasons of  his  membership  of
    that social group.   The Respondent did not accept that  the  Appellant
    was gay, and so the claim failed at that first hurdle.  Protection  was
    refused.

 3. The matter came before the First-tier Tribunal which was  required,  on
    the case put, to evaluate two related aspects of  the  claim.  Had  the
    Appellant encountered problems as a result of his sexuality  in  Egypt,
    which had  culminated  in  a  warrant  being  issued  for  his  arrest?
    Further, had the Appellant  established,  with  reference  to  evidence
    about his life in the UK, that he was  in  fact  gay?   The  First-tier
    Tribunal found the answer to be both  questions  to  be  negative.  The
    appeal was dismissed.

 4. The Appellant now submits that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside for four material errors of law:

              i) The Tribunal failed to take material evidence into account;


             ii) It  unlawfully  sought  corroboration  of  the  Appellant's
                 claims when it is established principle that asylum seekers
                 should not be required to produce the same;

            iii) The Tribunal misunderstood the evidence;

             iv) Matters were taken against the Appellant which he  did  not
                 have an opportunity to address because they were not put to
                 him.

 5. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mrs Chawdhery and  Mr  Harrison
    and I reserved my decision.


    My Findings


    Ground (i)


 6. At paragraph  33  of  the  determination  the  Tribunal  considers  the
    evidence in respect of the Appellant's claim that  he  lives  with  his
    partner in the UK:


         "I have noted the utility  invoice  contained  in  the  appellant's
         bundle and accept that this is dated 28  December  2015  and  gives
         both their names and have taken this into account,  but  I  do  not
         accept that this is determinative because the inclusion of  a  name
         on an isolated invoice does not necessarily  mean  they  are  in  a
         relationship, or even living at the same  address.   There  are  no
         other forms of evidence in the appellant's bundle to show  that  he
         is living at the address.  If he genuinely lives there, there  must
         be other utility bills, phone bills,  doctors/dentist  records  and
         personal correspondence."


 7. It is submitted on the Appellant's behalf that the Tribunal here  erred
    in failing to take material evidence into account, namely his screening
    interview, his  asylum  interview  and  correspondence  from  the  Home
    Office, all of which places the Appellant at the address  in  question.
    The Tribunal was wrong to say that there was "no other  evidence"  that
    he lived at that place. Further it is submitted that the  Tribunal  was
    speculating  when  it  found  that  the  Appellant  should  have   been
    registered with a dentist or a doctor.


 8. There is certainly no error of  fact  in  the  determination  when  the
    Tribunal records, at paragraph 33, that there are  no  other  forms  of
    evidence relating  to  the  claimed  cohabitation  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle. There is no evidence at  all.    The  only  document  that  the
    parties could identify was an  item  of  correspondence  from  a  water
    company in the Respondent's bundle which contains both  names.    I  do
    not read paragraph  33  as  the  Tribunal  specifically  requiring  the
    Appellant to produce, for instance, something from a dentist. Rather it
    was merely pointing out the kind of evidence one might expect to see if
    both men lived at the property, and the fact  that  it  was  strikingly
    absent.

 9. At paragraph 38 the determination addresses the fact that the Appellant
    did not claim asylum on arrival, but  rather  waited  for  five  months
    before doing so:

         "The appellant came to the UK in May  2015  and  did  not  identify
         himself as an asylum seeker  on  arrival,  despite  saying  he  was
         running for his life.  He waited for five months before making  his
         claim.  He says that this was because his claimed partner only told
         him to claim asylum on return  from  a  trip,  but  I  reject  this
         explanation because the  partner  is  a  refugee  and  I  have  not
         accepted the relationship is genuine".


10. It is submitted that in so finding the Tribunal  failed  to  take  into
    account the evidence that the claimed partner had been on a trip.    It
    is further submitted that the Tribunal acted unfairly in rejecting  the
    evidence of the partner because he is a refugee.


11. I am unable to read the determination in the same way as the drafter of
    the grounds. First of all, there does not appear to have been an  issue
    that the man went on a trip, so there was no need to refer to  evidence
    of the same.  Secondly, it is perfectly clear that his evidence was not
    rejected "because he is a refugee". The point being made (in accordance
    with the Tribunal's statutory duty under s8  AI(TC)A)  2004)  was  that
    there had been a delay in the claim being advanced, and that this  must
    be held to undermine the claim that the  Appellant  held  a  subjective
    fear of return to Egypt.   The reasoning cited is  concerned  with  the
    Appellant's explanation for the delay, namely that his partner was  not
    around to give him advice or support his application. The Tribunal  was
    rejecting that explanation inter alia on the grounds that  his  claimed
    partner was a refugee himself and so could be expected to have  a  good
    understanding of the processes and requirements  of  the  Home  Office,
    including the duty to make a prompt claim.

12. I am not satisfied that the Tribunal did fail  to  take  evidence  into
    account, or that if it did, that was material.

    Ground (ii)


13. The complaint under this heading is that the Tribunal applied too  high
    a standard of proof  and/or  erred  in  requiring  additional  evidence
    contrary to the principle that asylum seekers should not be required to
    provide corroboration of their claims: Kasolo v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department (13190). It is contended  that  the  Tribunal  made
    these errors in respect of the Appellant's claimed relationship in  the
    UK.


14. The principle in question has its origins in the UNHCR Handbook[1]

         196. It is a general legal principle that the burden of proof  lies
         on the person submitting a claim. Often, however, an applicant  may
         not be able to support  his  statements  by  documentary  or  other
         proof, and cases in which an applicant can provide evidence of  all
         his statements will be the exception rather than the rule. In  most
         cases a person fleeing from persecution will have arrived with  the
         barest  necessities  and  very  frequently  even  without  personal
         documents. Thus, while the burden of proof in  principle  rests  on
         the applicant, the duty to ascertain and evaluate all the  relevant
         facts is shared between the applicant and the examiner. Indeed,  in
         some cases, it may be for the examiner to use all the means at  his
         disposal to produce  the  necessary  evidence  in  support  of  the
         application. Even  such  independent  research  may  not,  however,
         always be successful and there may also be statements that are  not
         susceptible of proof. In such cases,  if  the  applicant's  account
         appears credible, he should, unless there are good reasons  to  the
         contrary, be given the benefit of the doubt.


         197. The requirement of evidence should thus not  be  too  strictly
         applied in view of the difficulty of proof inherent in the  special
         situation in which an applicant for refugee status  finds  himself.
         Allowance for such possible lack of  evidence  does  not,  however,
         mean that unsupported statements must necessarily  be  accepted  as
         true if they are inconsistent with the general account put  forward
         by the applicant.

15. The point made, and adopted in Kasolo, is that when people are  fleeing
    from the place of persecution, it is unreasonable  to  expect  them  to
    collate documentary evidence of the same before they leave.    In  this
    case the matter in  issue  was  whether  the  Appellant  was  having  a
    homosexual relationship with a man who lived in  Liverpool.  The  Judge
    had set out [at 31-32] the reasons why she was not prepared  to  attach
    any significant weight to the Appellant's evidence on  this  point:  he
    had been vague, inconsistent and  uncertain  about  matters  which  she
    expected a person in a genuine committed relationship  to  know  about.
    What happens thereafter is the Tribunal looks to see whether  there  is
    other evidence  to  support  the  claim  being  made:  statements  from
    friends, utility bills etc to confirm cohabitation,  confirmation  from
    agencies such as 'Asylum Link' that they attend  together.  Finding  it
    lacking, she found the burden of proof was not discharged.   I  am  not
    satisfied that her approach was wrong. The evidence in question was not
    of the type considered in Kasolo. This was  not  material  out  of  the
    Appellant's reach,  or that would have been  particularly  onerous  for
    him to obtain.   There was no requirement that he  submit corroborative
    evidence, but given the deficiencies in his own  evidence,  it  plainly
    would have been useful to his case. The Tribunal  was  not  obliged  to
    accept the oral evidence at face value.


    Ground (iii)


16. It is submitted that in its analysis of the  Appellant's  evidence  the
    Tribunal misunderstood what had been said. At paragraph 31 the Tribunal
    weighs against the Appellant the fact that he was only able to name one
    bar in Liverpool that  he  claims  to  attend  with  his  partner.  The
    Tribunal did not find that to be consistent with the claim that the men
    had been socialising in the city for over five months: "I do  not  find
    it credible that the he would not know the names of bars they  went  to
    as a couple". Issue is taken with that finding because it is said  that
    the Appellant was not asked to name bars that he had attended, but bars
    that were in the area that he visited.


17. I accept that there may have been some misunderstanding of the evidence
    on this point, and that it is arguably more likely that  the  Appellant
    would be ignorant about other bars in the vicinity  than  he  would  be
    about bars he had actually gone to.

    Ground (iv)


18. It is an established principle of law that parties  should  be  put  on
    notice of a forensic challenge to their evidence, in  order  that  they
    might fairly be given an opportunity to address that challenge.


19. In this case it is said that the Tribunal erred  in  failing  to  apply
    this principle at paragraph 28 when it apparently weighed  against  the
    Appellant the fact that he has  not  produced  a  copy  of  the  arrest
    warrant that he says has been issued against him in Egypt, and moreover
    had failed to provide a good explanation why not.

20. I cannot be satisfied that the Appellant has been taken by surprise  by
    this matter being raised. His claim that he is  wanted  in  Egypt,  and
    that an arrest warrant has been issued against him, was disputed in the
    reasons for refusal letter dated 15th April 2016 [at  29].    Questions
    about that warrant, and how he managed to  leave  the  country  without
    difficulty, were expressly put in cross examination.   This  ground  is
    not made out.

    Conclusions

21. In granting permission Judge Southern  had  observed  that  this  is  a
    determination that contains numerous typographical errors and  that  it
    might be arguable, as a result,  that  there  was  a  lack  of  anxious
    scrutiny applied by the First-tier Tribunal.   That is a factor that  I
    have weighed in the balance with my findings on ground (iii), the  only
    submission that I have found to have any merit. It is unfortunate  that
    the determination appears to have been dictated and not proof  read.  I
    am however quite satisfied that the Judge  has  assessed  the  relevant
    evidence before her, and given intelligible reasons why she  has  found
    it not to discharge the burden of proof.   The  Appellant  can  readily
    understand why he has lost, and there can be  no  legitimate  complaint
    that the Tribunal did not turn its mind to the substantive  matters  in
    issue. For that reason I am not persuaded that the decision contains an
    error of law such that the decision should, or must, be set aside.


    Decisions


22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law such that the decision must be set  aside.   The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is upheld.


23. There is no direction for anonymity.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               11th May 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] HANDBOOK AND GUIDELINES ON PROCEDURES AND CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING
REFUGEE STATUS under the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol relating to
the Status of Refugees



