
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
PA/04113/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly         | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 28 June 2017                        | On 7 July 2017                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                ATTA UL ALEEM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Malik for Thomson and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 7 October 1983 and is a national of Pakistan.


3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Simmonds promulgated on 1 November  2016  which  dismissed
   the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  11
   April 2016 to refuse the Appellants protection  claim  based  on  further
   submissions made on 11 April 2016.
5. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons which were in essence that :
   a) The Appellants claim to be at risk due  to  his  Ahmadi  religion  and
      religious activities were the subject of a previous decision made by a
      Judge on 18 April 2015 and he found that the Appellant had  failed  to
      establish that he preached in  Pakistan  or  had  taken  part  in  any
      significant activity in the UK.
   b) The Judge found that  it  was  not  the  Appellants  genuine  wish  to
      practice and manifest his faith openly on return.
   c) Reliance was placed on the CG case of MN and  others  (Ahmadis-country
      conditions-risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 389 (IAC)
   d) The letter from the  Ahmadiyya  Association  (the  AA)  is  vague  and
      therefore little weight is attached to it.
   e) The photographs produced do not reflect religious activities.

The Judge's Decision

6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Simmons ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal on all grounds.
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that the Judge was  erred  in  her
   application of MN & Others;  the  Judges  findings  in  relation  to  his
   religious activities in Pakistan were inadequately  reasoned;  the  Judge
   had misdirected herself as to the live issues in the case given that this
   was a fresh claim.
8.  On 24 February 2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Dr  H  H  Storey  gave
   permission to appeal.

9. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Malik  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that (a) He relied on the grounds of appeal and  the  grant  of
   permission.

   (b) The only issue was with the asylum findings and the approach that the
   Judge took to the evidence.

   (c) The Judge appears to take Devaseelan as a blanket prohibition on  the
   introduction of new evidence.

   (d) Nevertheless the Judge accepted at paragraph 30  that  the  Appellant
   was organising preaching in Pakistan for 5  years  and  then  leafletting
   thereafter.

   (e)The  further  letters  from  the  Ahmadiyya  Association  clarify  the
   previous information they had given: thus it was not new evidence  simply
   clarification of the evidence that they had already given. The AA  is  an
   independent organisation and their evidence can  only  be  rejected  with
   care.

   (f) The Judge at paragraph 35 failed to adequately consider  whether  the
   Appellants decision to preach discreetly in Pakistan was more to do  with
   the restrictions placed on his faith rather  than  a  reflection  of  his
   genuine intentions : relying on HJ Iran if it was  the  former  that  was
   persecution.

10. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Harrison submitted that :

   a) He conceded that there was an error in law as argued by  Mr  Malik  in
      relation to whether the Appellant would  manifest  his  faith  in  the
      future.

The Law

11.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is untrue.

Finding on Material Error

13. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

14. The first challenge is that the Judge erred in how  she  applied  MN  in
   that inter alia the test set out provides at 3(ii) that if  it  is  found
   the Appellant would avoid engaging in the behaviour  in  issue  to  avoid
   persecution he is in need of protection. The Appellants witness statement
   at paragraphs 3 and 7 makes clear that the Appellant preached  discreetly
   because of legal  restrictions  in  Pakistan.  I  am  satisfied  that  at
   paragraph 32  and  35  of  the  decision  where  the  Judge  reaches  her
   conclusions she has not made clear findings that  reflect  an  engagement
   with this part of the test it that while she refers to this being said in
   his witness statement it is unclear what she made of this assertion and I
   am satisfied that Mr  Harrison  was  correct  concede  that  this  was  a
   material error of law. This error I consider to be material since had the
   Tribunal conducted this exercise the outcome could have  been  different.
   That in my view is the correct test to apply.

15. The second challenge  is  in  relation  to  findings  of  fact  made  in
   relation to the Appellants activities in Pakistan. I  am  satisfied  that
   there is an apparent contradiction between the finding  at  paragraph  30
   that 'he was involved in some organising of preaching in Pakistan between
   2005-2010' and the finding at paragraph 32 that  there  was  insufficient
   reason to go behind the previous  Judges  findings  in  relation  to  the
   letter of the AMA UK regarding his activities in Pakistan which was  that
   the Appellant 'did not engage  in  preaching  in  Pakistan.'  I  am  also
   satisfied that the approach of the Judge to the fresh evidence  from  the
   AA was inadequately reasoned in that while I do not accept that she views
   Devaseelan as a blanket ban it is unclear whether the Judge engaged  with
   the argument that the Appellant was not seeking to add to  the  available
   facts because his evidence about the meaning of the words  Islaho  Irshad
   was merely confirmed by the later AA letters.

16. The third challenge is that the Judges approach to her  task  failed  to
   take into account that the Respondent in accepting that this was a  fresh
   claim conceded that there was new evidence. I am satisfied that the Judge
   erred in setting out at paragraph 21 her task as requiring her the assess
   whether before her was  the  same  evidence  or  new  evidence  when  the
   Respondent had clearly conceded that it was new evidence in accepting the
   fresh claim and conceding that there was a right of appeal.

17. I therefore found that errors of law have been established  in  relation
   to both the Appellants activities both in Pakistan and the  UK  and  that
   the Judge's determination cannot stand and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
   entirety. All matters to be redetermined afresh.

18. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. In this case I have determined that the case should  be  remitted  as  I
   have found there was an error of law because the Appellant did not have a
   fair hearing due to the errors in the Judges approach  to  the  evidence.
   In this case none of the findings of fact are to  stand  and  the  matter
   will be a complete re hearing.

20. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
   at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before me.





21. I made the following directions for the resumed hearing.

    . List for 3 hours

    . Urdu interpreter.



Signed                                                              Date
6.7.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell




































