
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: PA/04116/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13th December 2017                        |On 22nd December 2017          |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                    a g a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:    Miss R Manning of Counsel instructed by Genesis Law
Associates Ltd
For the Respondent: Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against a decision of Judge E.M.M. Smith of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 16th  January  2017.   The
    Appellant is an Ethiopian citizen born 1st January 1997.

 2. The Appellant was encountered at the  Channel  Tunnel  on  25th  August
    2015.  He was arrested and claimed asylum.  His claim  was  based  upon
    his membership and support of the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF).

 3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's claim on 14th December 2015  and
    the FtT dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds, finding him to
    be an  incredible  and  untruthful  witness.   With  reference  to  the
    Appellant's claimed sur place activities in the UK, the  FtT  found  in
    paragraphs 41-43 that the Appellant was not a member of the OLF and  he
    had not effectively participated in any OLF demonstrations or meetings.



 4. Following dismissal of his appeal the Appellant applied for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The application was initially refused
    but a subsequent application  was  made  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and
    granted.

Error of Law

 5. On 9th October 2017 I heard submissions from both parties  in  relation
    to error of law.  The Respondent contended there was no material error,
    as although the FtT may have overlooked evidence  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's sur place activities, the error was  not  material  because
    the FtT had considered risk on return, taking the Appellant's  case  as
    its highest.

 6. I found there was  a  material  error  of  law  disclosed  in  the  FtT
    decision, and set aside the decision, but preserved the  findings  made
    by the FtT  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  claimed  activities  in
    Ethiopia,  which  had  not  been  challenged  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.

 7.  Full  details  of  the  application  for  permission,  the  grant   of
    permission, the submissions made by both parties,  and  my  conclusions
    are contained in my decision dated 10th  October  2017  promulgated  on
    17th October 2017.  I set out below paragraphs 19-30 of that  decision,
    which contain my conclusions and reasons  for  setting  aside  the  FtT
    decision;

         19.  As conceded by Mr Vokes there was no  realistic  challenge  to
             the credibility findings made by the FtT in  relation  to  the
             Appellant's claimed activities in Ethiopia.   The  credibility
             findings  made  by  the  FtT  that  relate  to  those  claimed
             activities in Ethiopia, and the Appellant's journey to the  UK
             stand.  Those findings are contained within  paragraphs  19-32
             of the FtT decision.
         20.  In my view the FtT erred in considering  the  Appellant's  sur
             place activities.  The error is a failure to take into account
             and analyse potentially material evidence.
         21.  The Appellant supplied two bundles of documents  to  the  FtT.
             At pages 71-72 of the first bundle there is a letter  from  Dr
             Berri, the chairman of the OLF  committee  in  the  UK.   This
             letter is dated 20th June 2016.  Dr  Berri  explains  that  he
             verified the Appellant's current  activities  in  the  UK,  in
             relation to the  Oromo  community.   The  Appellant's  claimed
             activities are listed in the letter, and Dr Berri in the third
             paragraph states;
                  "From  the  assessment  of   his   background,   interview
                  responses and current participation in the  OLF  movement,
                  it was satisfactory for me to believe that Mr A is  active
                  supporter of the OLF."
         22.  The FtT is under no obligation to  refer  to  every  piece  of
             evidence produced before it.  However in  this  case  reliance
             was specifically placed upon  the  letter  from  Dr  Berri  as
             evidence and support of  the  Appellant's  claimed  sur  place
             activities.  There is no reference to this letter in  the  FtT
             decision, and at paragraph 42 the FtT records;
                  "I have not been provided with  any  evidence  from  other
                  members of OLF to establish that he is  a  member  or  has
                  attended any meetings or demonstrations and if I am  wrong
                  I do not regard him as having any significant role in  the
                  demonstrations that  would  alert  him  to  the  Ethiopian
                  authorities."
         23.  The FtT is incorrect in stating  that  no  evidence  from  OLF
             members has been provided, and it does  appear  that  the  FtT
             overlooked the contents of  Dr  Berri's  letter.   This  is  a
             failure to consider and analyse potentially material  evidence
             and is an error of law.
         24.  In addition, as pointed out by the judge  granting  permission
             to appeal, there is within the Appellant's  second  bundle  of
             documents at pages 131-132 a letter dated 20th  December  2016
             written by Negassa Gerba the secretary of the Oromo  Community
             in the West Midlands (OCWM).  This describes  the  Appellant's
             "commitment   and   determination   to   supporting   OLF   by
             participating   in   many   Oromo   Community   meetings   and
             demonstrations".   The  letter  details  events  and  meetings
             attended by the Appellant.
         25.  As with Dr Berri's letter,  there  is  no  reference  to  this
             letter in the FtT decision, and therefore no consideration and
             analysis of its contents.  This is a second example of the FtT
             being incorrect at paragraph 42 in stating  that  no  evidence
             has been provided from  OLF  members  to  establish  that  the
             Appellant  is  a  member  or  has  attended  any  meetings  or
             demonstrations.
         26.  I therefore conclude that it has been demonstrated  on  behalf
             of  the  Appellant,  that  in  relation  to  his   sur   place
             activities, there has been a failure to consider  and  analyse
             potentially material evidence, and I am  satisfied  that  this
             amounts to a material error of law.
         27.  Therefore the decision of the FtT is unsafe,  in  relation  to
             consideration of the Appellant's sur place activities and must
             be set aside.  As explained earlier, the credibility  findings
             in relation to the Appellant's claimed activities in  Ethiopia
             and his journey to the UK have not  been  challenged  and  are
             therefore preserved.
         28.  Although the FtT stated that the Appellant's  case  was  being
             considered at its highest, I find that  the  consideration  is
             flawed because potentially  relevant  evidence  has  not  been
             taken into account and considered.
         29.  The decision needs to be re-made.  It was not  suggested  that
             this is an appropriate case for remittal to  the  FtT,  and  I
             find the appropriate course  is  to  have  a  further  hearing
             before the Upper Tribunal.
         30.  Mr Vokes indicated that it was not proposed  to  call  further
             evidence.  The focus of the next hearing will be to  ascertain
             the extent of  the  Appellant's  activities  in  the  UK,  and
             whether those activities would put him at risk if returned  to
             Ethiopia.

Re-Making the Decision

 8. At the commencement of the hearing it was  confirmed  that  no  further
    evidence would be called, and further submissions would be made by both
    representatives in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  claimed  sur  place
    activities, and whether those activities  would  put  him  at  risk  if
    returned to Ethiopia.

 9. I ascertained that the Tribunal had  all  documentation  to  be  relied
    upon.  This consisted of the Respondent's bundle that had  been  before
    the FtT, and the two bundles submitted on behalf of the Appellant which
    had been before the FtT.  For ease of reference it was agreed that  the
    first bundle which comprises 120 pages would be called  Bundle  A,  and
    the second bundle which comprises 133 pages  would  be  Bundle  B.   On
    behalf of the Appellant five original photographs were produced.

10. I firstly heard submissions on behalf of the Appellant.   Miss  Manning
    referred to the letter from Dr Berri chairman of the OLF  Committee  in
    the UK, which is dated 20th June 2016 and contained at pages  71-72  of
    Bundle A.  I was asked to note that in the  third  paragraph  Dr  Berri
    described the Appellant's significant  participation  in  meetings  and
    demonstrations and believed the Appellant to be an active supporter  of
    the OLF.  Dr Berri voiced the opinion that it was  very  unlikely  that
    any OLF member or supporter would be safe in Ethiopia, and believed the
    Appellant would face persecution on his return.

11. Miss Manning then referred to a letter dated 20th  December  2016  from
    Negassa Gerba the secretary of OCWM,  contained  at  pages  131-132  of
    Bundle B.  This letter lists events that the Appellant has  taken  part
    in, the latest being a demonstration in Downing Street, London on  16th
    August 2016 the purpose of  which  was  to  attract  the  attention  of
    international communities in  relation  to  the  persecution  of  Oromo
    people.

12. Miss Manning commented that the current country guidance  on  Ethiopia,
    which is MB (Ethiopia) CG [2007] UKAIT 00030 is of some age, and I  was
    asked to place weight upon the expert report of Dr  Trueman  dated  8th
    December 2016, contained within Bundle B.  I was asked to find that the
    FtT had been wrong to reject this report in its  entirety,  because  it
    was based upon what Dr Trueman had been told by the Appellant, who  the
    FtT found to be an untruthful witness.  Miss Manning  pointed  out  the
    report was not entirely based upon what the Appellant had  stated,  but
    contained some objective evidence.

13. I was referred to paragraph 15 in which Dr Trueman sets out the risk on
    return to Ethiopia for those of Oromo ethnicity, and  paragraph  16  in
    which Dr Trueman  gives  the  opinion  that  low  level  activities  as
    described by the Appellant, and even the  slightest  suspicion  of  the
    same, attract serious abuses by  government  forces  in  Ethiopia.   Dr
    Trueman believes that the Appellant would be treated as an OLF suspect,
    and would be interrogated, beaten and tortured.

14. I was referred to the opinion of Dr Trueman at paragraph 17, and  asked
    to note his view that if the Appellant was politically  active  in  the
    UK, it is likely that this  activity  would  have  been  noted  by  the
    Ethiopian authorities and entered on a  central  security  database  as
    referred to  at  paragraph  46  of  Dr  Trueman's  report  prepared  in
    September 2011.

15. I was asked to find that the evidence indicated  that  the  Appellant's
    sur place activities would place him at risk  if  he  was  returned  to
    Ethiopia.

16. I then heard oral submissions from Mr Mills who pointed  out  that  the
    FtT had found that the Appellant had fabricated his  asylum  claim,  in
    relation to his claimed activities in Ethiopia.  I was  asked  to  note
    that although the Appellant relied upon two  letters,  the  authors  of
    those letters had not attended the hearing to give evidence and  answer
    questions.

17. With reference to Dr Berri's letter, Mr Mills submitted that he had  no
    personal knowledge of the Appellant, and in compiling  his  letter  had
    relied upon what the Appellant and others had told him.

18. Mr Mills submitted that Negassa Gerba, the author of the  other  letter
    relied upon by the Appellant, did not appear to know of  the  Appellant
    personally, and it would be appropriate to  place  little  weight  upon
    this letter.

19. With reference to photographs relied upon by the Appellant, I was asked
    to find that these showed the Appellant in a crowd of people, and there
    was no evidence to indicate that the  Ethiopian  authorities  monitored
    attendees at meetings and demonstrations.

20. With reference to the report prepared by Dr Trueman, Mr  Mills  pointed
    out that Dr Trueman accepted that he  was  critical  of  some  decision
    making made by the Secretary of State and  the  Tribunal,  and  he  was
    chairman  of  the  Oromo  Support  Group,  and  the  report  should  be
    considered on the basis that Dr Trueman is an advocate  for  the  Oromo
    people.  Mr Mills submitted that Dr Trueman's opinion went further than
    the country guidance in MB (Ethiopia) in relation to risk on return for
    an individual of Oromo ethnicity, and Dr Trueman's  opinions  were  not
    supported by independent objective evidence.

21. Mr Mills pointed out that at paragraph 14 of his report, Dr Trueman had
    indicated that he did not know the extent of  the  Appellant's  claimed
    political activities in  the  UK.   There  was  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's attendance at any meeting had been filmed and posted on the
    OLF website or YouTube as referred to by Dr Trueman.  I  was  asked  to
    find that the Appellant did not have a  political  profile  that  would
    attract the adverse attention of the authorities in Ethiopia if he  was
    returned.

22. In response Miss Manning referred to the letter from Negassa Gerba, and
    submitted that this indicated that he knew  the  Appellant  personally.
    With reference to Dr Trueman's report, he had at paragraph 14(ix)  made
    reference to independent evidence, that being the Independent Norwegian
    Organisation, Landinfo which indicated that the  Ethiopian  authorities
    have information about people associated  with  opposition  parties  in
    exile, including the OLF.

23. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

24. The burden of  proof  is  on  the  Appellant  and  the  standard  is  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood  which  is  a  lower  standard  than  a
    balance of probability. The issue before me relates to  the  sur  place
    activities of the Appellant, but before analysing the evidence on  that
    issue it is appropriate at this point to set out the preserved findings
    of the FtT which relate to the Appellant's claimed involvement with OLF
    prior to arrival in the UK.  I set out below paragraphs  23-32  of  the
    FtT decision;

         23.  The Appellant claims that with the help of an  agent  employed
             by his maternal uncle he travelled  from  Ethiopia  to  Libya.
             The agent left him there.  However, the Appellant had no money
             so took employment for two weeks.  At  the  end,  he  was  not
             paid.  Despite then being destitute the Appellant was able  to
             obtain a second agent to take him to Italy.  I do  not  accept
             the Appellant's account.  The money paid by his maternal uncle
             was used by the first agent.  Thereafter, the Appellant had to
             seek employment for which he received  no  money.   I  do  not
             accept he could then pay a further agent to take him to Italy.
              I note that in his SEF interview (question 116) the Appellant
             was specifically asked if he was forced to work in Libya.   He
             did not say he was.  However, by the  time  his  statement  of
             November 2015 is prepared the Appellant  states  that  he  was
             forced to work [14].  If that  were  so  I  am  satisfied  the
             Appellant would have indicated it in his SEF  interview.   His
             failure to do so undermines his account of events in Libya.
         24.  Having arrived in Italy the Appellant said that the agent  had
             guided him and he followed their instructions  which  did  not
             include claiming asylum.  He then  sought  the  assistance  of
             another agent,  again  without  any  available  finances,  and
             travelled to France.  The Appellant  remained  in  Calais  and
             accepted in evidence to me that he  was  free  to  join  other
             groups of men and tried to board up to fourteen lorries.  This
             is in contrast to him previously saying that the reason he did
             not claim asylum in  France  was  because  he  was  under  the
             instruction of an agent and could not.   However,  having  the
             ability to join other males and to make as  many  as  fourteen
             attempts to board a lorry without any  interference  from  the
             agent establishes that he was not under the instructions of an
             agent and, therefore, had  sufficient  freedom  in  Calais  to
             claim asylum but he failed to do so.  I also take note that in
             his screening interview (RB A2 q1.6) the Appellant when  asked
             "what was the purpose of your trip to the UK?" he replied  "in
             my country I  couldn't  live  I  was  told  UK  gives  asylum,
             language is better".  It is clear from that reply that it  was
             the Appellant's intention when he left Ethiopia to  travel  to
             the UK.  I am satisfied the Appellant's account of his journey
             with various agents is incredible and I am satisfied that  his
             failure to claim asylum in Italy and  France  are  matters  in
             accordance  with  section  8  that  I  will  factor  into  his
             credibility generally.
         25.  In the Initial Contact and Asylum Registration  Form  (RB  A1)
             the Appellant is described as single.  He was challenged by Ms
             Alfred as to why at the beginning of the SEF interview (RB B3)
             he gave a date of marriage when he had  earlier  said  he  was
             single.  He was asked whether he was single or  married.   The
             Appellant said that he did not understand the interpreter  who
             spoke Amharic during the initial contact and,  therefore,  the
             answer he was single was not correct.  He said he was married.
              However, the Appellant accepted that the other information on
             that form had been correctly translated to the extent  he  was
             able to give his date of birth, his place  of  birth  and  his
             employment.  I do not accept there  was  any  misunderstanding
             between him and the interpreter even if Amharic was  used  and
             that the Appellant had in fact indicated  he  was  single  but
             chose later to add to his account that he was married.
         26.  The Appellant claims that even though he was married  in  2014
             in September 2015 he with two other men moved  away  from  his
             home to rent a property in Gasara.  He states his wife did not
             follow him.  I take note that in the SEF interview he provides
             his date of marriage as 10th April 2014 yet in  his  statement
             dated 24th November 2015 he states it is  November  2014.   In
             his evidence to me he was asked how long he had been with  his
             wife and replied by saying "the end of 2014".  He  was  unable
             to provide a specific date.  These are important discrepancies
             with the Appellant firstly giving different dates  as  to  his
             marriage and then not being in a position to  tell  the  court
             that actual date of his marriage.  I am  satisfied  that  this
             failure and the unexplained move without his wife  to  another
             town calls into question whether the Appellant has  ever  been
             married.
         27.  The Appellant was challenged by Ms Alfred why  when  asked  in
             the screening interview (RB  A3  q2.7)  whether  he  had  been
             involved in any political or religious organisation he replied
             "not to any politics but I supported  the  opposition  in  the
             election".   The  Appellant's  case  now  is   that   he   was
             politically active and replied to Ms Alfred that the  question
             was put in difficult terms.  He was asked to explain  how  the
             question was difficult but he could not do so even though  the
             question was repeated.
         28.  The Appellant states that when he was at home with his  mother
             (SEF RB B16 q74) he kept his involvement  with  OLF  from  his
             family.  Ms Alfred asked him why he kept  it  from  them.   He
             replied that he  did  not  want  them  to  get  into  trouble.
             However, at the age of 14 he was expelled from school  because
             of his OLF connections so his family would be fully  aware  of
             his involvement, which he accepted.  In  his  statement  dated
             24th November 2015 the Appellant mentions [8]  that  in  March
             2014 he encountered difficulties  at  school  and  with  other
             students was expelled.  However, he goes on to state  that  he
             was arrested and detained and whilst  detained  was  tortured.
             This incident does not feature in his screening  interview  or
             his SEF interview and indeed does not appear as  a  correction
             to the SEF interview as set out in  his  statement  (AB1  p5).
             This was clearly  a  very  significant  incident  which  first
             alerted his family to his involvement with the authorities yet
             he fails to mention it in his SEF interview or  the  screening
             interview.  The closest we have is the question (q48) and  his
             answer where he states that whilst he was  not  involved  some
             students posted some papers that supported OLF and put an  OLF
             flag up.  He does not mention being expelled from  school,  he
             fails to mention he was arrested and tortured  and  gives  the
             impression in that answer that the  school  incident  occurred
             shortly before he left his home to go  into  hiding  with  his
             friends.  However, as we have seen he states this incident was
             in March 2014, he married in November 2014 (or August) and did
             not  leave  his  home  until  September  2015.   I  find   the
             Appellant's failure to mention his arrest and torture  in  his
             SEF interview as a significant failure.  I am  satisfied  that
             in putting forward his story he has failed to grasp  the  fact
             that he has provided different and conflicting dates which are
             inconsistent with each other.  This  significantly  undermines
             the Appellant's account.
         29.  In May 2015  when  the  police  raided  his  rental  home  the
             Appellant immediately turned to his family for help  and  then
             his maternal uncle.  There was then no hesitation  to  involve
             his family at that stage even though he was not prepared to in
             2014 and kept from them his involvement with OLF.  By speaking
             with them, if he is right he put them at risk.   I  asked  the
             Appellant when he last spoke to his family  and  if  they  had
             mentioned having any difficulty with the authorities after  he
             left.  Following a number of attempts to get him to answer the
             question he said his mother had not said anything  to  him  in
             regard to any difficulties.  He had  last  spoken  to  her  in
             September 2015 and then  at  new  year.   If  the  Appellant's
             mother had had difficulties with the authorities because  this
             Appellant was a member of OLF I am satisfied  she  would  have
             told him.  By her silence, I am  satisfied  that  having  left
             Ethiopia his mother and other family members have not met with
             any difficulties from the authorities even though  they  would
             have been well-known to them bearing in mind that  his  father
             had previously been detained as the Appellant had  because  of
             connections to OLF (SEF q54).
         30.  Having moved away from his home to stay with his  friends  the
             Appellant explained in his evidence to  me  that  he  and  his
             friends operated in  secret  (SEF  q59).   Later  in  his  SEF
             interview  (q65)  he  said  that  he  delivered  leaflets   to
             churches, mosques, schools or playgrounds.  To do so  requires
             open delivery not least to the schools and the playgrounds and
             that is hardly operating in  secret  and  the  fact  that  his
             colleagues talked openly (q105) to one or two youths from  the
             area militates against secrecy.  In his statement (AB1 p6) the
             Appellant states that "I have  not  at  no  time  said  in  my
             initial interview, witness statement or substantive  interview
             with the HO that I publicly  distributed  leaflet  locally  to
             promote OLF."  Nowhere has the Appellant taken issue with  his
             answer (q65) either  in  this  statement  or  his  solicitor's
             letter dated 3rd December 2015 (RB  C1)  and  that  answer  is
             contrary  to  his  assertion  in  his  statement.   The   only
             inference one can take from  the  Appellant's  answer  to  q65
             despite his now denial is that leaflets  were  distributed  in
             public to schools and playgrounds not least market places.
         31.  The Appellant was asked whether Dr Trueman interviewed him and
             the Appellant confirmed he had not.  It was at this stage that
             Ms Alfred challenged  the  Appellant  about  the  contents  of
             paragraphs 7(ii)-7(ix) (page 4).  Ms Alfred asked  where  that
             information came from  for  Dr  Trueman  to  include  it.   It
             transpired that the statement dated 24th November 2015 had not
             been provided to the Respondent  or  the  court  and  was  not
             contained in any of the papers submitted by the Appellant.  Ms
             Glory produced it during her submissions.  The  Appellant  had
             not been asked at the outset of his  evidence  to  adopt  this
             statement and indeed he  had  not  been  shown  it.   From  Dr
             Trueman's report it can be established that even though he was
             instructed by fax on 28th November 2016 he had not  been  sent
             the Appellant's statement (AB1 p5) dated 12th July 2016.   The
             Appellant's second statement is dated after the instructions.
         32.  Having considered this Appellant's evidence before me,  having
             witnessed his failure to deal with various  questions  put  to
             him during his evidence  and  his  reluctance  to  answer  the
             questions  asked  I  am  satisfied  the  Appellant  has   lied
             throughout his various accounts and has lost track of his lies
             by the time  he  gave  evidence.   I  do  not  accept  he  has
             established even to the lower standard of proof  that  he  was
             ever involved with OLF or that he was arrested and tortured or
             that the events  on  25th  May  2015  occurred.   Taking  into
             account my section 8 findings I am satisfied this Appellant is
             an untruthful witness.

25. I set out below the head note to MB (Ethiopia)  CG  which  remains  the
    most recent country guidance;

          1) As at February 2007 the situation in Ethiopia is such that, in
             general:
               a) Oromo Liberation Front Members and sympathisers;
               b) persons perceived to be OLF members or sympathisers; and
               c) members of the Mecca Tolima Association;
             will, on return, be at real risk if they fall within the scope
             of paragraph (2) or (3) below
          2) OLF members and sympathisers and those specifically  perceived
             by the authorities to be such members or sympathisers will  in
             general be at real risk if they have been previously  arrested
             or detained on suspicion of  OLF  involvement.   So  too  will
             those  who  have  a  significant   history,   known   to   the
             authorities, of OLF membership or sympathy.  Whether any  such
             persons are to be excluded from  recognition  as  refugees  or
             from the grant of humanitarian protection by reason  of  armed
             activities may need to be addressed in particular cases.
          3) Given the proscription of the MTA and  the  current  state  of
             tension on the part of the Ethiopian authorities, the Tribunal
             considers that MTA members will also be at real risk on return
             if they have previously been arrested or detained on suspicion
             of MTA membership and/or of OLF membership  or  are  known  or
             suspected of membership of the MTA.  Despite  the  banning  of
             the MTA, the Tribunal does not consider the evidence  is  such
             as to show a real risk where the extent  of  the  authorities'
             knowledge  or  suspicion  about  an  individual   relates   to
             something less than membership of the MTA.


26. The preserved findings of the FtT show that  the  Appellant  fabricated
    his account of what he claimed had occurred in Ethiopia.  The Appellant
    failed to prove to the FtT that he had ever been involved with the  OLF
    prior to coming to the UK.  The  FtT  found  that  he  had  never  been
    arrested or detained on suspicion of OLF involvement.

27. The Appellant relies upon two letters to support his claim to have been
    involved with the OLF in the UK.  Those  letters  are  provided  by  Dr
    Berri dated 20th June 2016, and Negassa Gerba dated 20th December 2016.
     I place limited weight on those letters as the authors did not  attend
    the hearing to answer questions, and the letters are of some  age,  the
    most recent being prepared almost twelve months ago.

28. The letter from Negassa Gerba describes  the  Appellant  as  an  active
    member of the Oromo community in  the  West  Midlands  since  September
    2015. It is stated that the Appellant has participated  in  many  Oromo
    Community meetings which appear to take  place  in  community  centres.
    The  letter  refers  to  the  Appellant  taking  place  in  two  public
    demonstrations in London, one  on  10th  December  2015  at  Parliament
    Square, the other on 16th August 2016 in Downing Street.  There  is  no
    evidence in this letter of any activities since the  funding  event  on
    15th October 2016.  Turning to the letter from Dr Berri dated 20th June
    2016, it is apparent that Dr Berri has not personally met the Appellant
    but interviewed him by telephone on 16th June 2016.  Dr Berri was  told
    by the Appellant about his activities in Ethiopia, which the FtT  found
    to have been  fabricated.   Dr  Berri  appears  to  have  accepted  the
    Appellant's account of his activities supporting the OLF in Ethiopia.

29. I place limited weight upon this letter  as  Dr  Berri  has  no  direct
    knowledge of the Appellant.  This letter is based on what he  has  been
    told  by  the  Appellant,  and  by  consultation   with   other   Oromo
    organisations.  The letter does  not,  in  my  view,  add  anything  of
    substance to the letter written by Negassa Gerba.  It is  evident  that
    Dr Berri has accepted the Appellant's account, by  way  of  example  Dr
    Berri comments in the third paragraph of his letter that the  Appellant
    "chants slogans with fellow friends during demonstrations".

30. I have considered the photographs supplied by the Appellant.   At  page
    133 of Bundle B there are two photographs of a group of people inside a
    building.  It is not a public meeting held outside. This is said to  be
    at the fundraising event on  15th  October  2016  in  Birmingham.   The
    Appellant has indicated  his  position  in  the  group.   Without  such
    indication it would be in my view be extremely  difficult  to  identify
    the Appellant.

31. There are  further  photographs  at  pages  73-76  of  Bundle  A.   Two
    photographs at page 76 show a group of people sitting in a room.  It is
    clearly not a public meeting.  There is no indication this  meeting  is
    connected with the OLF.  There is a further photograph of what  appears
    to be the same meeting at page 74.  There  are  then  four  photographs
    which show a crowd  of  people  with  an  Oromo  flag  which  show  the
    Appellant, in one of the photographs he is holding a slogan calling for
    cessation of marginalisation. abductions and the torturing and  killing
    of Oromos.

32. I have carefully considered Dr  Trueman's  report.   I  attach  limited
    weight to this.  I have no doubt whatsoever that Dr Trueman  writes  in
    good faith, but I do not find that  he  can  be  described  as  totally
    independent and impartial.  He has been chairman of  an  Oromo  support
    group and I take that into account when considering his report.

33. The issue that I am considering relates to the  Appellant's  sur  place
    activities.  I place limited weight on  Dr  Trueman's  report  on  this
    issue because he has confirmed at paragraph 14(i) that he has not  been
    informed of the extent of the Appellant's political activities  in  the
    UK.  Dr Trueman in paragraph 14 states that some OLF  and  other  Oromo
    meetings are filmed and posted on the OLF website.  I do not  find  any
    satisfactory evidence has been presented in this case to indicate  that
    photographs of the Appellant have appeared on the OLF  website.   There
    is  no  satisfactory  evidence  to  indicate  photographs  showing  the
    Appellant had been placed on YouTube.

34. Dr Trueman has based his report  on  what  he  has  been  told  by  the
    Appellant in relation to his activities in Ethiopia.  That account  was
    found by the FtT to be fabricated, and that finding has been preserved.
     Dr Trueman is of the opinion that the Appellant would be  at  risk  of
    persecution in Ethiopia.  At paragraph 17 Dr  Trueman  finds  that  the
    Appellant's evidence is consistent with him having been a member of  an
    OLF supporter's cell in Ethiopia.  This was found not to be case by the
    FtT and that finding is preserved.  Mr Trueman finds that the Appellant
    was detained in Ethiopia, and again the FtT  found  that  claim  to  be
    fabricated.  That finding has been preserved.

35. Dr Trueman is of the opinion that if the Appellant has been politically
    active in the UK, it is likely that such activity will have been  noted
    by the Ethiopian authorities and entered on a security database.  I  do
    not find that there is objective and independent  evidence  to  confirm
    the existence of such a database.  Dr Trueman is of  the  opinion  that
    because the Appellant would be returned as a refused asylum seeker from
    the UK he would automatically be suspected of OLF  involvement.   I  do
    not find that  independent  and  objective  evidence  to  support  that
    assertion has been provided and I do not accept that to  be  the  case.
    At  paragraph  14  Dr  Trueman  refers  to  an  independent   Norwegian
    organisation, Landinfo, and a report released on 28th April  2015.   Dr
    Trueman points out that Landinfo concluded that association  in  Norway
    with an organisation which is illegal in Ethiopia and which is  willing
    to use military force such as the OLF, could result in adverse interest
    from the Ethiopian authorities on return.  I do not find that reference
    to Landinfo, which is predominantly concerned  with  the  situation  in
    Norway, provides independent and impartial confirmation as to what view
    the Ethiopian authorities  would  take,  if  they  were  aware  of,  an
    individual who attended OLF meetings in the UK.

36. Having carefully considered the Appellant's evidence, and  noting  that
    he did not wish to give any further evidence before the Upper Tribunal,
    the documentary evidence provided on behalf of the Appellant, including
    in particular the letters  written  by  Dr  Berri  and  Negassa  Gerba,
    photographs provided by the Appellant, and the  preserved  findings  of
    the FtT I reach the following conclusions.

37. The Appellant fabricated his claim of events said to have  occurred  in
    Ethiopia.  In the UK he has attended some OLF meetings, and two  public
    demonstrations.  He has had photographs taken of himself to  prove  his
    attendance.  He is not a leader of  the  OLF,  and  holds  no  official
    position within the  organisation.   In  my  view,  the  Appellant  has
    attended OLF meetings and had  photographs  taken  of  himself,  in  an
    effort to bolster an asylum claim which was refused  in  December  2015
    subsequently found to have been fabricated by the FtT in January  2017.
    I do not accept that he is a genuine OLF member or sympathiser.

38. I must nevertheless consider whether the attendance  at  OLF  meetings,
    and attendance at two demonstrations would put him at risk if  returned
    to Ethiopia.  In relation to the factors to be considered, I have taken
    into account the guidance in BA (demonstrators in  Britain  -  risk  on
    return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC).   I  of  course  accept  that  BA
    relates to an Iranian case, but I find the general  guidance  contained
    at paragraph 4 of the head note to be helpful.

39. The nature of the sur  place  activity  must  be  considered.   I  have
    already made the point  that  the  Appellant  is  not  a  leader  or  a
    mobiliser.  In the two demonstrations he has attended, he is  a  member
    of the  crowd.   He  is  not  speaking  to  the  crowd.   There  is  no
    satisfactory evidence that he has  attended  any  public  demonstration
    since August 2016.  The evidence that he has produced indicates that he
    last attended a meeting in October 2016.  I do not find  that  evidence
    has been submitted to prove that  the  demonstrations  attracted  media
    coverage in the UK or in Ethiopia.  I do  not  find  that  satisfactory
    evidence has been submitted to prove the Appellant's attendance at  the
    demonstrations could be identified on social media.

40. It is important to consider the identification risk,  and  whether  the
    Ethiopian regime undertakes surveillance  of  demonstrations.   I  find
    there is insufficient evidence to prove that this takes  place.   There
    is no satisfactory evidence that the Ethiopian regime has the  capacity
    to identify individuals for example by way of facial  recognition,  who
    have attended demonstrations.  There is no satisfactory  evidence  that
    the Ethiopian regime has the resources to fit names to faces in a crowd
    demonstrating.  There is no satisfactory evidence that  agents  of  the
    Ethiopian regime mingle with the crowd in a demonstration.

41. I then have to consider the Appellant's profile.  I do not find that he
    is a committed opponent to the Ethiopian regime and I do not find  that
    he has a significant political profile.  I do not find  that  there  is
    evidence that the Appellant would be at risk because  he  travelled  to
    the UK and would be returned as a failed asylum seeker.

42. MB (Ethiopia) CG is still country guidance, though the decision is  now
    of some age.  I therefore find that the guidance contained  therein  is
    still of relevance.  The Appellant has not been previously arrested  or
    detained  on  suspicion  of  OLF  involvement.   He  does  not  have  a
    significant history, known to the authorities,  of  OLF  membership  or
    sympathy.  The Appellant is an  individual  who  fabricated  an  asylum
    claim, and who has subsequently attended some  OLF  meetings,  and  two
    demonstrations, in an attempt to bolster his  asylum  application.   He
    would not be of adverse interest to the  authorities  if  returned  and
    therefore would not be at risk.  He did  not  undertake  activities  in
    support of the OLF when in  Ethiopia  therefore  would  not  do  so  if
    returned.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

The appeal is dismissed on asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights
grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

This  direction  is  made  because  the  Appellant  has  made  a  claim  for
international protection.


Signed                              Date: 15th December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 15th December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
