
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05530/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|on 15 October 2018                          |On 9 November 2018             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     VJ
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Hawkins instructed by VJ Nathan Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Lindsay Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Colvin, promulgated on 27 June 2018,  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  protection  and  human
        rights grounds.






Background


     2. The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, was born on 28  April  1990.
        Having considered the evidence with the required degree of  anxious
        scrutiny, including medical and  psychiatric  evidence,  the  Judge
        dismissed the appellant's appeal in findings set out from  [22]  of
        the decision under challenge.
     3. The  Judge  notes  at  [24]  the  principal  matter  regarding  the
        appellant's claim related to his uncle but did not  find  that  the
        appellant's explanation in relation to a core  negative  aspect  of
        the claim concerning his uncle was credible.  The  Judge  raised  a
        number of the credibility issues in the appeal  before  stating  at
        [31 - 32]:


             31.   In  making  an  overall  assessment  I  have  reach  the
                  conclusion that the appellant has not given a sufficiently
                  consistent and reliable account to  show  even  the  lower
                  standard of proof that it is  reasonably  likely  that  he
                  came  to  the  adverse  attention  of   the   Sri   Lankan
                  authorities and was detained and tortured by them in 2014.
                  There are inconsistencies in the appellants evidence which
                  I have referred to above that I consider to be significant
                  in terms of the credibility of his account leading  up  to
                  his claim of being detained. These include the  fact  that
                  the appellant gave 2 different years when his  uncle  went
                  missing and the  claim  that  he  helped  his  uncle  with
                  activities for the LTTE between 2007  and  2009  when  his
                  uncle had already gone missing  in  2006.  The  latter  is
                  particularly relevant as the appellant at one point stated
                  that it was these activities with his uncle which may have
                  led the authorities to take a particular adverse  interest
                  in him.


             32.  Then there is what I consider to be a highly  significant
                  discrepancy at the core the appellant's account  of  being
                  detained and tortured.  This  relates  to  the  photograph
                  showing his scars that is recorded on his mobile as having
                  been taken at a time when he clearly states that he was in
                  detention in Sri Lanka. And, as stated  above,  this  also
                  undermines the claim of his date of arrival in the UK.  It
                  means that whilst it is undeniable that the appellant  has
                  scars on his back which may well have  been  intentionally
                  inflicted, the  appellant  has  not  shown  to  the  lower
                  standard of proof that  they  were  inflicted  during  the
                  claimed period that he was  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities. In my opinion, it is also  relevant  to  this
                  point that the Medical Report  states  the  assessment  on
                  consistency is that the scars  are  to  be  considered  as
                  'typical' which  means  that  'there  are  other  possible
                  causes' than that given by the appellant  -  although,  as
                  already stated, these are not identified  in  the  Report.
                  This finding necessarily has relevance to the diagnosis of
                  the  Psychiatric  Report.  Even  when  setting  aside  the
                  criticisms made of this Report and accept the diagnosis of
                  the appellant having PTSD, it is still not shown that  the
                  cause  was  torture  at  the  hands  of  the  Sri   Lankan
                  authorities. In the circumstances I do not find  that  the
                  appellant was persecuted for a reason falling  within  the
                  Refugee Convention before he came to the UK  and  did  not
                  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of   the   Sri   Lankan
                  authorities in 2014 as claimed.


     4. Thereafter the Judge considered risk arising from  the  appellant's
        sur plas activities in the United Kingdom in which he stated he had
        taken part in a TGTE demonstration and meetings in the UK. At  [34]
        the Judge writes:


             34.  In the  absence  of  photographic  or  other  documentary
                  evidence  of  the  appellant's   public   involvement   in
                  activities with the TGTE I am  forced  to  the  conclusion
                  that his involvement in public events has only been  shown
                  to be since April this year at the earliest  and  possibly
                  only after he received the refusal  decision.  This  means
                  that I discount the claim that his father was arrested and
                  detained by the Sri Lankan authorities in February 2018 on
                  account of his son's protest activities in  front  of  the
                  Sri Lankan High Commission  in  the  UK  as  there  is  no
                  evidence he was publicly protesting  and  therefore  being
                  monitored prior to April 2018. There is also  no  evidence
                  that the appellant has  ever  played  a  significant  role
                  within the TGTE in the UK.


     5. Having considered the country guidance case of GJ  and  Others  the
        Judge was satisfied the appellant would not be at real risk or that
        he would attract adverse attention on return  to  Sri  Lanka  as  a
        result of his sur plas activities.
     6. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal the operative part of  the
        grant being in the following terms:


             2.   It is submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to  treat  the
                  appellant is a vulnerable witness and considered how  such
                  vulnerability could potentially account for discrepancies.
                  It also argued that the judge misdirected  himself/herself
                  in relation to sur plas activities.


             3.   However, reading the decision it is clear that the  Judge
                  has given careful consideration to the medical and  expert
                  evidence and provided cogent reasons for the findings. The
                  Judge also dealt specifically with the sur place evidence,
                  concluding that there was no evidence he had  ever  played
                  any significant role within the TGTE in  the  UK  and  was
                  only as recently as April 2018, possibly  after  receiving
                  the refusal decision.  It  is  arguable  that  failure  to
                  consider that the appellant may be  questioned  on  return
                  about his membership of the TGTE and thereby  at  risk  on
                  return, regardless of the  level  of  involvement,  was  a
                  material error of law, reliance  on  See  UB  (Sri  Lanka)
                  [2017] EWCA Civ 85. Whilst the appeal was allowed in  that
                  case, the court recognised that risk to the appellant turn
                  not merely on him showing that he was actually a member of
                  the TGTE, but relies on his membership being  detected  on
                  arrival in Sri Lanka. "There is no  suggestion  that  this
                  Appellant is on any list of individuals of interest to the
                  authorities in Sri Lanka. The objective  findings  by  the
                  FTT are clear that any activity by the Appellant  in  this
                  country, even if observed all recorded, was  a  low  level
                  and not likely to carry risk. That activity  itself  would
                  not demonstrate membership of the TGT E. In addition,  but
                  I bear in mind the very clear findings that the  Appellant
                  lied an exaggerated in alleging  mistreatment  during  his
                  last visit to Sri Lanka, and thus his credibility is low."


             4. The failure to assess this risk is  an  arguable  error  of
             law. All grounds may be argued.



Error of law


     7. Mr Hawkins relied on both pleaded grounds the  first  of  which  is
        that in relation to the  adverse  credibility  findings  the  Judge
        failed to treat the appellant as a vulnerable witness.  Mr  Hawkins
        submits there is no reference in the decision  under  challenge  to
        the Practice Direction for a child, vulnerable adults and sensitive
        witnesses and that the Judge erred by failing to  consider  whether
        such vulnerability could potentially account for  discrepancies  in
        the chronology evidenced by the Judge.
     8.  The term 'vulnerable  adult'  has  the  same  meaning  as  in  the
        Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups Act 2006. Some forms  of  disability
        cause or result in impaired memory requiring the decision-maker  to
        think about the order and manner in which evidence is  given,  that
        such evidence may be affected by mental, psychological or emotional
        trauma or disability, and the fact that an  individual's  responses
        to questions put to them may  have  been  impaired  by  their  past
        experiences.
     9. Judges of the First-Tier Tribunal receive as part of their judicial
        training extensive input in  relation  to  the  Joint  Presidential
        Guidance for dealing with child and vulnerable witnesses.  Although
        it is accepted the Judge does not make reference to  the  same  the
        Judges training would have imparted upon him the need  to  consider
        such issues.
    10. Whilst at [15] of the Guidance  it  states:  "The  decision  should
        record whether the Tribunal  has  concluded  the  appellant  (or  a
        witness) is a  child,  vulnerable  or  sensitive,  the  effect  the
        Tribunal considered the identified vulnerability had  in  assessing
        the evidence before it and thus whether the Tribunal was  satisfied
        whether the appellant had  established  his  or  her  case  to  the
        relevant standard of proof. In asylum  appeals,  weight  should  be
        given to objective indications of risk rather than necessarily to a
        state of mind", a reading of the determination as a whole does  not
        indicate any issues arising as a result of the appellant's  alleged
        experiences  sufficient  to  warrant  the  Judge  approaching   the
        evidence in a manner other than that in which  it  was  approached.
        The Judge clearly considered the evidence in the round, noting what
        was said by the appellant and on his behalf.  It is not recorded in
        the determination or record  of  proceedings  that  any  issue  was
        raised by  the  appellant's  representatives  in  relation  to  the
        inability of the appellant to take part in the proceedings  or  the
        need for the Judge to exercise any greater care than he did in  the
        assessment of the  evidence.  The  Judge  had  the  medical  report
        written by Dr Dhumad in which it is specifically stated  at  [16.5]
        that in the doctor's professional opinion the applicant is  fit  to
        attend the court  hearing  and  give  oral  evidence  although  his
        concentration is poor and likely to be worse, and that he should be
        supported with regular breaks and  extra  time  being  provided  to
        respond to questions.
    11. No arguable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal is made out in relation to this aspect of the grounds or the
        manner in which the Judge treated  any  of  the  available  medical
        evidence. If there were concerns about the appellant's presentation
        one would have expected his  representative  to  have  raise  these
        during the course of the hearing. They were not.
    12. The second ground Mr Hawkins seeks to rely upon is that relating to
        the appellants sur plas activities. The decision of  the  Court  of
        Appeal in UB (Sri Lanka) was before the Judge which refers  to  the
        TGTE being a prescribed terrorist group.
    13. Mr Hawkins submitted the  Judge  had  evidence  from  a  number  of
        sources including a letter from a lawyer in Sri Lanka dated 24  May
        2018 reporting information provided by the appellants father to the
        lawyer that the appellant was involved with LTTE activities  having
        been arrested and detained in 2014, had left  Sri  Lanka,  and  was
        being looked for by the  authorities.  That  evidence,  before  the
        Judge as part of the appellant's case, would have been  taken  into
        account and weighed against other aspects  which  the  Judge  found
        supported the conclusions  reached.  It  is  not  an  error  for  a
        decision-maker not to set out the findings in relation to each  and
        every aspect of a case provided  the  evidence  has  been  properly
        considered.
    14. In relation to the sur plas activities,  the  Judge  did  not  find
        these  showed  the  appellant's  profile,  even  if  he  attendance
        demonstrations, was known to the authorities  on  return  or  would
        place  the  appellant  at  risk  sufficient  warrant  a  grant   of
        international protection.  The  Judge  does  not  accept  that  the
        appellant had demonstrated a history of  interest  in  this  group;
        concluding that his attendance at public events was only  shown  to
        have occurred after he  received  the  refusal  letter.  The  Judge
        clearly  found  this  is  an  opportunistic  involvement   by   the
        applicant, although it is accepted that could still give rise to  a
        real risk on return if such is  perceived  by  the  authorities  to
        create a threat to the State on return.
    15. In UB (Sri Lanka) the Court of Appeal found at [24]:


             24.  In truth, consideration of  the  risk  to  the  Appellant
                  turns not merely on him showing that  he  was  actually  a
                  member of the TGTE  but  relies  on  his  membership  been
                  detected on arrival in Sri Lanka. There is  no  suggestion
                  that this Appellant is  on  any  list  of  individuals  of
                  interest to the authorities in Sri  Lanka.  The  objective
                  findings by the FTT are clear that  any  activity  by  the
                  Appellant in this country, even if observed  or  recorded,
                  was a low level  and  not  likely  to  carry  risks.  That
                  activity itself would not demonstrate  membership  of  the
                  TGTE. In addition, I bear in mind the very clear  findings
                  that  the  Appellant  lied  and  exaggerated  in  alleging
                  mistreatment during his last visit to Sri Lanka, and  thus
                  his credibility is low.


    16. In this appeal the Judge finds that the evidence  may  support  the
        claim of involvement in public events with there being no  evidence
        the appellant has ever played a significant role within the TGTE or
        to support the aims  or  membership  that  will  be  known  to  the
        authorities. The findings of the Judge are that  the  appellant  is
        not on any stop list or subject of an arrest warrant on return  and
        so  is  not  likely  to  attract  the  adverse  attention  of   the
        authorities as  a  person  with  the  potential  to  undermine  the
        stability of the government, on the facts.
    17. The findings of the Judge that this is an  opportunistic  sur  plas
        claim also gives  rise  to  it  being  that  the  appellant's  TGTE
        activities do not represent a genuine fundamentally held  political
        belief  adverse  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.  Whilst  it  is
        accepted, following HJ (Iran), that a person cannot be expected  to
        lie about  a  genuinely  held  belief  that  forms  part  of  their
        fundamental identity, that principle does not  apply  to  something
        which does not have such a firm foundation. It is not made out  the
        appellant will be required to reveal attendance at a TGTE event  if
        asked on return or, if his  attendance  at  the  demonstration  was
        known, that he will be expected to do other than  tell  the  truth;
        which is that he is nothing more than a person who  has  undertaken
        low level activities. In other respects,  the  adverse  credibility
        findings of the Judge are also a relevant factor as  identified  by
        the Court of Appeal.
    18. The respondent's guidance relating to  this  group  refers  to  the
        correspondence from the British High Commission not  considered  by
        the First-Tier Tribunal in UB (Sri Lanka) which is why that  appeal
        allowed and has  been  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
        matters to be determined fresh.
    19. Having considered the submissions made, the evidence  available  to
        the  Judge,  decision  under  challenge,  and  written   and   oral
        submissions, I do not find it made out that the Judge has erred  in
        law in a manner material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
        sufficient to  warrant  the  Upper  Tribunal  interfering  in  this
        judgement.

Decision

    20. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    21. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 31 October 2018












