
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
pa/05222/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2nd January 2018                      |     On 5th March 2018              |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                            mr Bat Erdene Ganbold
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Dr F O'Dair (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Onofriou, promulgated on 17th July 2017, following a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 4th July 2017.  In the determination, the judge allowed
    the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State, subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Mongolia, who was  born  on  16th
    November 1975.  He appealed against a decision of the Respondent  dated
    11th May 2017 refusing him asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  under
    paragraph 339F of HC 395.  The basis of his claim was that if  returned
    to Mongolia  he  would  be  mistreated  on  account  of  his  developed
    hepatitis B and hepatitis D viruses as a result of his previous  sexual
    activity, for which there is no treatment in Mongolia.  He also claimed
    that there is no treatment for all his medical conditions  in  Mongolia
    given that he had extensive fibrosis and liver inflammatory lesions.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge had regard to the fact that the Appellant had a  wife  and  a
    daughter born on 13th September 2013, who was at  nursery  school,  and
    some 3 years old.  The judge held that, "there is no dispute about  the
    Appellant's condition, the Respondent having accepted the diagnosis  of
    Dr Lemoine as set out in the letters of 3rd February 2017 and 6th April
    2017"  (paragraph  38).   This  diagnosis  entailed   co-infection   of
    hepatitis B and D and cirrhosis, and Dr Lemoine  had  stated  that  "he
    requires regular care by a specialist team in hepatology and  antiviral
    therapy  and  potentially  a  liver  transplantation  in  the   future"
    (paragraph 38).  The judge had gone on to say "that  his  condition  is
    clearly very severe and the question is, is it so severe that returning
    him to Mongolia would breach even the high threshold of  medical  cases
    laid down in the case of N" (paragraph  38).   The  judge  went  on  to
    observe that even though the Appellant had "a very  serious  condition,
    [c] is no worse off than the Appellant in N" (paragraph  48).   It  was
    concluded that the Appellant "satisfies the criteria that his  lack  of
    access to medical treatment in Mongolia would expose him 'to a serious,
    rapid and irreversible decline in his ...state of health  resulting  in
    intense suffering or to a significant reduction  in  life  expectancy'"
    (see paragraph 44).  The  judge  applied  the  well-known  decision  in
    Paposhvili.

 4. The appeal is allowed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  had  incorrectly
    assessed the Appellant's claim in the light of the  availability  of  a
    liver transplant, medical facilities in Mongolia.  The judge  had  also
    looked at the fact that the  Appellant  had  a  very  poor  immigration
    history, having overstayed, worked  illegally,  and  produced  a  false
    residency document.  The judge had regard to the child's best interests
    but had used this as a "trump" card.

 6. On 9th October 2017, permission to appeal was granted on the basis that
    the Appellant's daughter was not a qualifying child and the  judge  was
    wrong to allow the appeal largely  on  the  basis  of  the  Appellant's
    health conditions and the effect that  this  would  have  on  the  best
    interests of his  daughter,  were  he  to  pass  away  upon  return  to
    Mongolia, because he could not afford medical health treatment there.

The Hearing

 7. At the hearing before  me  on  2nd  January  2018,  the  Appellant  was
    represented  by  Dr  F  O'Dair  of  Counsel  and  the  Respondent   was
    represented by Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

 8. Since it was the appeal of the Respondent Secretary of State, Mr  Tufan
    opened by stating that the judge had  curiously  dismissed  the  appeal
    under Article 3 but had then gone on to allow it under Article 8 on the
    basis of the help of the Appellant and the impact that this would  have
    on his daughter, who was not a qualifying child.  Second, the judge had
    plainly confused  himself  because  at  paragraph  51,  in  ending  the
    determination, he had stated that "the  appeal  is  allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules", whereas earlier at paragraph 45, he had stated that
    the Appellant could not satisfy the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE.
    Third, the judge erroneously referred to the comments of Moses LJ in MM
    (Zimbabwe) [2012] even though there was no such  case  (paragraph  46).
    Mr Tufan submitted that what the judge evidently intended to do was  to
    refer to the judgment of Moses LJ in MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 279,
    which had been referred to by the Court of Appeal in a case  called  GS
    (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40.  Mr Tufan submitted that  the  case  of  GS
    (India) was also a  case  of  kidney  liver  disease  because  the  six
    Appellants there were suffering from  terminal  renal  failure  or  end
    stage kidney disease (see paragraph 4) and were likely to die in two or
    three weeks.  Nevertheless, the court  held  (paragraph  86)  that  for
    Article 8 to operate in a way as to assist them,  they  would  need  to
    refer to an additional factor.  This  is  because,  "Article  8  cannot
    prosper without some  separate  or  additional  factual  element  which
    brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm - the  capacity  to  form
    and enjoy relationships - or a state of affairs  having  some  affinity
    with the paradigm" (paragraph 86).  The Appellant,  however,  was  only
    referring to his ill-health. Insofar as there was a  reference  to  the
    interest of the Appellant's daughter, these would be  concomitant  with
    the interests of the parents because the  child  was  so  young.   This
    meant that if the parents were moved the child be also.  In any  event,
    the child was not a qualifying child.

 9. For his part, Dr O'Dair submitted that the application  for  permission
    was nothing more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  decision  of  Judge
    Onofriou.  The question here was  whether  the  judge  had  misdirected
    himself.  He had not.  The Grounds of Appeal by the Secretary of  State
    referred to no proposition  of  law,  and  cited  no  particular  legal
    argument as such, but simply argued that the judge had given the  wrong
    weight to the factors that he was duty bound to consider.  The heart of
    the matter here was the inter-relationship of Article 3 with Article  8
    of the ECHR.  The law was undisputed.  I

10. Insofar as the judge allowed the appeal by reference  to  the  case  of
    Akhalu, this was a suggestion that had originated from  submissions  by
    the Secretary of State, who has cited the case.   It  was,  of  course,
    true that one could not reformulate a failed argument under Article  3,
    as a Article 8 ECHR submission, but this was not the case here.   There
    were other factors here.  The other factor  was  the  position  of  the
    young child.  The judge was not wrong to  refer  to  this.   It  was  a
    relevant factor.  Given that the Appellant  could  not  afford  medical
    care in Mongolia, if he were to be returned there, the judge was  right
    to say that, "I consider the fact  that  she  would  see  her  father's
    health rapidly deteriorate and most likely die within  a  short  period
    which would be very traumatic for her and a clear  substantial  adverse
    effect over family life" (see paragraph 46(c)), and there had  been  no
    challenge to this particular finding by  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State.

11. Finally, it was not the case that the judge had confused himself on the
    question of whether she was allowing the appeal on  the  basis  of  the
    Immigration Rules  or  not.   This  is  because  the  judge  had  first
    considered the position of the Appellant divorced from his medical ill-
    health at paragraph 45 and had observed that,  "clearly  the  Appellant
    and his family have established a private and family life, but this had
    been done during a time when his immigration status was precarious, and
    the judge here had found the essential argument to be that  of  whether
    the decision of the Secretary of State was proportionate  or  not.   He
    and the judge had concluded that the Appellant could not succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules.

12. However, once  the  judge  had  factored  in  the  Appellant's  medical
    condition as well, her conclusion was that the Appellant would succeed,
    and now the judge held that "the Appellant's removal, together with his
    family, would be disproportionate and therefore  I  allow  this  appeal
    under Article  8  of  the  ECHR  and  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules".  There  was  nothing  inconsistent  in  this.   The
    decision was impeccable in terms of the care and  quality  attained  by
    the judge.  As for the citation of MM (Zimbabwe) there was  nothing  in
    this point because it was plain that the judge intended to refer to  MM
    (Zimbabwe) and a mistake  as  to  citation  of  the  decision  did  not
    constitute a material error of law.

13. In reply, Mr Tufan submitted that the judge  had  wrongly  allowed  the
    appeal under paragraph 276ADE on the basis that it would be  "difficult
    to reintegrate" for the Appellant in Mongolia, when the requirement  of
    the Rules was that there would be "very significant obstacles".

No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

15. First, it is not correct that the judge has  not  applied  the  correct
    legal Rule when referring to the fact that it would  be  "difficult  to
    reintegrate" for the Appellant in  Mongolia,  because  he  had  already
    concluded  (at  paragraph  44),  that  in  applying  paragraph  183  of
    Paposhvili, the lack of access to medical treatment in Mongolia for the
    Appellant would expose him to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline
    in his state of health.  The judge had  expressly  referred  to  "other
    very exceptional cases" as the  criterion  to  be  applied  in  such  a
    situation.

16. Second, the judge did look at two alternative situations,  first  under
    the Appellant's private and family life (devoid  of  his  medical  ill-
    health); and second, by factoring in his ill-health, and  then  looking
    at three different scenarios in this context (see  paragraph  46(a)  to
    46(c)).  It was only with respect to the  latter  that  the  judge  had
    concluded that the Appellant would succeed both under paragraph  276ADE
    and a freestanding Article 8 ECHR jurisprudence.

17. Third, the judge was cognisant of the medical expert's  report  in  the
    form of a letter of Dr Lemoine of 30th January 2017 (see  paragraph  38
    line 7) which makes it clear that the Appellant would be at severe risk
    of hepatitis complications and death.  The judge had properly concluded
    that the medical expert referred to such medical treatment in  Mongolia
    being unaffordable for the Appellant (see his paragraphs  35  and  42).
    These findings were open to the judge to make on the basis of  what  Dr
    Lemoine had found.  The judge  equally  was  not  wrong  to  take  into
    account the European Court decision  in  Paposhvili.   Moreover  Akhalu
    stood for the proposition that a decline in  the  health  of  a  person
    precipitated by removal can be a factor to be  taken  into  account  in
    balancing the exercise in relation to Article 8 cases.

18. There was left the question of the best interests of a  child  who  was
    not a qualifying child.  However, the judge did  not  regard  the  best
    interests of the child as a trump card.  She  uses  no  such  language.
    This was only one of the factors taken into account and the  judge  was
    entitled to do so.  In this respect, the judge  approached  the  matter
    consistently with the decision in Akhalu.  On the facts of  this  case,
    it was open to the judge to conclude (at paragraph 46C) that  it  would
    not be in the best interests of the child to see her father, who  would
    not have access to medical help in Mongolia  given  his  impecuniosity,
    eventually die for his inability to access such  health  care.   It  is
    moreover, of course, the case that the judge was very much cognisant of
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act and recognised that little weight would be
    given to a private life  acquired  where  the  Appellant's  immigration
    status was precarious (see paragraph 46).   Accordingly,  there  is  no
    error of law.

Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

The appeal of the Secretary of State is refused.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th February 2018
