
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05293/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2017                           |On 17 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                     Mohammad SALIM TAWFEEK Al-Mohammad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Gaisford, of Counsel instructed by Messrs
Seddons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                        DETERMINATION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Wedderspoon who, in a determination promulgated
    on 22 May 2017 dismissed the appellant's appeal against a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State to refuse to grant asylum  and  or  humanitarian
    protection.

2.   The basis of the appellant's claim was that he feared a Shia  group  in
    Baghdad.  In the bundle of documents submitted  there  was  a  detailed
    expert report.  The judge in his determination  not  only  ignored  the
    expert report but also other background evidence submitted and  that  I
    consider is  a  material  error  of  law.   Perhaps  more  importantly,
    however, is the fact that the judge appeared to  believe  that  it  was
    ISIS that the appellant feared when that was not the case.   The  judge
    referred to the  appellant's  fear  of  ISIS  in  paragraph  4  of  the
    determination and again in his findings and conclusions at paragraph 36
    he referred to an ISIS group.  He did not engage with the fact that the
    appellant feared a Shia militia group either when he set out the  basis
    of the appellant's claim or in  his  findings  and  conclusions.   That
    again is a material error of law.

2.   Following the Practice  Directions  of  the  Senior  President  of  the
    Tribunal, I consider that it is appropriate that I  remit  this  appeal
    for a hearing afresh in the First-tier on all issues.

Decision

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing  afresh  on
all issues. An  Arabic interpreter required.  Time estimate three hours.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]                      Date: 10 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy



