
[pic]
S-T

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05120/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 February 2018                       |On 27 February 2018               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                     K A
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Childs, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Iran. He claims to have entered
    the UK clandestinely on 6 September 2015, the date on which his  asylum
    claim is recorded. He was then aged  16.  The  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's claim  for  protection.  The  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    explained that the respondent did not accept  the  appellant  was  from
    Iran and considered it was more  likely  he  came  from  Iraq.  It  was
    accepted he is Kurdish.

 2. The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M B Hussein on
    29 June 2017, shortly after the appellant's  eighteenth  birthday.  The
    judge made adverse credibility  findings  against  the  appellant.  The
    judge identified the two key issues in the appeal as being whether  the
    appellant was an Iranian Kurd and whether his father had been a  member
    of the KDP. He found the appellant had not shown he was from Iran  but,
    even if he were wrong about that, the appellant had fabricated a  claim
    concerning his father's political activity. Finally,  the  judge  found
    the appellant would not be the subject of adverse interest  on  account
    of illegal exit.

 3. Regarding article 8, the judge said merely this:

         "54.     I have considered whether the appellant has claimed  under
         article 8 of the human rights grounds, and, for the  reasons  given
         by the Secretary of State, I find that he does not."

 4. The application for permission to appeal suggested the judge had  erred
    in law by failing to apply anxious scrutiny in his findings  about  the
    appellant's country of origin. It was not open to the judge to conclude
    that the appellant would be able  to  obtain  documents  from  Iran  to
    establish his nationality. With regard to article 8, the  judge  should
    have considered whether there were very significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration on return to Iran.

 5. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but granted
    by the Upper Tribunal on all grounds:

         "The grounds are arguable, just. The  grounds  have  a  flavour  of
         simple disagreement with the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge ("FtJ"). However, I consider that there is arguable merit  in
         the  contention  that  the  FtJ  failed  to  have  regard  to   the
         appellant's age, and the other matters referred to at [9d.] of  the
         grounds, when making his  assessment  of  the  credibility  of  his
         account, for example in relation to  the  matters  referred  to  at
         [40], notwithstanding his  reference  to  relevant  authorities  at
         [41]. The grounds do not reflect the  issues  in  relation  to  the
         currency point accurately, but then again neither,  arguably,  does
         the FtJ's decision.

         Although not mentioned in the  grounds,  it  is  open  to  question
         whether the FtJ was right to say at [41]  that  there  was  "not  a
         shred of objective evidence to connect [the appellant] to Iran".

         On a self-contained basis, I consider that the ground  in  relation
         to Article 8 is weak, but I do not limit the grounds  that  may  be
         argued. I note that at [61] the FtJ said he found in favour of  the
         appellant on human rights grounds, which is  clearly  not  what  he
         meant, but there is an indication there of a lack of  care  in  the
         writing of the decision."

 6. The respondent has not filed a rule 24 response. However,  the  grounds
    have been amended to incorporate the additional  point  highlighted  in
    the UT's order.

 7. I heard submissions from the representatives on the  issue  of  whether
    the judge's decision contained a material error of law.

 8. Ms Childs expanded in her submissions on her written  grounds  and  the
    additional ground.  She argued the judge's finding that the appellant's
    error at his interview in naming a  250  Toman  note  (which  does  not
    exist) was wrongly described by the judge as  an  error  regarding  the
    currency. In relying on the appellant's error in naming the KDP, rather
    than the KDPI or  KDP-I,  the  judge  had  not  taken  account  of  the
    appellant's age and inexperience.  He had not claimed to  be  a  member
    himself. In rejecting the appellant's evidence that he would be  unable
    to contact anyone in Iran as "fanciful", the  judge  had  impermissibly
    viewed what was plausible from the standpoint of another country (HK  v
    SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037). There was  also  background  evidence  that
    family members of KDPI members could be targeted, as the appellant  had
    claimed had happened. In relation to article 8, the judge had failed to
    consider the pertinent factors. The appellant had  claimed  his  family
    were no longer in Iran and there was nobody he could return to.

 9. Mr Bramble argued it was clear  the  judge  had  been  mindful  of  the
    appellant's age. He was entitled to reach the  conclusions  he  reached
    for the reasons he gave. His conclusion on article 8 was adequate.

10. Ms Childs disagreed the judge had been mindful of the appellant's  age.
    She returned to the matters on which  the  judge  had  relied  on  when
    making his adverse findings and argued the  reasoning  was  inadequate.
    He had ignored the  matters  which  the  appellant  got  right  at  his
    interview.

11. I indicated at the end of the hearing that I would dismiss  the  appeal
    because I did not consider the judge's decision contained any  material
    error of law. My reasons are as follows.

12. The judge saw and heard the appellant give evidence and he  simply  did
    not believe what he was told. The reasons  he  gave  for  reaching  his
    conclusions were based on the evidence and are sustainable. None of the
    grounds establish that the judge made a material error.

13. It is right  that  the  judge  was  obliged  to  take  account  of  the
    appellant's young age at the time of his interview and, to  an  extent,
    at the date of hearing. He reminded himself of the guidance given in AA
    (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 16 (IAC) and he stated
    it was "self-evidently correct".  It was not necessary  for  the  judge
    additionally to demonstrate his adherence to the  guidance  by  setting
    out different aspects of it, such as  making  allowance  on  areas  the
    appellant would have little knowledge of as a result  of  his  age  and
    inexperience. His mention of the case is sufficient to show he had  the
    appellant's age in mind. Given the appellant was able at his  interview
    to describe currency denominations, give the names of political leaders
    and name some geographical features, it is difficult to see how his age
    was an inhibiting factor in his performance. I accept the appellant did
    not have any personal involvement with his father's claimed  party  but
    that does not mean the judge  was  not  entitled  to  give  significant
    weight to the appellant's error. The judge explained in detail  why  he
    did give weight to this, noting the change  in  evidence  as  the  case
    progressed.

14. The renewed grounds state the judge failed to apply anxious scrutiny in
    making his findings. The grounds argue there is a world  of  difference
    between getting the names of the Iranian president and  supreme  leader
    the wrong way around, as the appellant did, and being  unable  to  name
    them, as the judge "asserted". The "assertion" Ms Childs  complains  of
    is presumably a reference to paragraphs 39 and 40. It is true the judge
    does express himself in terms that the appellant was unable to name the
    president and supreme leader. However, in the context of the case as  a
    whole, it is perfectly clear what he meant. The fact a claimed  citizen
    of Iran said the supreme leader was Hussain Rouhani and  the  president
    was Khamenei is a matter the judge was entitled to place weight  on  as
    undermining credibility even if the appellant  had  been  only  16  and
    uneducated.

15. In the same vein, much has been made of the  judge's  choice  of  words
    when noting the error regarding the non-existent 250  Toman  note.  The
    grounds suggest the judge overestimated the magnitude of the  error  by
    stating the appellant got  the  denomination  of  the  currency  wrong.
    However, it is clear what the judge was saying. He knew  the  appellant
    had named a banknote which did not exist in Iran but which did exist in
    Iraq. This was, as the judge put it, "unhelpful" to  him.  The  grounds
    appear to question why the judge felt it  was  appropriate  to  mention
    that the appellant had referred to a currency which exists in Iraq.  It
    is obvious. The point had already been made in the reasons for  refusal
    letter and the judge was endorsing it.

16. The structure of the decision shows that, when assessing  the  evidence
    of the appellant's country of origin, the  judge  set  out  the  points
    which troubled him. He then added, at paragraph 41, the failure of  the
    appellant to provide "objective  evidence  to  connect  him  to  Iran".
    Again, submissions were made on the meaning  of  the  words  used.  The
    notion that the  judge  erred  by  ignoring  the  correct  answers  the
    appellant gave at interview about Iran is contrary to the clear meaning
    of paragraph 41. By "objective evidence", the judge clearly had in mind
    official documentation, such as a birth certificate. One  only  has  to
    look to the end of the paragraph to understand that.

17. Arguments  were  also  pursued  about  the  judge's  rejection  of  the
    appellant's claim that he would have been unable to contact anyone from
    his  village.  Mr  Bramble  agreed  the  judge's  description  of   the
    appellant's evidence as "fanciful" might have been too strong. However,
    the judge was entitled to find the appellant could have  made  contact.
    Ms Childs argued the judge erred by making a finding of implausibility.
    She argued the judge had fallen into the trap of making  a  finding  of
    something being inherently improbable based on  the  perspective  of  a
    person in the UK.

18. In  HK  v  SSHD,  a  case  containing  colourful  evidence  of  certain
    initiation rituals in Sierra Leone, the Court of Appeal  explained  the
    dangers of relying on inherent improbability in the context  of  asylum
    cases where the judge has no experience of the  environmental  context.
    Chadwick LJ summarised the point as follows:

         "72.     On analysis of the tribunal's reasoning, I  am  unable  to
         avoid the conclusion that the Applicant's account has been rejected
         simply because the facts that he describes are so unusual as to  be
         thought unbelievable. But, as Neuberger LJ has pointed out, that is
         not a safe basis upon which to reject the existence of facts  which
         are said to have occurred within an environment and  culture  which
         is so wholly outside the experience of the decision maker  as  that
         in the present case. There is simply no yardstick against which the
         decision maker can test whether the facts are inherently incredible
         or not. The tribunal's failure to confront that problem  must  lead
         to the conclusion that they erred in law."

19. Ms Childs listed the reasons put forward by  the  appellant  for  being
    unable to obtain evidence from Iran,  including  the  fact  Iran  is  a
    "police state" and not wanting to get anyone into trouble. However, all
    the judge is saying in paragraph 42  is  that  the  appellant  had  not
    sufficiently explained why he had not taken the opportunity to  contact
    someone to send him a document to establish his nationality. Even if he
    was no longer able to contact his uncle for some reason, there  was  no
    reason he could not go back to  the  same  person  who  had  given  his
    uncle's number to him.

20. That is very far distant from the circumstances considered in  HK.  The
    judge was not relying on assumptions based on a UK perspective. On  the
    contrary, he noted what the appellant had already said he had been able
    to do and considered his responses as to why he had not taken steps  to
    retrieve his birth certificate. I see no error in this approach.

21. That leaves article 8. I begin by noting article 8 was not raised as  a
    ground of appeal in the notice of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal but
    I note it was referred to in Ms Childs's skeleton  argument  which  was
    handed to the judge. The point was  made  that  the  appellant  had  no
    family to return to in Iran and he would face discrimination as a Kurd.
    The circumstances amounted to "very significant  obstacles"  so  as  to
    fulfil the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the rules.

22. As seen, the judge's treatment of article 8 was  extremely  cursory.  I
    understand paragraph 54 to mean the judge agreed with the  respondent's
    analysis. It is not right therefore, as the grounds suggest,  that  the
    judge  failed  to  consider  article  8.  The  issue  is  whether   his
    consideration was adequate.

23. The difficulty is that the judge found the appellant was not  in  truth
    from Iran and there was therefore no reason to base his  assessment  on
    anything the appellant had said about how he came to  have  left  Iran.
    The judge also made findings in the alternative in case  he  was  wrong
    about the appellant's country of nationality and  found  there  was  no
    truth in the claim regarding his father's activities.  It  follows  the
    decision for the appellant to leave Iran must have been made for  other
    reasons. Either way, there was no evidential basis on which  the  judge
    should have considered the matters raised by Ms Childs as showing  very
    significant obstacles to integration. The appellant can  simply  return
    home.

24. There is no error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal and the decision shall stand.

25. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of  law
and his decision dismissing the appeal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 21 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
