
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05388/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 February 2019                  |On 6 March 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                 Obaidul [Q]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, instructed by Waterstone Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He appealed to a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of 12
    April 2018 refusing to grant asylum or humanitarian protection.

2.    The  appellant's  claim  was  based  on  his  claimed  involvement  in
    Bangladesh with the organisation Chatra Shibir, which  is  the  student
    wing of Jamat-e-Islami.  He said that he had  been  attacked  by  local
    Awami League members  in  March  2009  and  he  had  gone  into  hiding
    thereafter.  In the days after  the  attack  people  had  gone  to  his
    village home looking for him and in interview he  said  the  Government
    were looking for him and maintained he was still an  active  member  of
    the party.

3.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant and from his wife  and  his
    brother.  He found the appellant to lack credibility.  He noted a delay
    of over four years in claiming asylum and the fact that this  was  only
    done after service of a notice concerning removal.  The judge noted  at
    paragraph 57 of his decision that in support of his claim to have  been
    involved with Chatra Shibir he relied primarily on the evidence of  his
    brother and a letter from a Mr Ahmed, an affidavit from his father  and
    one from Mr Ali.  The judge considered briefly the evidence of  Mr  Ali
    and Mr Ahmed and also the appellant's father's affidavit.  He  did  not
    however refer to the evidence of the appellant's brother in  coming  to
    his  conclusion  that  the  appellant  lacked  credibility.   This   is
    essentially the basis upon which the decision has been challenged.

4.   In his witness statement the  appellant's  brother  who  lives  in  the
    United Kingdom and is a British citizen confirmed  that  the  appellant
    left Bangladesh and arrived in the United Kingdom in January 2010, that
    he had come to avoid persecution by the ruling Awami League  Party  for
    his involvement in  Chatra  Shibir.   He  said  that  the  family  were
    concerned for the appellant's safety since the Awami League  came  into
    power in early 2009 and after the incident of 26 March 2009 his parents
    had decided to send him out of the country to secure his education  and
    personal safety.  He confirmed that he was  told  by  his  father  from
    Bangladesh on the same day, i.e. 26 March 2009, that the appellant  was
    attacked in a meeting  and  seriously  beaten  by  Awami  League  Party
    members.  He had noticed his  brother's  concern  about  the  worsening
    political situation in Bangladesh since  arriving  here  and  confirmed
    that the family had received a repeated threat from  the  ruling  party
    activists and  the  law  enforcement  agencies  before  and  after  the
    appellant left Bangladesh and arrived in the United Kingdom.

5.   In essence the point before me as clarified in the  submissions  of  Ms
    Jones and Mr Avery, is whether this evidence could or should have  made
    any difference to the judge's evaluation of credibility.  It is, as  Mr
    Avery says, a fairly brief statement, and one expressed at a degree  of
    generality.  However in my judgment it cannot be concluded safely  that
    the judge would have come to  the  same  decision  had  he  taken  this
    evidence into account.  It is unclear whether that would have been  the
    case.  The general tenor of the judge's decision is  such  that  it  is
    perhaps unlikely, but I consider that where there was material evidence
    before the judge in the form of  a  witness  statement  and  also  oral
    evidence, it was incumbent  upon  him  given  the  centrality  of  that
    evidence to the claim, to make some findings  perhaps  not  necessarily
    very  full  findings,  but  some  findings  on  that  evidence.   As  a
    consequence the judge erred  in  law.   The  matter  will  have  to  be
    reheard, and given the centrality of the point in issue I consider that
    it will have to be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal so the matter was
    remitted for a full rehearing at Hatton Cross before a judge other than
    Judge Eldridge.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date 28 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
