
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05069/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 March 2019                   |On 29 March 2019                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     HV
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms K Dingwall, Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
       Tribunal MacKenzie dismissing an appeal on protection and human
       rights grounds.

    2. The appellant is a national of Vietnam and a Roman Catholic.  He
       claims he is sought by the police in Vietnam following his
       involvement in two public protests.  The Judge of the First-tier
       Tribunal did not find credible the appellant's evidence of his
       reasons for leaving Vietnam and rejected the core of his evidence to
       the effect that he is wanted by the authorities in Vietnam by reason
       of his political opinion.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on the grounds
       that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal arguably erred by
       misapprehending certain aspects of the evidence and thereby finding
       that there were inconsistencies in the evidence when there were none.

    4. In particular, it is contended that at paragraph 37 of the decision
       the judge stated that, according to the appellant's evidence, a
       protest he attended on 14th February 2017 was also attended by a
       priest called Father Huong, who was arrested and later released.  The
       judge noted that a letter dated 10th May 2018 from Father Huong did
       not refer to attendance at any protests or any other political
       activities.  According to the application for permission to appeal,
       the appellant's evidence at paragraph 17 of his witness statement was
       not that Father Huong attended the protest in question but that a
       different priest, called Father Thuc, attended.  Father Thuc also
       provided a letter of support.  It is contended that the Judge of the
       First-tier Tribunal misrecorded the evidence on this matter and drew
       an adverse inference on credibility as a result.

    5. The second alleged misapprehension of the evidence by the judge arose
       from paragraph 41 of the decision, where the judge recorded that
       according to his oral evidence the appellant injured two police
       officers at the protest on 14th February 2017.  The judge observes
       that in his witness statement the appellant stated that at a protest
       in October 2016 he pushed a police officer, who fell over, but made
       no mention of involvement in any injury to police officers at the
       February 2017 protest.  Again the application for permission to
       appeal contends that the judge misapprehended the evidence.  A
       quotation is given from paragraph 17 of the witness statement, where
       the appellant recorded that at the February 2017 protest two police
       officers in plain clothes took the appellant's phone, on which he was
       recording the protest, and tried to arrest him but the appellant
       fought back.  He was helped by other protesters and managed to
       escape.  Again it is alleged that the judge drew an adverse inference
       on credibility from misapprehending the evidence.

    6. At the hearing I was addressed by Ms Dingwall on behalf of the
       appellant and by Mr Govan for the respondent.  Mr Govan submitted
       that at paragraph 37 of her decision the judge had made a slip in
       mixing up the names of the two priests.  This was not material to the
       outcome in what was a very detailed decision.  Mr Govan further
       submitted that in his witness statement the appellant made no mention
       of the two officers being injured at the protest in February 2017.
       This ground of the application for permission to appeal was not made
       out.   The judge was being criticised for not inferring what
       happened.



Discussion

    7. So far as confusing the names of the priests is concerned,  I
       consider the judge's mistake amounts to more than an accidental slip
       and is material to the findings made.   At paragraph 37 of the
       decision the judge erroneously records the evidence of the appellant
       as stating that Father Huong led the contingent from the appellant's
       church to the February 2017 protest and was arrested and later
       released.  The judge observes that Father Huong provided no
       explanation about this in his letter of 10th May 2018 and comments
       that no explanation has been provided for this omission.  Then at
       paragraph 38 the judge refers to the letter of 28th April 2018 from
       Father Thuc.  The judge observes that Father Thuc's letter states
       that the appellant took part in the activities alleged and was
       "threatened and disturbed" by the authorities but according to the
       judge the details given were vague.  At paragraph 40 the judge states
       that having considered the letters in the round with the other
       evidence "and not having found the appellant to be an honest witness
       in respect of his claimed political activities" the letters added no
       weight to the appellant's claim.

    8. It is unfortunate that the judge reached this finding about the
       weight to be given to these letters while under the misapprehension
       that it was Father Huong who had attended the protest in February
       2017.  The judge's comment that there was no explanation of why
       Father Huong's letter of 10th May 2018 did not refer to attendance at
       protests or involvement in political activities is an adverse
       inference drawn from a document which was never intended to speak to
       the appellant's political activities.  As was pointed out at the
       hearing, Father Huang's letter was mainly a record of the appellant's
       involvement in the church, starting from his baptism.  It was Father
       Thuc's letter which addressed the appellant's political activities,
       but having mistakenly drawn an adverse inference from Father Huong's
       letter, the judge then went on to disregard the potential
       significance of Father Thuc's letter.  In these circumstances I do
       not agree with Mr Govan's submission that confusing the two priests
       was not material.

    9. At paragraph 41 of the decision the judge referred to the appellant's
       oral evidence that at the February 2017 protest he had injured two
       police officers.  The judge observed that the appellant's witness
       statement did not mention any injuries to police officers at the
       protest in February 2017 but stated that the appellant came to the
       adverse attention of the police because he was trying to record
       events on his mobile phone.  At paragraph 42 the judge observed that
       a summons produced by the appellant was for disturbing the police and
       acting against officers in their duty and not for assaulting police
       officers.

   10. The appellant's evidence in his witness statement was that at the
       protest in February 2017 the two plain clothes officers came over to
       take his phone away.  They started beating him but he fought back.
       Regrettably the judge has disregarded this account in the witness
       statement of a physical altercation with the two officers.  Mr Govan
       submitted that the judge was not at fault for not drawing an
       inference that the officers were injured when there was no mention of
       this in the witness statement.  While there is some force in this
       submission, it is more significant that the judge failed to refer to
       the appellant's evidence in his witness statement of fighting with
       the two officers.

   11. Furthermore, the judge considered that the appellant's evidence on
       this point went to the core of the claim.  Where the judge has stated
       this, it is difficult to regard the judges' failure to take fully
       into account the content of the witness statement as anything other
       than material.

   12. Mr Govan pointed out that there were a number of other reasons given
       by the judge for making adverse credibility findings.  I note, for
       example, that one of these appeared to be on the issue of whether the
       police succeeded in taking away the appellant's mobile phone.  This
       is not, however, a matter which was raised before me.  The difficulty
       though in scrutinising a decision such as this is in knowing whether
       the judge would have reached the same adverse finding on credibility
       if she had apprehended all the evidence correctly.  In the context of
       the judge's findings in the appeal the mistakes made by the judge are
       sufficiently significant and material to render her overall findings
       unsound.

   13. The parties were not in agreement about how the appeal should
       proceed.  Ms Dingwall suggested the decision might be re-made on the
       basis of submissions but Mr Govan submitted that if the errors were
       material then as they concerned credibility remittal would be more
       appropriate.  I agree with Mr Govan that as the errors relate to
       credibility remittal is the appropriate course.  The extent of
       findings of fact to be made is such that remittal is necessary in
       terms of paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement.  The appeal will
       be remitted to the First -tier Tribunal for hearing before a
       differently constituted tribunal with no findings preserved.



Conclusions

   14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
       making of an error on a point of law.

   15. The decision is set aside.

   16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard
       before a differently constituted tribunal with no findings preserved.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  In order
to preserve the positions of the parties until the appeal is finally
decided I make a direction in the following terms.  Unless or until a court
or tribunal directs otherwise no report of these proceedings shall directly
or indirectly identify the appellant or any member of his family.  This
direction applies to the appellant and the respondent.  Failure to comply
with the direction may lead to proceedings for contempt of court.


M E Deans   26th March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
