

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05614/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 September 2019                 |On 18 September 2019                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                   Rui [Z]
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Vinnasythamby P Lingajorthy, legal representative
                    with L & L Law, solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr David Clark, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal (sitting at Hatton Cross) dismissing his appeal against the
   respondent's decision to refuse him international  protection  under  the
   Refugee Convention, humanitarian protection, or leave to  remain  in  the
   United Kingdom on human rights grounds.  The appellant is  a  citizen  of
   the People's Republic of China.



Background

2. The appellant was born  in  [1983]  in  China.   He  was  diagnosed  with
   paranoid schizophrenia in China, in 2009, and  received  treatment  there
   for the next 7 years, before travelling to the United Kingdom  in  August
   2016 on his own passport with a valid 2-year visit visa.   The  appellant
   did not claim asylum until November 2017, over a year  after  he  arrived
   here.

3. Before coming to the United Kingdom, the appellant says he was a  student
   at Sichuan University, where claims to have had a number of  ideas  about
   technology and engineering of high speed  rail  and  quantum  satellites,
   which he discussed with other  students.  However,  both  of  those  were
   developed in China in the early 1990s, while the appellant  was  still  a
   very young child.

4. The appellant asserts that he was monitored by the authorities  in  China
   from about 2014, and further, that his  refusal  to  promote  government-
   sponsored health products (Pu'er Tea) between 2013 and 2015, and his anti-
   government activities, resulted in tampering with the water supply at his
   flat, giving him stomach pains, and also in the closure of  his  parents'
   business in China.

5. The appellant did not leave China immediately.  He was able to  obtain  a
   visit visa in the usual way and travel  on  his  own  passport.   In  the
   United Kingdom, his parents send him money for food and accommodation.  A
   letter in the bundle from the Communist Party stated  that  he  had  been
   removed from his village branch in July 2017, due to  non-attendance  and
   non-payment of membership dues.

6. The appellant's account says that after he arrived in the United  Kingdom
   his QQ Social account was frozen because he continued  to  support  anti-
   corruption campaigns here and that he was  expelled  from  the  Communist
   Party for that reason.  He believes that  the  Chinese  authorities  will
   have continued to monitor his activities here in the United  Kingdom  and
   that he will be arrested upon return to China.

7. The appellant produced medical evidence from Dr S Dhumad, saying that  he
   has moderate depression and met the criteria for paranoid  schizophrenia.
   He is receiving anti-psychotic medication. Dr Dhumad considered that  the
   appellant was at moderate risk of suicide.

8. Dr Dhumad's opinion was that the appellant was  unfit  to  testify.    He
   was  depressed,  paranoid,  hopeless  and  had  poor  concentration.  The
   appellant would be unable to participate meaningfully in the hearing  and
   was not fit to fly.

First-tier Tribunal decision

9. The First-tier Tribunal respected Dr Dhumad's  medical  opinion  and  did
   not ask the appellant to testify.  The Judge accepted that the  appellant
   had a subjective fear, but not that it was objectively well founded.  The
   more florid elements of the appellant's  account  were  ascribed  by  the
   First-tier Judge to his paranoia, there being no  evidence  of  any  real
   basis in fact for his alleged monitoring in the  United  Kingdom  by  the
   Chinese authorities.  Given the availability  of  medical  treatment  and
   family support in China, the Judge did not consider that  there  was  any
   good reason why he could not be returned to China.

10. The appeal was dismissed,  and  the  appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

11. Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's
   significant mental health difficulties  had  not  been  considered  under
   Article 3 ECHR.  First-tier Judge Boyes, when granting leave,  considered
   that the First-tier Judge had 'seemingly not considered any risk  arising
   as a result of the mental health issues'.

Rule 24 Reply

12. The respondent did not serve her Rule 24 Reply promptly or within  time.
    On 8 September 2019, just a few days before the  hearing,  a  Reply  was
   received from the respondent, the relevant paragraph of which is  in  the
   following terms:

         "3.  Article 3 is a very high threshold.  This is a case where  the
         First-tier Judge does not believe the appellant's account and finds
         that he can return to China where he  previously  received  medical
         treatment and has family support.  Regarding  fitness  to  fly  and
         removal, it is asserted that the Home Office will manage removal at
         the  airport  and  on  the  flight,  in  the  knowledge  of   these
         circumstances, and assist the appellant in returning to China."

   I grant permission for that Reply to be admitted out of time, but it adds
   very little to the arguments before me today.

13. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

14. At the hearing today, Mr Lingajorthy for the appellant  relied  only  on
   the grounds of appeal drafted by Ms Sara Anzani of Counsel, which  raised
   the following issues:

   1) That insufficient weight was given to the opinion of Dr  Saleh  Dhumad
      that the appellant, currently presenting only a moderate suicide risk,
      would suffer a serious deterioration in his mental health if  returned
      to China and that the risk of suicide would become significant in that
      context;

   2) That Dr Dhumad considered the appellant 'not fit to fly' in the  light
      of his existing mental health problems;

   3) That it was not open to the First-tier Judge on the evidence  to  find
      that the appellant's subjective  fear  of  return  to  China  was  not
      objectively well founded, nor to give weight to his ability  to  leave
      China in 2016 with a visa, on his own passport, in the ordinary way.

15. In oral submissions, Mr Lingajorthy said  that  the  appellant  remained
   too ill for him to be able  to  take  any  instructions  from  him.   The
   appellant was in Court, as he had been  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   (when despite Dr Dhumad's report, he indicated a wish  to  give  evidence
   but was not required to do so).  Mr Lingajorthy  said  that  Dr  Dhumad's
   report had not entirely ruled out the appellant's  symptoms  having  been
   caused by his paranoid schizophrenia.   The appellant's witness statement
   said that he had been forced into psychiatric treatment in 2009 in  China
   and that was when the persecution began.

16. Mr Lingajorthy had been provided with a recent patient care  plan  dated
   9 September 2019 which said that the appellant was now being treated with
   Sertraline and that he had low mood and suicidal thoughts.  He was to  be
   reviewed in 4 weeks.  That document had  not  been  filed  or  served  in
   advance and Mr Lingajorthy accepted that it could not constitute an error
   of fact or law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  following  a
   hearing on 29 May 2019.  It would only be relevant if a material error of
   law was found.

17. Mr Lingajorthy also relied on the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Y
   (Sri Lanka) and  Z  (Sri  Lanka)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362, as summarised in guidance from the  Royal
   College of Psychiatrists entitled CR199 Psychiatric Reports:  preparation
   and use in cases involving asylum, removal from  the  United  Kingdom  or
   immigration detention.  The Court of Appeal  decision  in  Y  and  Z  was
   summarised therein on page 34.  Mr Lingajorthy had not read the  judgment
   itself and was unable to take me to the  passages  therein  on  which  he
   relied.

18. Mr Lingajorthy argued  that  the  First-tier  Judge's  treatment  of  Dr
   Dhumad's report was 'woefully inadequate' and reminded  me  of  the  ill-
   treatment being meted out  in  China  to  Uighur  Muslims,  although  the
   appellant is neither Uighur nor a Muslim.   If a material  error  of  law
   was found, the appellant might advance  more  psychiatric  material.   He
   relied on paragraphs  [4-5],  [9],  [13]  and  [15]  of  the  appellant's
   statement and on his online activities in the United Kingdom for Guo  Wen
   Gui.  The Chinese authorities were very  sensitive  about  criticism  and
   dissent.

19. Mr Lingajorthy asked me to allow the appeal.

20. For the respondent, Mr Clark observed that the standard for  an  Article
   3 ECHR risk in foreign cases  was  very  high.   The  First-tier  Judge's
   findings were consistent with the findings of the Court of Appeal and  of
   Strasbourg.  The Judge was aware of the evidence of Dr  Dhumad,  but  the
   report was lacking in that it did not reflect  the  appellant's  previous
   medical treatment in China, nor that he had family support  available  to
   him.  There was no objective basis for the claimed risk on return or  the
   enhanced suicide risk.  Mr Clark directed me to [61]-[63] in Y and Z  and
   argued that the level of exceptionality which N and Y and Z required were
   not present here.

21. Mr Lingajorthy replied, relying on the  assessment  at  page  8  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal decision of Dr Dhumad's report.   The  case  law  was
   clear: if the appellant's mental health problems were  caused  in  China,
   the appeal would stand or fall on the  Y  and  Z  test.   Dr  Dhumad  had
   indicated at least some doubt as to whether the asserted history was real
   and having regard to the lower standard of proof, the  appeal  should  be
   allowed.

22. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

The legal framework

23. I remind myself that in Y and Z, the Court of Appeal was adding  to  the
   test set out in J v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2005]
   EWCA Civ 629, which held that in order for a  'foreign  case'  Article  3
   ECHR suicide risk claim to succeed:

     i) The appellant must be  at  real  risk  of  treatment  attaining  'a
        minimum level of severity' on return, which  must  'necessarily  be
        serious...an affront to  fundamental  humanitarian  principles...at
        risk of serious ill-treatment';

    ii) The appellant must show a causal link between the act or threatened
        act of removal or expulsion and the inhuman treatment  relied  upon
        (Soering, at [91]);

   iii) In a 'foreign case' such  as  this,  the  Article  3  threshold  is
        particularly high, and  even  higher  'where  the  alleged  inhuman
        treatment is not the  direct  or  indirect  responsibility  of  the
        public authorities of the receiving state, but  results  from  some
        naturally occurring [physical or mental] illness' (see D  v  United
        Kingdom at [49] and Bensaid at [40]);

    iv) An Article 3 claim can in  principle  succeed  in  a  suicide  case
        (Bensaid at [37]);

     v) In deciding whether there is a real risk of a breach of  Article  3
        in a suicide  case,  'a  question  of  importance  is  whether  the
        [appellant's] fear of ill-treatment in  the  receiving  state  upon
        which the risk of suicide is said to be based is  objectively  well
        founded.  If the fear is not well-founded, that will tend to  weigh
        against there being a real risk that the removal will be in  breach
        of Article 3'; and

    vi) Where  the  removing  and/or  the  receiving  state  has  effective
        mechanisms to reduce the risk of  suicide,  'that  too  will  weigh
        heavily against an [appellant's] claim that  removal  will  violate
        his or her Article 3 rights'.

24. To those six tests, Y and Z added a gloss. At [16] in  the  judgment  of
   Lord Justice Sedley (with whom Lady Justice Arden and Lord Justice  Moses
   agreed), he expanded  the  fifth  principle  by  saying  that  'what  may
   nevertheless be of equal importance is whether any genuine fear which the
   appellant may establish, albeit without an objective foundation, is  such
   as to create a risk of suicide if there is an enforced return'.   It  was
   common ground in Y and Z that both appellants had  suffered  torture  and
   rape and had an  overwhelming  subjective  fear  of  return.   They  were
   traumatised to the extent  that  if  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  they  were
   extremely likely to commit suicide.  On that narrow grounds, the  appeals
   of Y and Z were allowed.

25. That is the framework against  which  the  First-tier  Judge's  decision
   should be made, and against which it is to be evaluated.

Dr Dhumad's report

26. Dr Dhumad saw the appellant for two hours on 30 May  2018,  interviewing
   him through a Chinese interpreter.  He used the ICD-10 Classification  of
   Mental and Behavioural Disorders and the Istanbul Protocol.

27. Dr Dhumad recorded the appellant's account that  he  had  mental  health
   issues from 2004, but did not seek  help  initially.  His  mental  health
   deteriorated, and he felt scared all the time.  At university, he thought
   he had important ideas which people might steal  from  him,  but  despite
   family encouragement to seek medical help, he did not  see  a  doctor  in
   China till 2009, after which he was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenic
   and received treatment, including medication.

28. The appellant told Dr Dhumad that he 'received online messages from  the
   government in 2013 and 2015 trying to convince him to sell  products  for
   them...they tried to poison him, and they exposed him to an ongoing sound
   of a cat meowing; he has been hearing it since, he said it is scary. ...'
   and that even in the  United  Kingdom  he  considered  that  the  Chinese
   government was listening to his calls, that Chinese  men  and  white  men
   were watching him, and that he heard voices, people  talking  about  him,
   saying he was a bad man, not good looking, and  that  he  heard  animals,
   cats, and rats climbing the wall, even though there  was  nothing  there.
   He could hear people calling him but when he asked them, they  said  they
   were not calling him.

29. In  the  United  Kingdom  the  appellant  was  not  working,  living  in
   privately rented accommodation on savings from China, sharing a room with
   three other Chinese people.  He had neither family nor friends here.   He
   was taking 2 mg of Risperidone, an antipsychotic medication.

30. Dr Dhumad's mental state conclusion is set out at 12 in his  report:  at
   12.2 he said this:

         "12.2    [The appellant] feels hopeless about his safety in  China.
         He believes that he will be killed by  the  authorities,  there  is
         evidence of  paranoid  delusions  (false  unshakable  beliefs),  he
         believes his phone is bugged  and  he  has  been  followed  by  the
         Chinese intelligence in China and in the United Kingdom.  There  is
         also  evidence  of  auditory   hallucinations   (false   perceptual
         abnormalities).  He has been hearing animals' noises  and  people's
         voices. ...

         12.4 [The appellant] lacks insight into his condition  although  he
         has seen his [general medical practitioner] for his  mental  health
         and has been compliant with medication. "

31. At 13, Dr Dhumad gave his opinion.  At  13.2,  he  considered  what  the
   underlying factual matrix might be, but came to no settled conclusion:

         "13.2    [The appellant's] presentation in my opinion meets the ICD-
         10 criteria for paranoid schizophrenia F20.   It  is  difficult  to
         differentiate the  actual  cause  of  his  fear  from  the  Chinese
         authorities from the paranoid beliefs, and  whether  his  psychotic
         symptoms are caused by stress due to fear of the authorities.

         13.3 The risk of suicide in my opinion is moderate, but significant
         in the context of removal to China.  The main risk factors  in  his
         condition are depression, psychosis and hopelessness.    Depression
         and hopelessness in  schizophrenic  have  serious  and  significant
         association with suicide risk.  The risk will be  greater  when  he
         feels that the deportation is  close.   Threat  of  removal  in  my
         opinion will trigger a  significant  deterioration  in  his  mental
         suffering and subsequently increase the risk of suicide. ..."
                                                              Emphasis added

32. At 13.6, Dr Dhumad considered the possibility of the appellant  feigning
   his mental illness but was not satisfied that he had done  so,  nor  that
   his symptoms were  exaggerated.  He  said  that  he  had  not  taken  the
   appellant's  account  at  face  value   but   'carefully   examined   his
   symptomatology and his emotional reactions during the  interview.  ...his
   clinical presentation is consistent with a diagnosis  of  depression  and
   paranoid schizophrenia.'

Analysis

33. This is a difficult case, because the appellant is unfit to  testify  or
   to give instructions to his solicitors.  Dr Dhumad found  him  to  be  so
   when he saw him at the end of May 2018 and that remains  the  appellant's
   case.   Counsel  has  stated  today  that  he  has  no  ability  to  take
   instructions from the appellant.

34. The Judge had nothing else to  help  him,  except  for  the  appellant's
   statement, signed on 17 April 2019 and written in English.

35. There is no explanation in the April 2019 witness statement  as  to  how
   the appellant, who needed a Mandarin Chinese interpreter to speak  to  Dr
   Dhumad and for his Home Office interview, understood the contents of  the
   statement, nor indeed whether he was fit  to  give  instructions  to  his
   solicitors in April 2019, when at the end of May 2018 he had not been fit
   to testify, nor apparently to fly, in Dr Dhumad's opinion.

36. On the basis of the evidence before  him,  it  was  unarguably  open  to
   First-tier Judge to find that the appellant had not reached the  'foreign
   case' Article 3 ECHR  standard  of  showing  a  real  risk  of  treatment
   attaining a minimum level of severity on return.  Dr Dhumad did not  find
   that the appellant had been tortured or forcibly treated for his paranoid
   schizophrenia in China before coming to the United Kingdom.

37. While the medical evidence was  that  the  appellant's  condition  might
   deteriorate as deportation came closer, Dr Dhumad did  not  consider  the
   protective measures which the respondent could put in place, nor that the
   appellant's parents could assist him on return, as they are  doing  while
   he is in the United Kingdom, nor the available treatment in  China,  from
   which he had previously benefited.

38. This appeal is distinguishable on its facts from those of Y and Z  where
   there was credible and accepted evidence of past rape and torture and  of
   overwhelming fear of return likely to lead to suicide if deportation were
   carried out.  There was insufficient evidence before the First-tier Judge
   to establish, even to the  lower  standard  applicable  to  international
   protection, that there existed in China for this appellant an objectively
   well-founded risk at the high and demanding level required for an Article
   3 'foreign case'.

39. The appellant continues to  receive  treatment  and  medication  in  the
   United Kingdom: he now takes an anti-depressant, Sertraline (25 mg once a
   day, rising to 50 mg after two weeks), prescribed for him on 9  September
   2019 but there is no background information as to  the  severity  of  the
   suicidal thoughts and low mood for which it was prescribed.  Even if that
   document were admissible at the error of  law  stage,  it  would  not  be
   material to consideration of the First-tier Judge's decision.

40. There is no material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Judge and his decision is upheld.

DECISION

41. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law

   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     16 September
2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



