

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05991/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6 June 2017                             |On 7 June 2017                 |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     ZMA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Khan of Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The brevity of the decision is due to the commendable focus  displayed
      by both representatives, and the clarity of the Judge's decision.


    2. For the sake of consistency with  the  decision  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, I shall hereafter refer to the Secretary of State  as  the
       Respondent, and ZMA as the Appellant.


    3. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify ZMA or any of his family members. This direction
       applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with
       this direction could give rise to Contempt of Court  proceedings.  I
       do so in order to preserve the anonymity  of  ZMA  whose  protection
       claim, for reasons that will become clear, has been allowed.


 Background


    4. The Respondent refused ZMA's application  for  asylum  or  ancillary
       protection on 26 May 2016. His appeal against the asylum appeal  was
       dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Myers ("the Judge") following
       a hearing on 22 November 2016, but allowed in relation to article  3
       and humanitarian protection.  There was no cross appeal in  relation
       to the asylum decision which stands.

The grant of permission


   5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie granted permission to  appeal  (23
      March 2017) in relation to the article 3 and  humanitarian  protection
      claims on the basis that it is  arguable  that  the  Judge  materially
      erred in hypothesising that there might  be  difficulty  in  obtaining
      documentation that would permit internal relocation.


Discussion

   6. I am not satisfied that a material  error  of  law  occurred  for  the
      following reason. It was found that the Appellant's  family  was  from
      Kirkuk. It was accepted by the Respondent at the hearing  that  Kirkuk
      was a contested area. It was accepted that he had left his CSID  there
      and lost his passport in Greece. The Judge quoted from AA (Article  15
      (c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) the  relevant  extract  regarding
      the  difficulty  in  obtaining  the  required  documentation  from   a
      contested area to make internal relocation a  reasonable  option.  She
      was entitled to do so and accordingly make the findings she did.


Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
6 June 2017
