

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/05684/2016 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 July 2020                       |On 21 July 2020                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This decision has been made on the papers, under Rule  34  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  further  to  directions  issued  by
myself on 24 April 2020 and 29 May 2020.

The appellant is a national of Kenya born on 29 April 1962. She entered  the
UK in  2005  using  a  counterfeit  Swaziland  passport,  having  previously
resided in the UK from September 1996 until she was  deported  to  Kenya  in
May 2000 pursuant to a deportation  order  issued  as  a  result  of  drugs-
related criminal convictions for which  she  received  a  seven-year  prison
sentence in 1997.  In  May  2008  she  was  issued  with  a  certificate  of
naturalisation as a British citizen, which she was given after  obtaining  a
counterfeit French passport with a different date and place of birth to  her
true identity. On 22 May 2008 the appellant was arrested  and  charged  with
possession of a false instrument, when her true  identity  became  known  to
the authorities. On 6 March 2009 she submitted representations stating  that
she feared return to Kenya as a result of her sexuality  and  on  the  basis
that her daughter would be subjected to FGM.

On 16 March 2009 the appellant was notified that the Secretary of State  was
considering depriving her of her British citizenship under section 40(3)  of
the British nationality Act 1981. On 29 April 2009 she  was  served  with  a
notice of a decision to deprive her of her  British  citizenship.  It  seems
that nothing further happened at that time. However, in September  2012  the
appellant requested the  return  of  her  counterfeit  French  passport  and
permission to return to Kenya to see the  installation  of  her  brother  as
Nabongo King, which was refused. Following that, on 28 March 2013,  she  was
served with a decision nullifying the grant of British  citizenship  on  the
basis that it had been obtained fraudulently.

In June 2013 the appellant applied again for asylum on  the  same  basis  as
previously. On 24 July 2015 she was served with a notice informing her  that
section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  would  be
applied to her case. She did not respond at the time.  She  also  failed  to
attend an asylum interview arranged for 23  November  2015.  On  11  January
2016  she  was  arrested  for  driving  offences  and  was  detained   under
immigration powers. Following a  screening  interview  in  relation  to  her
asylum claim, the appellant claimed to be  a  victim  of  human  trafficking
and, as a result, a referral was made under the National Referral  Mechanism
(NRM). A decision was made that there were  reasonable  grounds  to  believe
that she was a potential victim of trafficking, but then on 19  April  2016,
following an asylum interview on 23 February  2016  and  a  PVOT  (potential
victim of trafficking) interview on 16 March 2016,  she  was  notified  that
there were not conclusive grounds to believe that she was a victim of  human
trafficking or slavery. The appellant's asylum claim  was  then  refused  by
the respondent in a decision of 19 May 2016 and a supplementary decision  of
26 July 2016.

In her asylum claim, the appellant claimed to have been born in  France  and
to have left France at the age of nine years and then lived in Dubai,  Kenya
and Denmark. She claimed to have been married in Kenya,  but  to  have  been
lesbian and to have had three lesbian relationships. Her first  relationship
was with V and lasted from 1995 to 2001, the second was with  D  and  lasted
from 2003 until 2010 and the third, current relationship, was with AZ.  When
she returned to Kenya in 2000 her ex-husband found out she was  lesbian  and
she was beaten and raped by him and her brothers-in-law, nephew  and  cousin
as a result. A herbalist made marks on her body and rubbed potions  into  it
and she was burned on her thigh with a hot iron rod. In August 2000  V  came
to Kenya and took her to hospital and she arranged for her return to the  UK
in November or December 2000 using a counterfeit document.  She  was  forced
to pay V back for the flight ticket and travel documents and,  although  she
was in love with V, V forced her to work as a prostitute so that  she  could
earn the money to pay her back. She claimed to have been trafficked  to  the
UK by V.

In the Conclusive Grounds decision of 19 April 2016 it was noted that  there
were extensive discrepancies in the appellant's account of her  relationship
with V and being forced  into  prostitution  and  her  claim  to  have  been
trafficked to the UK was not believed.

In the decision of 19 May 2016 refusing  her  asylum  claim  the  respondent
certified that the presumption in section 72 of the 2002 Act applied on  the
basis that the appellant's  continued  presence  in  the  UK  constituted  a
danger to the community. The respondent rejected the  appellant's  claim  to
be gay or bisexual and did  not  accept  her  account  of  being  in  a  gay
relationship. It was noted that there were  significant  inconsistencies  in
the appellant's account of  her  relationships.  The  respondent  considered
that the appellant could safely return to Kenya and that she had a  daughter
living there who could provide her with  support.  The  respondent  rejected
the appellant's claim to no longer be a Kenyan citizen and  considered  that
she was a Kenyan citizen  by  birth.  The  respondent  considered  that  the
appellant's removal would not breach  her  Article  3  or  8  human  rights.
Although it was noted that she suffered from mental health problems, it  was
considered that she  would  be  able  to  access  treatment  in  Kenya.  The
respondent maintained the deportation decision.

In a  subsequent  decision  of  26  July  2016,  issued  in  response  to  a
psychiatric report  from  Dr  Mounty  on  behalf  of  Medical  Justice,  the
respondent accorded little weight to the conclusions in the report  in  view
of the fact  that  they  were  based  upon  the  information  given  by  the
appellant, and considered that medical care was available to  the  appellant
in Kenya. It was not considered that the appellant met the test in J v  SSHD
[2005] EWCA Civ 629 to make out an Article 3 claim on the basis  of  a  risk
of suicide.

The appellant appealed against the respondent's decisions.  Her  appeal  was
initially  allowed  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but  that  decision  was
subsequently set aside in the Upper Tribunal and the case  was  remitted  to
the First tier Tribunal to be heard de novo. The appeal was  then  heard  on
11 May 2017 by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Henderson  and  dismissed  in  a
decision promulgated on 2 June 2017.

At the hearing of that appeal, the judge heard from the  appellant  and  her
claimed partner, AZ. The judge noted that AZ  had  been  successful  in  her
asylum appeal in  February  2017,  where  her  evidence,  and  that  of  the
appellant, in regard to their relationship, had been accepted.  However  the
judge noted various inconsistencies in the evidence given before her by  the
appellant and AZ of how they had met and the details of  their  relationship
and did not accept that they were in a relationship. Neither did she  accept
the appellant's account of her relationship with V and  D.  The  judge  also
rejected the appellant's account of being attacked by  her  husband  on  her
return to Kenya in 2000. The judge concluded that the  appellant  would  not
be at risk on return to Kenya. She accepted that there were medical  reports
in relation to mental health concerns and the risk of suicide but  concluded
that the appellant was currently not at risk on  that  basis  and  that  her
removal from the UK would not breach her human rights.

The appellant sought permission to  appeal  the  judge's  decision  on  four
grounds. Firstly, that the judge failed to follow the Tribunal  decision  in
AZ's appeal and  accept  that  the  appellant  and  AZ  were  in  a  genuine
relationship; secondly, that  the  judge  failed  to  take  the  appellant's
psychiatric condition into account when assessing her credibility;  thirdly,
that the judge erred in law in  failing  to  give  weight  to  the  doctor's
conclusions in the Rule 35 report; and fourthly that  the  judge  failed  to
take account of relevant evidence when considering the risk of suicide.

Permission to appeal that decision to the Upper Tribunal was granted  on  28
June 2017.

The matter was listed for an error of law hearing in the Upper Tribunal,  on
27 September 2017, but was  adjourned,  and  has  since  been  adjourned  on
several occasions, for various reasons. One of those reasons  was  the  fact
that the Secretary of State had withdrawn the nullity decision  in  February
2018, following the judgment of the Supreme Court in Hysaj & Ors, R (on  the
application of) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2017]  UKSC
82, and was considering whether to make a decision to deprive the  appellant
of her British citizenship under section 40(3) of  the  British  Nationality
Act 1981. In addition, on  18  December  2018,  the  respondent  decided  to
withdraw the original deportation decision in light of  the  fact  that  the
appellant remained a  British  citizen.  It  was  considered  by  the  Upper
Tribunal Judge, Judge Hemingway, upon the application and agreement  of  the
parties, to be  appropriate  to  adjourn  the  error  of  law  determination
pending the respondent's decision on the deprivation  matter.  In  addition,
in response to the appellant's request, UTJ Hemingway made a ruling,  on  21
February 2019,  that  the  appeal  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  could  continue
notwithstanding  the  respondent's  withdrawal   of   their   decision,   in
accordance with  SM  (withdrawal  of  appealed  decision:  effect)  Pakistan
[2014] UKUT 64. A decision was then made by the respondent, on  26  November
2019,  to  deprive  the  appellant  of  her  British  citizenship,  and  the
appellant  lodged  an  appeal  against  the  decision,  which  is  currently
outstanding in the First-tier Tribunal (appeal reference DC/00133/2019).

The most recent adjournment of the error of law hearing was  on  10  January
2020 due to the appellant being unwell and not in attendance.  In  his  note
of that hearing the judge referred to having granted an application  to  the
appellant to amend her grounds to include a  further  ground.  That  further
ground made assertions of procedural irregularity in [83] to [86], [88]  and
[94] to [98] of Judge Henderson's  decision,  whereby  the  judge  erred  by
making  adverse  findings  against  the  appellant  without  giving  her  an
opportunity  to  respond.  The  respondent  was  directed  to  indicate  her
position in response to the amended grounds.   On  10  February  2020  Upper
Tribunal Judge Hemingway gave directions that the matter be relisted  before
him after 31 March 2020 for the error of law issue  to  be  dealt  with  and
reiterated his previous direction for  the  respondent  to  respond  to  the
amended grounds of appeal.

On 24 April 2020, owing to  the  impact  of  the  coronavirus,  I  made  the
following directions:

         "1.  I have now reviewed the file in this case. In the light of the
         present need to take precautions against the  spread  of  Covid-19,
         and the overriding objective expressed in  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I have reached  the  provisional  view
         that the decision in this case can be made without a hearing on the
         following basis.

         2.   Irrespective of whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge made  an
         error of law in her decision of 2 June 2017  on  the  grounds  upon
         which permission was granted, any error would not  be  material  as
         the appellant simply cannot succeed in her  appeal.  As  a  British
         national, which the appellant has been since May 2008,  she  cannot
         meet the requirements within the Refugee Convention as  a  refugee,
         since she is not outside the country of her  nationality,  and  she
         cannot succeed on human rights grounds since she  will  not,  as  a
         British national, be  required  to  leave  the  UK.  Alternatively,
         considering matters outside the grounds upon which  permission  was
         granted, the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law by  failing  to
         consider the appellant's case on the basis that she was  a  British
         citizen, irrespective of the fact that at that  time  the  position
         before the judge appeared to be that the appellant  was  no  longer
         considered to be a British national, and the decision in the appeal
         must be re-made by dismissing it on the basis  as  set  out  above.
         Either way the appellant's appeal against the  decision  to  refuse
         her protection and human rights claim, must be dismissed. The  fact
         that an order may be made in the future depriving the appellant  of
         her British citizenship is irrelevant to this appeal.

         3.   Any reasonable objection to the above is to be made in writing
         to the Upper Tribunal not later than 21 days  from  the  date  this
         notice is sent out.

         4.   Following that period, in  the  absence  of  any  satisfactory
         response, and notwithstanding the views expressed by a  party,  the
         Tribunal may nevertheless proceed to determine the error of law and
         the re-making of the decision in the appeal on the  basis  set  out
         above."

A response was received  from  Mr  Draycott  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,
entitled "appellant's written submissions opposing the striking out  of  her
appeal to the Upper Tribunal", in which  he  expressed  concerns  about  the
proposal to strike out the appeal, given that  there  would  be  a  lack  of
opportunity for the appellant to  address  the  adverse  findings  in  Judge
Henderson's decision.

I made the following further directions on 29 May 2020:

         "1.  Further to my Notice and Directions dated  1  April  2020  and
         sent out on 24 April 2020, submissions have been received  from  Mr
         Draycott for the appellant, dated 15 May 2020. There  has  been  no
         response from the Secretary of State to the directions.

         2.   Contrary to the submissions made by Mr Draycott, there was  no
         suggestion in my directions of the appellant's appeal being  struck
         out and Mr Draycott appears to have  misunderstood  the  basis  and
         intention of those directions. I therefore make further  directions
         which are to be read together with those sent out previously.

         3.   As stated at [5] of my previous  directions,  having  reviewed
         the file and the history of the appeal as set out at [2] and [3], I
         have reached the provisional view that it would  in  this  case  be
         appropriate to proceed to making a decision without a hearing.

         4.    Having  read  Mr  Draycott's  submissions   and   given   due
         consideration to the lengthy history of this case, I do not  accept
         that it is appropriate or necessary to stay the matter  further  in
         order to await the outcome of the appellant's appeal in relation to
         the decision to deprive her of her British citizenship,  as  stated
         at paragraphs 2 and 16 of Mr Draycott submissions. I  do,  however,
         have regard to the matters raised  by  Mr  Draycott  at  paragraphs
         2(b)(i) and 18(i) of his submissions in relation to the opportunity
         to challenge the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  and  to
         the issue of fairness arising out of that.

         5.   Accordingly, I make the following DIRECTIONS:

          a) The appellant may submit further submissions in support of the
             assertion of an error of law and on the question  whether  the
             First-tier Tribunal's decision should be set aside if an error
             of law is found, to  include  the  challenges  raised  in  the
             grounds of appeal as well as addressing the matters at [6]  of
             my previous directions dated 1 April 2020,  to  be  filed  and
             served on all other parties no later than 14 days  after  this
             notice is sent out (the date of sending  is  on  the  covering
             letter or covering email);

          b) Any other party may file and serve submissions in response, no
             later than 21 days after this notice is sent out;

          c) If submissions are made in accordance with paragraph (b) above
             the party who sought permission to appeal may file and serve a
             reply no later than 28 days after this notice is sent out.

          d)  All submissions that rely  on  any  document  not  previously
             provided to all other  parties  in  electronic  form  must  be
             accompanied by electronic copies of any such document.

         6.   Any party who considers that despite the foregoing  directions
         a hearing is  necessary  to  consider  the  questions  set  out  in
         paragraph 5(a) above must submit reasons for  that  view  no  later
         than 21 days after this notice is sent out and they will  be  taken
         into account by the Tribunal. The directions in paragraph  5  above
         must be complied with in every case.

         7.   If this Tribunal decides to set  aside  the  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal for  error  of  law,  further  directions  will
         accompany the notice of that decision."

On 12 June 2020 submissions were received from Mr Draycott on behalf of  the
appellant and on 16 June 2020 submissions were received from Mr  Melvin  for
the  Secretary  of  State.  There  was  no  reply  by  Mr  Draycott  to  the
respondent's  submissions,  in  accordance  with  paragraph   5(c)   of   my
directions of 29 May 2020.

In the written submissions, Mr Melvin stated  that  the  respondent  had  no
objection to the error of law matter being decided on the papers without  an
oral hearing, whilst Mr Draycott did object. I have had  careful  regard  to
Mr Draycott's objections and have considered Rule 5A as  inserted  into  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in that regard. I  note  that
Rule 5A(3) makes it clear that a decision to determine a  matter  without  a
hearing is not restricted to the conditions in 5A(2) and it remains open  to
the Tribunal to apply Rule 34.

Mr Draycott's main objection  to  the  appeal  being  determined  without  a
hearing is based for the most part upon his amended grounds of appeal  which
raised procedural  irregularity.  He  asserts  that  such  matters  are  not
appropriate to be determined on the papers.  He  asserts  further  that  the
respondent ought first to be directed to file  a  response  to  the  amended
grounds and that the appellant then submit a  response  to  that  reply.  Mr
Draycott relies upon Rule 31 of the Upper Tribunal rules in  asserting  that
the respondent was required to lodge a response. However,  Rule  31  relates
to judicial review proceedings. The relevant rule for statutory  appeals  is
Rule 24, whereby the respondent "may" file a response. As noted  above,  UTJ
Hemingway directed the respondent on two occasions to make her  response  to
the amended grounds clear, but that has  not  happened.  An  explanation  of
sorts is provided by Mr Melvin at [9] of his submissions. There has, in  any
event, been ample time for the respondent to respond and I do  not  consider
the absence of such a response to be a reason for  further  postponing  this
matter.  Further,  the  respondent  has  made  her  position  clear  in  the
submissions of 16 June 2020 from  Mr  Melvin,  whereby  he  has  adopted  my
provisional view set out in my directions of 24 April 2020, that  any  error
of law identified in the grounds is  immaterial  given  the  fact  that  the
appellant was a British citizen at the time  of  the  hearing  before  Judge
Henderson. Mr Melvin has decided not to address the individual  grounds.  Mr
Draycott was therefore aware  of  the  respondent's  position  and  has  not
sought to address my provisional view further.

In any event, I find Mr Draycott's objection  to  the  error  of  law  being
decided on the papers provides no satisfactory reason as  to  why,  in  this
particular case, the appellant would be prejudiced  by  the  absence  of  an
oral hearing, particularly given the findings  I  have  made  below  on  the
error of law. I have the benefit of detailed  grounds  of  appeal  from  the
appellant, together with Mr  Draycott's  two  sets  of  submissions  and  Mr
Melvin's submissions, and I can find no reason why a  consideration  of  the
grounds and submissions, as opposed to hearing from  counsel  in  person  or
remotely, would prejudice the  appellant  in  this  particular  case.  I  am
therefore satisfied that I am able to proceed to decide  the  error  of  law
issue without a hearing and do not consider that  that  gives  rise  to  any
unfairness on either side.

I  therefore  turn  to  the  grounds  of  appeal.   Although  the  grant  of
permission by the First-tier Tribunal did not exclude any  of  the  grounds,
the focus of the grant  was  on  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  evidence
relating to the risk of  suicide.  Whilst  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
medical evidence was, for the most part, a thorough one, it is notable  that
no mention was made of the records of the appellant's suicide  attempts  and
indeed the judge proceeded on the basis that there was no  evidence  of  any
such attempts. At [106] she referred to a lack of  any  earlier  history  of
self-harm corroborating the appellant's claim recorded  in  the  Yarls  Wood
medical history for 21 January 2016.  Although,  as  the  judge  found,  the
evidence does not include any  records  of  attempts  at  self-harm  by  the
appellant prior to that date, aside from the appellant's own claim  in  that
regard, there is evidence of her having overdosed  on  two  occasions  after
that date, on 16 June 2016 and 29 September  2016.  The  first  incident  is
recorded at page 125 of the appellant's bundle in  the  Yarls  Wood  report,
and confirmed by a report from Bedford Hospital at page 239. That led to  an
assessment by Dr Ward on 20 June 2016, in a Rule 35 report, that  there  had
been a significant deterioration in the appellant's mental health  condition
and that the risk  of  suicide  in  detention  was  very  high.  The  second
incident is confirmed in a letter from Bedford Hospital at page  14  of  the
bundle. It was  following  that  second  incident  that  the  appellant  was
referred to Solace for psychological support, as  mentioned  in  the  letter
dated 8 May 2017 to which the judge referred at [109].  In  the  absence  of
any record by the judge of having taken account of the appellant's  attempts
at self-harm, it seems to me that her assessment of the  evidence  at  [106]
and her conclusions arising out of that evidence are therefore flawed.

Whilst that may not in itself be a reason to  conclude  that  the  appellant
would be at risk of committing suicide if returned to Kenya, and indeed  may
fall well short of such a conclusion, it seems to me that the matter has  to
be looked at again and that a full and proper assessment would  have  to  be
made in the light of all the evidence. In addition, the fact that the  judge
reached her conclusions without a full understanding of the  extent  of  the
appellant's  mental  health  condition   undoubtedly   impacted   upon   her
assessment of the evidence as a whole, as asserted in the second  ground  of
appeal. Although there were discrepancies identified by  the  judge  in  the
appellant's evidence,  in  regard  to  her  claimed  relationships  and  her
sexuality, and in regard to her claim of being attacked in Kenya, which  may
well have justified an adverse credibility finding, I do not  consider  that
the judge's conclusions can be sustained  when  they  appear  to  have  been
reached  without  a  full  and  complete  assessment  of   the   appellant's
psychological state.

In  the  circumstances  it  seems  to  me  that  the  judge's  findings  and
conclusions on the evidence are infected by errors of law and cannot  stand.
Having said that, I maintain  the  view  I  expressed  provisionally  in  my
directions of 24 April 2020, namely that even if Judge  Henderson  had  made
errors of law in her decision of 2 June  2017  on  the  grounds  upon  which
permission was sought, any error would not be material as the appellant,  as
a British citizen, simply cannot succeed in her appeal. Mr  Melvin,  in  his
submissions, agreed with my provisional view. Mr Draycott  has  not  engaged
with the matter, despite being directed to do so on two occasions.

At the time of the hearing  before  Judge  Henderson  the  appellant  was  a
British citizen. Although  the  appeal  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
appellant's British citizenship had been nullified in March  2013  and  that
she was therefore not a British citizen at that time, the  nullity  decision
was subsequently withdrawn  in  February  2018  with  the  result  that  her
British citizenship, acquired by way of a certificate of  naturalisation  in
May 2008, remained intact and remains so  unless  and  until  a  deprivation
order is made further to an unsuccessful appeal.  Clearly  the  judge  could
not be blamed for proceeding on the basis that  the  appellant  was  a  non-
British national. However, the decision that she reached, namely to  dismiss
the appeal, was inevitable given that the appellant was in  fact  a  British
national. As such, she could not meet the requirements  within  the  Refugee
Convention as a refugee, since she  was  not  outside  the  country  of  her
nationality, and she could not succeed on human  rights  grounds  since  she
would not, as a British national, be required to leave the UK.

Even if I am wrong  in  considering  that  the  withdrawal  of  the  nullity
decision had retrospective effect, and in concluding that the appellant  was
a British citizen at the time of the hearing  before  Judge  Henderson,  the
fact remains that if the judge's decision is set aside on the basis  of  the
errors of law identified above, it can only be  re-made  by  dismissing  the
appeal given that the appellant  is  a  British  citizen  and  cannot  be  a
refugee nor can she be compelled to leave the UK.  Whilst I am mindful  that
such a view does not provide  an  opportunity  for  further  directions  and
submissions on the re-making of the decision, as per [7]  of  my  directions
of 29 May 2020, I cannot foresee any other  outcome.  My  understanding  was
that Mr Draycott's concerns in regard to a lack of such an  opportunity  was
that the adverse findings of Judge  Henderson  would  remain  in  place  and
could subsequently be relied upon by the respondent.  However,  that  is  no
longer the case as I have  set  aside  those  findings  and  accordingly  no
unfairness arises.



DECISION

The  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  contains  material  errors  of   law.
However, for the reasons given above, the decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
stands.  Alternatively,  the  decision  is  set  aside  and  is  re-made  by
dismissing the appeal.




    Anonymity

    The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 6 July 2020
