
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05836/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 April 2019                     |On 11 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                   Miss DQ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss E Rutherford of Counsel, instructed by TRP
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on [~] 1990. This is her
appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss her
appeal on asylum, human rights and humanitarian protection grounds.  The
judge granting permission, Judge Saffer, identified the principal ground
being that the First-tier Tribunal judge who heard her appeal, Judge Nixon,
failed to consider fully the expert's report from Sonia Landesmann. Judge
Saffer specifically referred in his grant of permission to the possible
misreading of that report "... regarding the dates of information upon
which she relied such as to call into question the finding regarding the
sufficiency of protection".  Judge Saffer allowed the appellant to argue
all grounds before the Upper Tribunal. However, the identified ground
appeared to him to be the strongest.

Background

2.   The appellant has a long immigration history and there is a
significant background to these proceedings.  She claims to have left
Albania in June 2014 and spent six months in France.  She came to the UK in
December 2014 and claimed asylum as long ago as 13 January 2015.  The basis
of her claim was that she claimed to have been the victim of domestic abuse
from her husband. She therefore claimed to need protection as a lone female
who had been the victim of domestic violence.  She claimed that if she were
returned to Albania she would be pursued by her husband or other persons
who would find her of ongoing interest.  She claimed that she would not be
able to seek the protection of the police in Albania. In any event the
authorities in that country would not be able to provide the degree of
protection that, in international law, she would be entitled to. The
appellant did not trust the police as they had not properly dealt with her
mother-in-law's claim in the past.

3.   The appellant was interviewed about the claim on 19 June 2015.  The
respondent, however, rejected her application. She subsequently appealed
the respondent's refusal of asylum/humanitarian protection to the First-
tier Tribunal (FTT).

4.   Before the FTT, the appellant provided a witness statement, setting
out fully the basis of her claim and the reason she claimed to continue to
fear her former husband, as well as the expert report from Sonia
Landesmann.  The parties also referred to objective evidence in the FTT,
largely supplied by the respondent and, in particular, the Country
Information and Guidance Note (CIGN) dated April 2016. That dealt with the
difficulties facing women who have been, or may in the future be, subject
to domestic violence.

5.   The procedural history of this matter is as follows:

       . On 17 October 2017 Judge Nixon decided to dismiss the appeal
         following the hearing in Birmingham.

       . On 8 November 2017 the FTT's decision was promulgated.

       . On 31 January 2018 the application for permission to appeal was
         made. There is no issue now as to the timeliness of that
         application.

       . On 16 November 2018 permission to appeal was granted by Judge
         Saffer. There is no explanation for that additional delay.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

6.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, submissions were made by
both representatives.  Miss Rutherford, who appeared for the appellant,
said that her grounds were lengthy but, helpfully, she summarised them in
her succinct submissions.  She said that Judge Nixon did not have full
regard to the background material including the expert report dated April
2016 to which I referred.  She said that in rejecting Sonia Landesmann's
report Judge Nixon had not fully referred to all the materials that Sonia
Landesmann had considered. She had mistakenly referred to it as being less
up-to-date than the CIGN when, in fact, Sonia Landesmann's report was the
"last word" on the matters referred to in it. She should have relied on
that up-to-date information in coming to her decision.  Miss Rutherford
acknowledged that Judge Nixon had referred to the CIGN and to Ms
Landesmann's evidence. However, she did not accept that all the references
were accurate.

7.   Assuming that the appellant had been the victim of domestic violence,
as the respondent had done, the real issue was whether she was unwilling or
unable to seek assistance from the Albanian police. The appellant had given
as her principal reason for not seeking their assistance in Albania, the
fact that she had witnessed the poor treatment of her mother-in-law in
relation to abuse inflicted on her by her father-in-law.

8.   Miss Rutherford invited me to conclude that, on the evidence, her
client was entitled to refugee status/humanitarian protection. In the event
that it was necessary to go on to consider internal flight, the appellant's
husband was said to have been a powerful figure of financial means who
would be able to find the appellant "wherever she lived". Furthermore,
shelters and other accommodation, potentially available to her client,
would not be of the required standard. There were significant hurdles which
had to be overcome before the FTT would be able to conclude that there was
an internal flight alternative to seeking international protection.

9.   Ms Kiss, who appeared for the respondent, said that she accepted that
there were some mistakes in the decision in relation to dates but she said
that they did not really go to the heart of the decision. Where Judge Nixon
criticised the expert, there appeared to be some justification, given Ms
Landesmann's qualifications and experience.  It was not obvious what
experience Ms Landesmann actually had.  She had clearly acted for a number
of people in the past, some of whose appeals had been successful.
Generally speaking, women who were subject to domestic violence were able
to resort to the protection of the authorities in Albania and, furthermore,
she agreed with Judge Nixon's finding in relation to internal flight.

Discussion

10.  The main issue before the Upper Tribunal is whether Sonia Landesmann's
report was sufficiently considered by Judge Nixon. If it was not, the issue
then is whether with fuller treatment, she might have reached a different
decision.

11.  This being an appellate jurisdiction, it is no part of its function to
gainsay findings of fact made after hearing witnesses give evidence and
having considered the submissions.  Both parties were represented before
the FTT.  In support of Miss Rutherford's submission, the expert report of
Ms Landesmann was not dismissed out of hand by the respondent's
representative in the FTT, indeed, the respondent accepted the appellant
had been a victim of domestic violence.  It was not submitted that no
weight should attach to the report. Therefore, it was incumbent on Judge
Nixon to properly deal with the report. It was open to the respondent to
seek a report showing that the appellant had not been a victim of domestic
violence or, having reached the conclusion that she had been, that the
future risk of being a victim of domestic violence was so small as to be
ignored.

Conclusions

12.  Having weighed up the arguments, I have decided that this was a
decision open to Judge Nixon on the evidence before her. Sonia Landesmann's
report was clearly a matter that she had to consider and did consider. If
Judge Nixon had dealt with the report more fully she would have probably
reached the same conclusion in any event.

13.  As far as credibility was concerned, Judge Nixon was entitled to
reject the credibility of the appellant's account. In particular, she
considered the fact that the appellant had a long period in France before
she decided to come to the UK. This was long after she had been the victim
of any domestic abuse. This tended to call for an explanation as to her
failure to claim asylum at the first opportunity and cast doubt on her
reasons for not going to the police in Albania.  There is evidence
(summarised in the CIGN quoted at paragraph 22 of Judge Nixon 's decision)
to the effect that the police in Albania help individuals such as the
appellant. In addition, there is evidence that there are shelters available
for women, for example in Tirana. I do not underestimate the hardship that
the appellant, as a single mother, may suffer on returning to Albania,
particularly since she now has an additional child.  However, overall, I am
satisfied that Judge Nixon demonstrated that she had regard to all the key
factors in the case in reaching her decision, including the substance of Dr
Landesmann's report. Judge Nixon engaged fully with that report, for
example, at numbered paragraph 19 (which ought to be numbered 22) where she
made extensive reference to the report. She was clearly wrong to refer to
"more recent evidence" but nevertheless the substance of her findings
appears open to her.

14.  For these reasons I am satisfied there was no material error of law in
the decision of the FTT.



Notice of Decision

The appeal by  the  appellant  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed.  The
decision of the FTT to dismiss the appeal against the respondent's  decision
therefore stands.

An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal  and  I  continue
that direction as follows:



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   W. E. Hanbury Date 7 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 7 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
