
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05945/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th July 2019                     |On 19th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     HA
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pacey, promulgated on 24th June  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 6th June 2018.  In the determination, the judge dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iran, and was born on  22nd  July
    1996.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  24th
    April 2018 refusing his claim for asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is  that  he  is  a  member  of  a
    particular social group, because he is a gay Iranian man who would face
    persecution if returned, and additionally he is also  an  atheist,  who
    would be ill-treated upon return as a non-religious  person,  which  is
    forbidden in Iran.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge noted how the Appellant in his screening interview  has  said
    that he held no religion and that he would be subject to persecution as
    a non-religious person if returned to Iran.  He made no mention at that
    stage that he was also a gay  person.   During  his  asylum  interview,
    however, he stated  that  he  was  a  danger  also  because  he  was  a
    homosexual and feared  the  government  given  that  homosexuality  was
    punishable by death.  He  had  not  mentioned  this  at  his  screening
    interview because he did not know anything about  the  country  he  was
    coming to.  The Appellant had then explained how he had a boyfriend  in
    the UK by the name of [FS], with whom he had been in  relationship  for
    about one and a half months.  He also had three  serious  relationships
    which he went on to describe in  evidence  before  the  Tribunal.   The
    judge did not find the Appellant to be credible because the appellant's
    explanation that he had not  mentioned  his  homosexuality  during  his
    screening interview, because he did not know the country he was  coming
    to, was not plausible.  As the judge explained, "if he did not know the
    UK approach to homosexuality ... he could not  have  known  if  the  UK
    adopted as punitive an approach to gay people as did Iran....  For  all
    he knew he could have been travelling from  the  frying  pan  into  the
    fire" (paragraph 68).

 5. On the other hand, the judge observed that if the Appellant  was  aware
    of the actual UK approach to homosexuality, "then there was  no  reason
    for him not to have mentioned his sexuality at the screening interview"
    (paragraph 69).

 6. The judge was also not impressed by the witnesses before the  Tribunal.
    In short, the Appellant's claim was rejected wholesale.  The appeal was
    dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  had  engaged  in  a
    material error of law in relation to the evidence of  a  Miss  [L]  and
    that of Mr [S] whose credibility  had  been  wrongly  impugned  by  the
    judge.  There had been apparently a discrepancy between to the oral and
    the written evidence of Miss [L], but this discrepancy had not been put
    to the witness, and if this was so then this was contrary to the  rules
    of natural justice.

 8. On 23rd November 2018 permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 9. At  the  hearing  before  me  on  5th  July  2019,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Howard, who adopted the grounds of  application.   He
    submitted that if the judge was concerned about the discrepancy in  the
    oral and written evidence of Miss  [L],  then  this  should  have  been
    explored by the Tribunal, because in her oral evidence,  Miss  [L]  had
    said that she had "not met [F]", whereas in her  written  evidence  she
    had said that "she also knew his previous partner, [F]" (paragraph 34).
     Secondly, Mr Howard submitted that if one looks at the evidence of  Mr
    [S] (at page 14 of the Appellant's bundle).  He makes  it  quite  clear
    that he is the director of a voluntary organisation called Persian LGBT
    Advisory Services, where it provides "voluntary social  activities  for
    LGBT asylum seekers".  He explains that the appellant had contacted him
    via Facebook on 9th June 2016.  He invited the Appellant to  meet  with
    him, and after a conversation he had come to the view that "I am  aware
    the Appellant is openly active on Facebook page which I would refer  to
    as an online activist where he shares  information  on  LGBT  community
    using his Facebook page...".  On that basis that the judge was wrong to
    have impugned his credibility.

10. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that the issues that were  before  the
    judge, both in relation to the Appellant's atheism and  his  homosexual
    tendencies, were not new issues.  If  evidence  was  collected  by  the
    Appellant between the asylum interview and the Tribunal hearing,  in  a
    manner that the Appellant himself chose to do, then he should have been
    prepared to deal with it on the basis of oral  testimony.   These  were
    not new points.  The witnesses  were  not  people  whose  evidence  had
    previously been accepted.  Both  cases  were  simply  black  and  white
    discrepancy cases where the judge was entitled to say  that  she  would
    not attach any significant weight to  such  evidence,  because  as  put
    before the Tribunal, the evidence was not persuasive.

No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as  follows.   First,  it  is  simply  not  correct  to  say  that  the
    discrepancy in the oral and witness statement evidence of Miss [L]  was
    something that the judge should have probed  herself  with  a  view  to
    ascertaining exactly what Miss [L] knew about Mr [F].  The judge  noted
    that in her oral evidence Miss  [L]  stated  she  was  aware  that  the
    Appellant had a relationship in the UK "but had not met [F]".  Then the
    judge noted how in her witness statement, Miss [L] had stated that  she
    became friends with the Appellant when she met him  in  Calais  at  the
    "the jungle" in April 2016, and "when they  became  strong  friends  he
    told her of his fear of persecution and that he was  an  atheist.   She
    also knew his previous partner, [F]" (paragraph 34).  It  was  for  the
    Appellant's representative  to  probe  this  matter  further.   As  the
    evidence stood, the judge was entitled to conclude that "Miss  [L]  has
    also been inconsistent in a written and oral account of whether she had
    met [F]" (paragraph 78).

12. Second, as far as Mr [S]'s evidence is concerned, I note that he  is  a
    director of the voluntary organisation  called  Persian  LGBT  Advisory
    Services.  He wrote in terms that he was "aware the Appellant is openly
    active on Facebook page".  He had stated that "I have acknowledged that
    the Appellant has made  a  strong  relationship  with  the  wider  LGBT
    communities ...".  He had further stated that "I have  also  seen  that
    the Appellant has participated openly at this year's  LGBT  Pride  with
    Christian LGBT parade ...".  He ended his statement by  declaring  that
    "based on information that has been provided by  the  Appellant  I  can
    confirm that he is homosexual and would be subject of  persecution...".
    (See page 14 of the Appellant's bundle).  The manner in which the judge
    dealt with this evidence was one which was entirely open to her to  do.
    What the judge states is that she would "attach very little  weight  to
    Mr [S]'s evidence" because "he said at the hearing that he had attended
    court since 2008 to support gay asylum seekers".

13. Nevertheless as the judge observed, "his support did not,  on  his  own
    evidence, comprise independent verification of each  Appellant's  claim
    since he took the claim of each at face value,  entirely  taking  their
    word for it without doing anything to verify their claim, in the way of
    what might be termed 'due diligence'.   While  he  may  well  be  well-
    meaning, the uncritical nature of his  support  means  it  is  of  very
    little probative value" (paragraph 79).

14. There is nothing in this particular analysis of  the  judge's  detailed
    explanation that sits ill at ease with what the witness himself  states
    in his statement of 4th June  2018  (at  page  14  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle) when he makes it clear that  "I  am  aware"  or  that  "I  have
    acknowledged".  In any  event,  what  the  judge  is  referring  to  is
    actually what Mr [S] himself said in his evidence  where  he  makes  it
    clear that as a director of the voluntary organisation he supports  gay
    asylum seekers taking each  claim  at  face  value.   Accordingly,  the
    decision of the judge in this particular case was clear, comprehensive,
    and well-reasoned and there is no error of law in it.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law.  The decision shall stand.

16. An anonymity order is made.

17. The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of
their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th August 2019



