
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05855/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 January 2020                    |On 28 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    A p l
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu, instructed by NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure of publication of any matter likely to lead members  of  the
    public identifying the  appellant.   A  failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam who was born on 20 May 2001.  She
    is, therefore, 18 years of age.

 3. The appellant claims to have left Vietnam by lorry on 15 February  2018
    and from there, travelled to China where she remained for  two  months.
    She then flew on a false passport  to  an  unknown  country  where  she
    remained for a short period of time  before  travelling  to  France  by
    lorry and from there on to the UK.  She claims to have arrived  in  the
    UK, therefore, probably sometime in late March or early April 2018.

 4. On 18 April 2018, the appellant claimed asylum.  She claimed  that  she
    was a Hoa Hao Buddhist and was at risk of persecution as  this  was  an
    unregistered religion in Vietnam.  She claimed that in  December  2014,
    she and her parents were arrested and detained by the police  following
    a memorial service for  a  deceased  aunt  in  their  home.  They  were
    released after eighteen days.  Subsequently, she claimed that in  2016,
    her step-father had been killed by the authorities having been  stabbed
    during a protest  which  he  had  organised  against  the  Government's
    persecution of their religion.  Finally, she claimed that she was again
    arrested by the authorities on 10 August 2017  and  detained  for  five
    months during which time she was subject to a number of beatings.   She
    claimed she had been arrested because the police  had  discovered  that
    she was distributing leaflets in her village which protested about  the
    actions of the authorities, including the killing of  her  step-father.
    She was released in February 2018, she  believes,  because  her  mother
    paid a bribe.  She claims that she was told to  report  to  the  police
    twice a week but, instead, decided that it was too dangerous to  remain
    in Vietnam and her mother arranged for her to travel to the UK.

 5. On 9 June 2019, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Arts 2, 3 and  8  of  the
    ECHR.  Whilst the Secretary of State accepted that the appellant was  a
    Hoa Hao Buddhist, the Secretary of State did not accept the appellant's
    account of what she had claimed had happened to her in Vietnam.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  O'Rourke
    dismissed the appellant's  appeal.   He  accepted,  as  the  respondent
    conceded, that the appellant was a Hoa Hao Buddhist.  He also  accepted
    that she and her family may have suffered harassment by the authorities
    in Vietnam.  However, he did not accept the appellant's claim that  she
    had been arrested and detained on the two occasions  in  December  2014
    and August 2017, or  that  her  step-father  had  been  killed  by  the
    authorities.

 7. The judge's reasons for his adverse findings are principally  found  in
    paras 22 and 23 of his determination as follows:

         "22. Credibility.  I do not find the Appellant a  credible  witness
             because  she  was  inclined,  when  confronted  with  apparent
             inconsistencies, or gaps in her evidence, to change or add  to
             her evidence, on the 'spur of the moment', as follows:

                  i.   When challenged as to whether  she  should  have  had
                  documentation  from  the  police  as  to   her   reporting
                  conditions, she, for the first time, said that she had, in
                  fact, been issued with such documentation and had  brought
                  it with her, from Vietnam, to UK, but, on arrival here had
                  lost it.  This query followed  on  from  questions  as  to
                  whether she had any documentation about her  step-father's
                  death.  It appeared to me that she clearly felt  (although
                  not a  strict  legal  requirement)  somehow  'obliged'  to
                  answer  in  the  affirmative  to  at  least  some  of  the
                  questioning of this nature and hence made up  her  account
                  of having brought the police documents with her to UK, but
                  then, somewhat conveniently, losing them.  She  was  first
                  interviewed within,  on  her  account,  two  days  of  her
                  arrival in UK, having promptly been able to stay with  her
                  mother's  friend  and  having  had  legal   representation
                  immediately arranged for her [Q.3.3  screening  interview]
                  and it seems inherently unlikely, with  that  prompt  care
                  and advice that the importance of such documents,  if  she
                  in fact had them, would not have been at the forefront  of
                  her mind and that of her  advisors.   She  was  asked,  at
                  Q.6.2, if she had any documents to support her  claim  and
                  she said she had none, making no reference to  having  had
                  some, but them being lost.

                  ii.  When the inconsistency as  to  her  distributing  the
                  leaflets at  night  to  avoid  detection,  but  yet  their
                  contents making reference to her father-in-law was pressed
                  on her, she, for the first time, said  that  in  fact  the
                  leaflet  made  no  direct  reference  to  him,  in  direct
                  contradiction of her earlier evidence.

                  iii. She, for the first time in  her  statement  completed
                  days before this Hearing, makes reference to having phoned
                  home 'shortly after arriving in  UK'  and  speaking  to  a
                  stranger.  While she asserted that she had  provided  this
                  information before, it is not in her earlier statement, or
                  in her interview notes, both of which lost post-date  this
                  alleged event and I consider that her belated reference to
                  it is an attempt to embellish her account.

                  iv.  I note her age and relative immaturity, but both  the
                  Respondent and this Tribunal is  entitled  to  expect  any
                  witness, even of this relatively young age,  to  tell  the
                  truth.

         23.  Events in Vietnam.   The  Appellant's  account  of  events  in
             Vietnam  is  broadly  externally  consistent  with   objective
             evidence as to the State's treatment of unregistered  Hoa  Hao
             Buddhists.  The CPIN sets out that they can face  restrictions
             on religious freedom and if they come to the attention of  the
             authorities,  for  perceived  anti-government  activities,  be
             subject to persecution [36]37], to include  unfair  trial  and
             detention [54].  The Amnesty International  report  'Prisoners
             of Conscience in  Vietnam'  May  2019  gives  several  similar
             examples of mistreatment of Hoa Hao followers, who have sought
             to protest against the State's treatment [77,  81].   However,
             whether or not it can be concluded that  such  similar  events
             happened to the Appellant must be dependent on the credibility
             of her account and as I have found, I do not  consider  her  a
             credible witness.  While it is accepted by the Respondent that
             she is a member of the Hoa Hao sect, that  of  itself  is  not
             enough to found a claim for protection.  The  CPIN  refers  to
             harassment and restrictions on religious practice, but  unless
             individuals have previously  come  to  the  attention  of  the
             authorities, for perceived anti-government activity,  Hoa  Hao
             are not subject to persecution or at  risk  of  serious  harm,
             sufficient to engage the Convention.  It is possible, I accept
             that she and her family may have suffered some harassment from
             the authorities in the past, but based on, firstly,  her  lack
             of credibility and secondly, the  inherent  implausibility  of
             her account of the leaflet incident, I do not accept that  she
             has been subject to arrest and detention by  the  authorities.
             I find the leaflet incident account to be implausible because,
             firstly, despite up to fifteen people being involved  in  this
             incident, only she carried out  the  distribution  and  nobody
             else was apparently arrested and secondly that she  should  be
             concerned about detection, distributing them at  night,  when,
             however, the leaflet apparently directly linked to her father-
             in-law.  As she was, at the time, aged just over  sixteen  and
             living with her mother, it  is,  even  without  attempting  to
             'second-guess'  the  actions   of   the   Vietnamese   police,
             inherently implausible that at  very  least,  her  mother  too
             would have been arrested, bearing in mind her stated  previous
             record with the authorities.  I consider this account to be an
             effort to embellish  her  assertion  as  to  the  authorities'
             perceived interest in her."

 8. At para [24], the judge concluded:

         "The Appellant is simply, as accepted, a Hoa Hao Buddhist which, of
         itself, does not engage the Convention.  I do not accept  that  she
         is at enhanced risk, due  to  any  previous  involvement  with  the
         authorities."

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On 10
    November  2019,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (DJ  Shaerf)  granted   the
    appellant permission to appeal.

10. On 26 September 2019, the Secretary of State filed  a  rule  24  notice
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

Discussion

11. Mr Dieu, who represented the appellant, sought to  focus  the  somewhat
    discursive grounds under three  main  headings  to  which  he  added  a
    further three points, arising from the  grounds,  as  a  result  of  my
    raising with him whether those  points  were  still  relied  upon.   Mr
    Howells, who represented the Secretary of State,  made  submissions  on
    each of the six points in support of upholding the judge's decision.  I
    will take each of the points (number (1)-(6)) in order.

12. Point 1: Mr Dieu submitted that the judge had failed properly  to  take
    into account the background evidence which  was  consistent  with,  and
    supportive of, the appellant's  account  before  reaching  his  adverse
    credibility finding.  He submitted that  the  judge  made  his  adverse
    credibility finding in para [22] but  only  considered  the  background
    evidence in para [23] and as was clear from his use of the words "as  I
    have found" in para [23], he had already reached an adverse credibility
    finding before considering the supportive background evidence.

13. In response, Mr Howells  submitted  that  the  judge  had  applied  the
    structured approach envisaged by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  KB  and  AH
    (credibility - structured approach) Pakistan [2017] UKUT 491  (IAC)  by
    considering  the  sufficiency  of  detail  of  the  appellant's  claim;
    internal  consistency;  external  consistency;  and  plausibility.   Mr
    Howells submitted that the judge had considered the background evidence
    in para [23] and had noted that the appellant's account of  events  was
    "broadly externally consistent" with that evidence.  The fact  that  it
    was so, Mr Howells submitted, did  not  oblige  the  judge  to  make  a
    favourable credibility finding.

14. In my judgement, a fair reading of the judge's determination  does  not
    support Mr Dieu's submission that the judge failed to  have  regard  to
    the background evidence in reaching his adverse  credibility  findings.
    In my judgment, paras [22] and [23] have to be read together.  It would
    be an unduly myopic reading of the judge's  determination  to  conclude
    that, despite the submission made about  the  background  evidence  and
    despite his clear statement in para [23] that the  appellant's  account
    was "broadly"  consistent  with  the  background  evidence,  the  judge
    nevertheless ignored that evidence in reaching  his  adverse  findings.
    Of necessity, the judge had to, at least in part, compartmentalise  his
    reasoning.

15. Leaving aside the integrity of that reasoning for the present, in  para
    [22] he identified a number of inconsistencies and implausible  aspects
    of the appellant's evidence.  He repeated those points,  in  particular
    in relation to the leaflet incident, in para [23] after  his  reference
    to the background evidence and that it  was  "broadly  ...  consistent"
    with the appellant's account.  The judge went on, in fact, in para [23]
    to accept that it was "possible" that the appellant and her family "may
    have suffered some harassment from the authorities in the past".  I  do
    not accept that this experienced judge failed to have regard to all the
    evidence, including the background documents when reaching his  overall
    conclusion at the end of para [23] and also in para [24]  that  he  did
    not accept the appellant's account of her previous involvement with the
    authorities in Vietnam and  that  she  was  as  a  result  at  risk  of
    persecution on return.  Consequently, I reject this ground relied  upon
    by Mr Dieu.

16. Point 2: Mr Dieu submitted that the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account the  appellant's  young  age  and  maturity  in  assessing  her
    evidence.  He reminded me that she was 13 years of age when she claimed
    her home was raided and she was arrested in December 2014.  She was  15
    years of age at the time of the death of her step-father  in  2016  and
    she was 16 years of age when she claimed that  she  was  arrested  when
    distributing leaflets in her village.  She was just 18 years old at the
    date of her interview.  Mr Dieu acknowledged that in para [22(iv)]  the
    judge noted "her age and relative immaturity" but, Mr  Dieu  submitted,
    he did so only to state that "even of  this  relatively  young  age"  a
    witness  could  be  expected  "to  tell  the  truth".   That,  Mr  Dieu
    submitted, missed the point which was that her age and  immaturity  was
    relevant in deciding whether her account, if it appeared  inconsistent,
    might have been affected by her age.

17. It was undoubtedly incumbent upon the judge, so far as relevant  to  an
    assessment of the appellant's evidence, to take into  account  her  age
    and maturity (see the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 and
    the Senior President Tribunals' Practice Direction:  Child,  Vulnerable
    Adult and Sensitive Witnesses).  That obligation not only arises in the
    context of a child but of a vulnerable adult.  In the Upper  Tribunal's
    recent decision in SB (vulnerable adult: credibility) Ghana [2019] UKUT
    398 (IAC), the Tribunal dealt with the  issue  in  the  context  of  an
    appellant who  had  been  treated  as  a  vulnerable  witness  and  the
    submission was made that the judge had not given effect to the guidance
    when making findings of fact, in particular in relation to credibility.
     The President (Lane J) said this at [60]-[62]:

         "60. ... The fact that a judicial fact-finder decides to  treat  an
             appellant or witness as a vulnerable adult does not mean  that
             any adverse credibility finding in respect of that  person  is
             thereby to be regarded as inherently problematic and thus open
             to challenge on appeal.

         61.  By applying the Joint Presidential  Guidance  Note,  No  2  of
             2010, two aims are achieved.  First, the judicial  fact-finder
             will ensure the best practicable  conditions  for  the  person
             concerned to give their evidence. Secondly, the  vulnerability
             will also be taken into account when assessing the credibility
             of that evidence.

         62.  So far as the second aim is concerned, the Guidance  makes  it
             plain that it is for the judicial fact-finder to determine the
             relationship between the vulnerability and the  evidence  that
             is adduced:

                  '...

                  3.    The  consequences  of  such   vulnerability   differ
                      according to the degree to  which  an  individual  is
                      affected. It is a matter for  you  to  determine  the
                      extent of an identified vulnerability, the effect  on
                      the quality of the evidence  and  the  weight  to  be
                      placed  on  such  vulnerability  in   assessing   the
                      evidence before you, taking into account the evidence
                      as a whole'."

18. Applying that approach in this appeal, it is clear to me that the judge
    acted fully in accordance with that second aim.

19. The judge specifically noted the importance of taking into account that
    the appellant was of a "relatively young age" at para [22(iv)].

20. In his submissions before the  judge,  Mr  Dieu  had  relied  upon  the
    appellant's young age and lack of  maturity  in  two  respects  of  her
    evidence.  First, it should be  taken  into  account  when  determining
    whether the fact that she had given inconsistent evidence as to whether
    her step-father was referred to in the leaflets  that  she  distributed
    was a matter that called into question the credibility of  her  account
    (see the submission at para [21(iv)(d)]).   Secondly,  Mr  Dieu  relied
    upon it as something the judge should consider when determining whether
    to take into account, as adverse to the appellant's  credibility,  that
    she had mentioned for the first time that she had spoken to her  mother
    shortly after she arrived in the UK and a  stranger  had  answered  the
    phone (see para [21(iv)(f)]).

21. Both of these points were relied upon by the  judge  in  assessing  the
    appellant's credibility at  para  [22(ii)]  and  [22(iii)]  immediately
    prior to the judge's self-direction that he should  have  regard  to  a
    relatively young age in para [22(iv)].  There is no  doubt,  therefore,
    that the judge was well-aware of the submissions made by  Mr  Dieu  and
    the importance of  not  reaching  an  adverse  credibility  finding  by
    relying on matters which might be explained by the appellant's relative
    young age.  I am not persuaded that the judge fell into error.

22. As regards the  leafleting  issue,  this  was  not  a  case  where  the
    appellant omitted to mention something which might be explained by  her
    young age when the leafleting incident was  claimed  to  have  occurred
    when she was 16 years of age.  While the point relied upon by the judge
    in relation to her first mention  of  the  phone  call  to  her  mother
    shortly after arriving in  the  UK  and  speaking  to  a  stranger  is,
    potentially, a matter that might be seen as an oversight to  which  age
    might be relevant, it was, in my judgement, well within  the  range  of
    reasonable conclusion for the judge to take  the  view  that  when  the
    appellant came to the UK and was interviewed she was 18 years  of  age.
    He was reasonably entitled to take  the  view  that  her  age  did  not
    explain the oversight.  (I will return to  whether  it  was  indeed  an
    oversight below.)  In any event, it is not easy to see why her  age  at
    the date of interview could rationally explain an omission subsequently
    corrected in her witness statement  two  months  later  in  July  2019.
    Consequently, I reject Mr Dieu's submissions on this point.

23. Point 3: Mr Dieu submitted that the judge had failed to engage with his
    submissions made on behalf of the appellant.  Those submissions are set
    out at length by the judge at para [21(i)]-[21(xi)].  Mr Dieu submitted
    that as a result the judge's decision lacked adequate reasoning.

24. In reaching his decision, the judge was required to  consider  all  the
    relevant evidence  and  reach  findings  on  all  relevant  matters  in
    determining the appellant's claim.  It is axiomatic that the judge  had
    to give adequate reasons for his findings.  Here, the central issue was
    the appellant's credibility.  The majority  of  Mr  Dieu's  submissions
    were directed to how the judge should assess the appellant's  evidence.
    Many of the submissions were directed to countering reasons relied upon
    by the respondent in the  refusal  decision  (see  in  particular  para
    [21(iv)]).  In fact, as can be seen from the judge's  reasons  in  para
    [22]-[23] set out above,  the  judge  relied  upon  three  matters,  in
    particular, as being adverse to the appellant's credibility.  Those are
    set out at sub-paras (i)-(iii) of para [22].

25. To the extent that Mr  Dieu's  submissions  were  directed  to  adverse
    points taken by the respondent in the refusal letter,  but  which  were
    not relied upon by the judge, it is difficult to see why it could be an
    error of law for the judge not to engage with these  submissions.   The
    points relied upon by the respondent,  and  Mr  Dieu's  submissions  in
    relation to them, played  no  part  in  the  judge's  eventual  adverse
    finding in respect of credibility.

26. To the extent that Mr Dieu made submissions on the three points in sub-
    paras (i)-(iii) of para [22], it is plain to me that the judge did have
    well in mind Mr Dieu's submissions, albeit that he did not accept  them
    and approached the assessment of the evidence in the way  that  he  was
    urged not to do by Mr Dieu.  It is also plain that the judge took  into
    account, and indeed  accepted,  some  of  Mr  Dieu's  submissions.   In
    particular, he accepted the submission noted at  para  [21(i)]-[21(ii)]
    that  the  appellant's  account  was  generally  consistent  with   the
    objective evidence.  The judge specifically agreed with that submission
    and made a finding in line with it in para [23].   In  his  submissions
    before me, Mr Dieu did not identify any submission made by him  to  the
    judge, and recorded in para [21], which the judge had not dealt with in
    substance which was relevant to the reasons he  gave  for  his  adverse
    credibility finding in paras [22]-[23].

27. The point relied upon by Mr Dieu is, of  course,  not  that  the  judge
    might have erred by rejecting his submissions but rather, it  is  said,
    the judge fell into error by not considering  them.   It  will,  in  my
    judgment, be unusual for a losing party to  be  able  to  establish  an
    error of law simply on the  basis  that  a  judge  has  not  explicitly
    considered submissions made on that party's behalf.  The judge's  legal
    obligation  is  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his  findings.    The
    materiality of any submission must be  determined  by  considering  the
    reasons relied upon by the judge and  whether  those  reasons,  by  not
    explicitly engaging with a submission, should be seen as  'inadequate'.



28. Here, the judge plainly took into account the submissions  made  by  Mr
    Dieu that sought to provide positive support to the  appellant's  claim
    (such as the consistency of her account with the  background  evidence)
    and, to the extent that he relied upon aspects of the evidence which he
    considered adverse to the appellant's credibility,  the  judge  clearly
    had well-in-mind the submissions made why those points  should  not  be
    taken as a basis for  an  adverse  credibility  finding.   He  was  not
    required to engage further with submissions  that  did  not  materially
    impact upon his adverse credibility finding.   Consequently,  I  reject
    point 3 relied upon by Mr Dieu.

29. At the conclusion of his submissions on these three points, I  enquired
    whether Mr Dieu relied upon three further points which were  raised  in
    the grounds.  He indicated that he did and he made submissions on those
    points.  I now turn to consider them.

30. Point 4: this relates to the judge's reasoning in para [22(i)].   There
    the judge took into account, adverse to  the  appellant's  credibility,
    that in the course of her oral evidence she said  for  the  first  time
    that she had been issued with documentation by the police  in  February
    2011 when she was released from detention which included her  reporting
    conditions but that she had lost those on arrival in the UK.

31. Relying on the grounds,  Mr  Dieu  submitted  that  that  answer  arose
    because of a misinterpretation of a question by the interpreter, namely
    whether she had any documents.  In  para  [8]  of  the  grounds  it  is
    asserted, in effect, that the appellant  must  have  misunderstood  the
    question when her case  throughout  was  that  she  did  not  have  the
    documents in the UK but only in Vietnam.

32. Mr Dieu acknowledged that he was in some  difficulty  in  relying  upon
    this point in the absence of any supporting evidence  either  from  the
    appellant or the appellant's legal representatives  to  establish  that
    there was a misinterpretation by the interpreter.  It is  worth  noting
    that Mr Dieu represented the appellant at the hearing but did not draft
    the  grounds.   In  his  oral  submissions  to  the  judge  he  clearly
    acknowledged that  the  appellant  had  said  that  she  had  lost  the
    documents "on arrival in UK" (see para [21(ix)]).  Mr Howells helpfully
    drew to my attention the Presenting Officer's notes where the appellant
    had been asked whether she had any  paperwork  when  she  was  released
    confirming that she had to report.  The appellant  answered  yes.   She
    was then asked why she had not provided it and her answer was that when
    she got to the UK all the paperwork was lost.

33.  In  my  judgement,  and  perhaps  reflecting  Mr  Dieu's  acknowledged
    difficulty with this point, it cannot succeed to the extent that it  is
    based upon an asserted mistranslation.  There is simply no evidence  of
    that.   As  far  as  I   can   tell,   as   regards   the   appellant's
    representatives, only Mr Dieu was present at the hearing.   As  I  have
    said, he did not draft the  grounds  and,  therefore,  the  appellant's
    representatives could only have become  aware  of  this  point  if  the
    appellant explained it to them.  However, in the  absence  of  evidence
    the mistranslation is a pure assertion in the grounds.

34. In any event, both the Presenting Officer's notes and, as appears  from
    his submissions, Mr Dieu's understanding of the appellant's evidence at
    the hearing, was that she said she had lost the documents in the UK.  I
    see no proper  basis  upon  which  the  judge  can  be  criticised  for
    proceeding on the basis that that was her evidence.  She  said  in  her
    screening interview in answer to a question as to whether she  had  any
    documents,  namely  question  6.2,  "No".   That,  of  course,  is  not
    inconsistent with what she said  at  the  hearing.   Nevertheless,  the
    judge was  entitled  to  take  into  account,  having  heard  her  give
    evidence, that she had sought to embellish her account by claiming  now
    that she had documents but that they had been lost in the UK as he said
    at para [22(i)]:

         "It appeared to me that she clearly felt  (although  not  a  strict
         legal requirement) somehow 'obliged' to answer in  the  affirmative
         to at least some of the questioning of this nature and  hence  made
         up her account of having brought the police documents with  her  to
         UK, but then, somewhat conveniently, losing them.   She  was  first
         interviewed within, on her account, two days of her arrival in  UK,
         having promptly been able to stay  with  her  mother's  friend  and
         having had legal representation immediately arranged  for  her  ...
         and it seems inherently unlikely, with that prompt care and  advice
         that the importance of such documents, if she  in  fact  had  them,
         would not have been at the forefront of her mind and  that  of  her
         advisors.  She was asked, at Q.6.2, if she  had  any  documents  to
         support her claim and she said she had none, making no reference to
         having had some, but them being lost."

35. I am unpersuaded that there is anything exceptionable in that reasoning
    based upon the answer  which  the  appellant  plainly  gave  in  cross-
    examination when she was asked whether she had any documents, and if so
    what had happened to them, following  her  release  by  the  police  in
    February 2018.

36. Point 5: this point relates to the judge's reasoning in para [22(iii)].
     Mr Dieu submitted that the judge had been  wrong  to  state  that  the
    appellant had not, prior to her witness statement made  shortly  before
    the hearing on 19  July  2019,  referred  to  her  having  phoned  home
    "shortly after arriving in the UK" and had spoken to  a  stranger.   He
    submitted that the appellant had referred to phoning home in her asylum
    interview at question 16 and in her earlier witness statement dated  16
    April  2019  at  para  [15].   He  also  drew  my  attention   to   her
    'Unaccompanied Asylum Seeking Children: Statement of Evidence' at  page
    20 of 45 where it is noted that the appellant "tried to contact  family
    friends to contact mother".

37. Whilst Mr Howells initially sought to rely  upon  question  16  of  the
    asylum interview, he resiled somewhat from that when what was  recorded
    as said was explored.

38. At question 16 the appellant was asked "What family do you have in  VNM
    [i.e. Vietnam]?".  Her answer was as follows:

         "My parents [father and mother] just my mum [where does she live] I
         do not know [when did you last speak to her] before I arrived  here
         [where were you when you spoke to her] I was in China [how did  you
         contact her] on the phone, so I borrowed someone  else's  phone  to
         contact her, actually there was another time when  I  just  arrived
         here [where was she each time you contacted her] at home  [in  VNM]
         yes [the same home you left] yes [how did you have  her  number]  I
         remembered her number [what is her number] ... [is there a  country
         code] +84 [how long ago did you last speak  to  your  mother]  more
         than a year [why have you not spoken to her in more  than  a  year]
         because I was not allowed to use the internet or  phone  [who  said
         you were not allowed]  ...  [why  not]  because  he  thinks  I  was
         trafficked and that is a safety measurement  [is  there  any  other
         reason for why you have not contacted your mother] I  do  not  know
         where my mum is at the moment and I do not want  her  to  have  any
         problems and I just want her to be safe."

39. As can be seen from this answer, the appellant initially said that  she
    had contacted her mother from China but then corrected herself  stating
    there was "another time when I just arrived".  However,  the  appellant
    makes no mention of  any  contact  with  her  mother  from  the  UK  by
    telephone resulting in a "stranger" answering the phone.  The appellant
    also refers to having called her "mother's friend" when she arrived  in
    the UK at para [15] of her statement dated 16  April  2019.   It  does,
    therefore, seem that the judge was wrong to conclude in para  [22(iii)]
    that the appellant had mentioned  for  the  first  time  that  she  had
    telephoned home in her statement dated 19 July 2019  prepared  for  the
    hearing.  She had previously mentioned it in her asylum  interview  and
    also in her April 2019 statement.  The emphasis of the judge's point is
    not that she failed to mention that she had spoken to a  stranger  when
    she made the phone call, but rather that she had made a phone  call  at
    all "shortly after arriving in the UK".  It  seems  to  me,  therefore,
    that the judge fell into error in relying  on  this  as  a  reason  for
    doubting the appellant's credibility.

40. I am not, however, persuaded  that  this  error  was  material  to  his
    adverse credibility finding taking his reasons overall in  paras  [22]-
    [23].  I am satisfied that the judge would  have  reached  his  adverse
    credibility finding even without reliance on the reason he gave in para
    [22(iii)].

41. Point 6: this concerns the judge's reason in para [22(ii)].  There  the
    judge relied on the inconsistency in the appellant's evidence that  she
    had previously stated that the leaflets that she had  distributed,  and
    which had led to her arrest, had identified her  step-father  when,  in
    her evidence at the hearing, she  stated  that  the  leaflets  made  no
    direct reference to him.  Mr Dieu did not press this point before me.

42. The point relies upon what was said  by  the  appellant  in  answer  to
    question 58 of her asylum interview.  There she was asked "Do you  know
    what information was on the leaflet?" to which she  replied:  "It  says
    why did you kill these people, why you killed my uncle ...".

43. Perhaps not surprisingly, the judge  read  this  evidence  as  being  a
    reference to  the  appellant's  step-father  (or  as  he  is  sometimes
    referred to in the evidence, her uncle).  The point made in  para  [10]
    of the grounds is that the first part  of  her  response  is  a  direct
    answer to the question to which she then provides  clarity  by  stating
    that for her this is her uncle.  There was a  submission  made  at  the
    hearing by Mr Dieu that there was "some lack of clarity" as to  whether
    her step-father was directly referred to  in  the  leaflets  (see  para
    [21(iv)(d)]).

44. In my judgment,  that  assertion  is  simply  an  attempt  to  explain,
    favourably to the appellant, the answer that she in fact gave.  It  was
    reasonably open to the judge to conclude that the appellant's  evidence
    was that her step-father/uncle was identified in the leaflet.  That was
    entirely consistent with what she said at  para  [11]  of  her  witness
    statement dated 16 April 2019 that:

         "My step-father had been executed by the Government and  we  wanted
         to deliberately tell the public that he had been  executed  because
         of his religion."

45. Without reference to her step-father/uncle it is difficult to  see  how
    she could have intended to tell the public that he had been executed by
    the Government.  For these reasons, I am satisfied that the  judge  was
    reasonably entitled to rely upon a  contradiction  in  the  appellant's
    evidence concerning whether her  step-father/uncle  was  named  in  the
    leaflets which she distributed.

46. For all these reasons, I am satisfied that the judge did not materially
    err in law in reaching his adverse credibility finding  and  therefore,
    in dismissing the appellant's appeal.

Decision

47. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal did not involve the making of a material  error  of  law.   That
    decision, therefore, stands.

48. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            22, January 2020
