
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05755/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 June 2017                          |On 14 July 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     K B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Vencatachellum, Counsel, instructed by Linga &
                    Co Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       respondent. Breach of this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of
       court.  I  make  this  order  because  the  respondent  has  claimed
       international protection and there is a risk  that  publicity  could
       create a risk in the event of the respondent's return.

    2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  a  decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal  to  allow  an  appeal  by  the  respondent,
       hereinafter "the claimant", against the decision of the Secretary of
       State  that  he  was  not  a  refugee  or  otherwise   entitled   to
       international protection.

    3. In summary, it is the Secretary of State's case, and the reason  for
       her being given permission to appeal, that the judge's reasoning  is
       seriously deficient.

    4. I begin by looking at the decision the judge actually made.

    5. The decision shows that the claimant is a national of Sri Lanka  who
       was born in September 1994.   He  entered  the  United  Kingdom  and
       claimed asylum in October 2015.

    6. The judge then outlined his case.  The claimant said  that  the  Sri
       Lankan Army wanted to kill him because his father was a high ranking
       LTTE activist.  He had been detained twice; on the  second  occasion
       for nearly two months.  He gave further details at an interview  and
       said how on one occasion he was hit with a  baton  and  his  private
       parts squeezed.  He said that he had gone to India and he was beaten
       up when he returned.

    7. The Secretary of State did  not  believe  the  claimant.   She  gave
       reasons.  These included the contention that minor activists for the
       LTTE were not at risk, that the claimant had been  vague  about  his
       father's activities and profile and that he seemed ignorant  of  the
       details of the organisation of the LTTE.  Neither did the  Secretary
       of State believe that the claimant had left Sri  Lanka  fearful  for
       his safety in March 2014 in defiance of reporting  restrictions  and
       then returned to Sri Lanka from India in May 2014.  The Secretary of
       State also found the description of events in alleged  detention  to
       be unpersuasive.

    8. The judge began the analysis of the case by setting out  the  papers
       that had been provided, including a supplementary bundle and a  main
       bundle.  The claimant had made  a  statement  setting  out  in  some
       detail his father's role and was cross-examined.

    9. I note that according to the judge "it was explained that due to his
       mental health issues he would not be asked any  questions-in-chief".
       Be that as it may, the  statement  should  have  been  complete  and
       supplementary questions should not have been necessary.

   10. The judge acknowledged that the papers included  "a  lengthy  report
       from the Medical Foundation."

   11. The report was prepared after five separate interviews and  a  total
       of ten hours with the medical practitioner.

   12. The incidents recounted to the medical  practitioner  were  "broadly
       consistent" with the evidence given to the Secretary  of  State  but
       there were examples where the claimant said that he  had  difficulty
       remembering dates and details.

   13. Medical evidence showed that there were 41 separate lesions  on  his
       body.  Some of these were attributed  to  his  being  beaten  during
       detention or otherwise mistreated.  The medical  practitioner  found
       that three of the lesions are "consistent with blunt trauma injury",
       one of the lesions is "highly consistent" with blunt  trauma  injury
       and a total of eighteen lesions on the knees and legs were "probably
       caused by the events described" by the claimant.

   14. The medical practitioner had photographs that she was able to  match
       to  the  lesions.   The  medical  practitioner  concluded  that  the
       claimant had "symptoms  consistent  with  a  diagnosis  of  moderate
       depression and post-traumatic stress disorder".  The consequence  of
       that condition in some people is an inability to recall consistently
       or accurately.  The doctor opined that the likelihood of suicide  or
       self-harm would be increased in the event of return to Sri Lanka.

   15. The judge then directed himself appropriately about the standard and
       burden of proof and acknowledged background evidence.  At  paragraph
       24 the judge said:


  "It is claimed by the [claimant] that when he was 18  years  old  he  and
  some friends hoisted the LTTE flag.  He was then arrested and  mistreated
  and tortured.  He was initially released but was mistreated when  he  was
  required to report.  He was later  arrested  following  his  return  from
  India and again was mistreated and tortured.  I consider that the medical
  evidence in his case provides strong support for his claim.  There are 41
  lesions found on the [claimant's] body by the doctor,  13  of  the  scars
  cannot be attributed to this ill-treatment, but the others are consistent
  with ill-treatment.  The doctor considers that one of the scars is highly
  consistent with the explanation given by the  [claimant]  and  the  other
  scars particularly when taken as a whole are more likely than not to have
  been caused in this way.  The doctor also considers that  the  [claimant]
  has symptoms of PTSD and depression."

   16. It was after setting out these findings  that  the  judge  said:  "I
       consider that the [claimant's] account is generally credible, and is
       supported by the medical evidence."

   17. The judge then noted that the claimant had not been able to  produce
       any evidence of his father's activities in the LTTE although he  had
       produced a photograph of an aunt who he said was killed  in  action.
       The judge directed himself  that  it  may  be  difficult  to  obtain
       evidence from the LTTE as the organisation no longer existed.

   18. At paragraph 27  the  judge  reminded  himself  expressly  that  the
       claimant had travelled to  India  from  March  until  May  2014  and
       regarded it as "surprising on one level" that the claimant  returned
       to India in view of the treatment he had received there.  The  judge
       also took into account that the claimant had not asked for asylum as
       soon as he entered the United  Kingdom  even  though  that  was  his
       apparent purpose for arriving in the United Kingdom although he  did
       claim asylum "fairly promptly", the judge noting that this was not a
       case where the claimant had been living in the  United  Kingdom  for
       many months before claiming asylum.

   19. The judge acknowledged that the evidence did not point  in  entirely
       one direction.  The judge said that the action of hoisting the  flag
       of the LTTE is "just the kind of action which the  Government  would
       deal with very harshly".  The claimant said that  he  "reveres"  the
       LTTE and the judge thought that when his behaviour  was  taken  with
       his father's or other family members' activity the  claimant  "would
       be somebody that the Government would wish to suppress."

   20. The judge then went on to say that he found the claimant  "would  be
       at risk on return to Sri Lanka and there is  a  real  risk  that  he
       would be detained and tortured or otherwise mistreated."

   21. I consider now how these findings were  challenged  in  the  grounds
       (not settled by Mr Clarke).  Four points are raised.  The  first  is
       that the judge materially erred in finding  the  claimant  credible.
       The Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  raised  a  number  of  credibility
       points, particularly that  the  claimant  was  vague,  inconsistent,
       incoherent and generally implausible.  The description at  paragraph
       25 that  the  "claimant's  account  is  generally  credible  and  is
       supported by the  medical  evidence"  is  described  as  "manifestly
       unreasoned".  It was said that the judge had not made  any  findings
       on the claimant's narrative, particularly the lack  of  detail.   It
       was said the judge's decision was lacking in anxious scrutiny.   The
       grounds complained the medical evidence relied on  does  not  assist
       because  it  cannot  determine  the  claimant's  account  which   is
       something the judge ought to do.

   22. I note that the grounds do not allege that the judge  was  wrong  to
       find that the claimant was at risk if he was telling the truth about
       his previous experiences in Sri Lanka.  It is therefore not open  to
       the Secretary of State to argue that if I am not  persuaded  by  the
       grounds going essentially to the credibility findings that I  should
       nevertheless allow the Secretary of State's appeal.

   23. This might be thought surprising because in the  refusal  letter  at
       the end of the passage marked "consideration  at  its  highest"  the
       Secretary of State said:


  "As such it is considered that given the evidence above  (that  postdates
  GJ Sri Lanka); that someone of your profile, who has had a very low level
  involvement with the LTTE would be subjected to  treatment  amounting  to
  persecution on return to Sri Lanka.  Of course any national authority may
  wish  to  appropriately  question  you  regarding  your   past   pro-LTTE
  activities."

   24. It is not for me to plead the Secretary of State's case and although
       I think it  would  be  undesirable  for  either  party  in  Tribunal
       hearings of this kind to be held rigidly to their pleadings, this is
       a case about credibility and no more.

   25. It is one of the difficulties commonly experienced in this  Tribunal
       in  assessing  the  evidence  of  a  person  who  has  clearly  been
       traumatised in some way that although they  may  have  an  excellent
       excuse for their apparent inability to  recall  consistently  or  to
       give  accurate  chronologies,  the  evidence  that  they  have  been
       traumatised is not evidence that they have been traumatised  in  any
       particular way.  Here, although imperfect in the way the  point  was
       made, it was the claimant's case that  he  had  been  badly  knocked
       about by the Sri Lankan authorities because of his apparent  support
       for the LTTE and that this had continued after he had returned  from
       India.  There were marks on his body which were consistent with  the
       mechanisms given and one of them  was  highly  consistent.   It  was
       undeniably open to the judge to  conclude  without  further  comment
       that the claimant had shown that he had been knocked about badly and
       had been traumatised.  There can be no complaint  about  that.   The
       claimant is a citizen of Sri Lanka and no  one  doubts  that  he  is
       Tamil.   The  broad  mechanism  of  his  injury,  albeit   explained
       imperfectly, was substantiated by empirical evidence which persuaded
       the judge.  Indeed it is difficult to see how the judge  could  have
       rejected it.  It was considered and expert and unopposed.

   26. I am satisfied that the judge gave sufficient  reasons  for  finding
       that the claimant had been ill-treated by the Sri Lankan authorities
       and, given the way the case is pleaded, that disposes of the  appeal
       before me.  I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 14 July 2017                   |

