
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05671/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16 October 2018                  |On 23 October 2018                    |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Anzani, instructed by York Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bannerman promulgated 18.6.18, dismissing on all grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    18.4.18, to refuse his claim for international protection.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Feeney  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    13.7.18.



Error of Law

 3. For the reasons set out below, I found such error of law in the  making
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to require it to  be
    set aside to be remade afresh.

 4. The appellant's representatives were instructed on 30.4.18. As late  as
    two days before  the  date  of  the  appeal  hearing,  they  sought  an
    adjournment in order to obtain  a  scarring  report.  Their  letter  of
    29.5.18 explained that since the receipt  of  the  Notice  of  Hearing,
    issued on 3.5.18, they had been trying their  best  to  obtain  such  a
    report, attaching two letters to experts, dated  15.5.18  and  22.5.18.
    However, none of the experts approached could prepare the report within
    the available timeframe before the hearing.

 5. The application was refused by the Designated Judge, pointing out  that
    the appellant arrived in the UK in 2013 and knew  from  then  that  the
    issue of scarring was in dispute. The  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State was not made until 18.4.18 but this was because the appellant had
    absconded. The judge considered that  there  had  been  ample  time  to
    obtain the necessary report and there was already  one  report  dealing
    with the scarring.

 6. The adjournment application was renewed at the appeal hearing. For  the
    reasons set out between  [29]  and  [40],  the  application  was  again
    refused.

 7. The judge went on to dismiss the appeal, based at least in part on  the
    conclusion that the it was not believed that  the  appellant  sustained
    the scarring in the manner claimed  and  consistent  with  his  factual
    claim on risk of mistreatment on return.

 8. In granting permission, Judge Feeney found it arguable that  the  judge
    erred in failing to grant an adjournment in order for the appellant  to
    obtain a scarring  report,  stating  that  although  there  are  strong
    practical  and  case  management  reasons  for   dealing   with   cases
    expeditiously, in refusing the adjournment request the  judge  did  not
    take into account the materiality of the evidence sought  and  that  it
    could assist in determining a  central  issue  in  the  case,  applying
    Nwaigwe (adjournment fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).

 9. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  address  the
    materiality of the evidence sought. Whilst an existing report  detailed
    the scarring, it did not address the causation of  those  scars.  Given
    that the judge rejected the appellant's explanation  for  the  scarring
    and that this  was  fundamental  to  the  appellant's  credibility,  it
    follows that the absent evidence was potentially crucial to the appeal.
    In Nwaigwe, the Upper Tribunal held that considerations  of  efficiency
    and expediency "must be tempered and applied with the recognition  that
    a fundamental common law right, namely the right of every litigant to a
    fair hearing, is engaged. In any case  where  a  question  of  possible
    adjournment arises, this is the dominant consideration."

10. I find that the judge approached the adjournment issue in  a  way  that
    amounted to a material error of law and resulted in unfairness  to  the
    appellant. Mr Tan indicated in his submissions that he  would  struggle
    to identify where the judge had considered  the  issue  fairly  to  the
    appellant. In the circumstances for this reason alone the appeal cannot
    stand and must be set aside.

11. Ms Anzani addressed a number of other  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  of
    lesser significance, none of which I found made  out.  For  example,  I
    found no error of law in respect of  the  claim  that  the  judge  made
    inconsistent findings or made a material misdirection  in  law  in  the
    approach to article 8. On a proper reading of the decision, neither  do
    I accept the submission that there  is  necessarily  any  inconsistency
    between [108] and [116] of the decision. The judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant previously left Sri Lanka by  sea  so  would  not  have  gone
    through immigration control. However, it was the appellant's  own  case
    that he left using his own passport.

12. Neither did I accept the submission that in  addressing  the  issue  of
    family life between the appellant and his brother  at  [135]  that  the
    judge took into account an irrelevant consideration when  stating  that
    the brother had been found not to be credible. It is clear  from  [136]
    that the judge was assessing the extent of the  claimed  dependence  on
    the brother and thus credibility of the brother and the appellant as to
    this issue was relevant.

13. Given the findings above in relation to the refusal of the  adjournment
    request, it is not necessary for this tribunal  to  address  the  other
    more minor alleged errors of law.

Remittal

14. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiates all other findings of fact and the  conclusions
    from those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of
    the issues in the appeal.

15. Given that the appellant will now have  the  opportunity  to  obtain  a
    scarring report, it is clear that all  the  credibility  findings  will
    need to be addressed afresh. Given the time required for a report to be
    commissioned and delivered it is not appropriate to retain this case in
    the Upper Tribunal.

16. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.



Decision

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier Tribunal in accordance with the directions below.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Consequential Directions

18.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Manchester;

19. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

20. The ELH is 4 hours;

21. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge Bannerman and Judge Feeney;

22. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing.



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. However, I consider it appropriate to do so.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him (or  any  member  of  his  family).  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable so no fee award can be made.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated
