
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05332/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On October 8, 2018                           |On October 17, 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                   mr a m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Archbold
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008  (the  UT  Procedure  Rules)  I  make  an  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure  or  publication  of  specified  documents  or   information
    relating to the proceedings or of any matter likely to lead members  of
    the public to identify any person  who  the  Upper  Tribunal  considers
    should not be identified.  The effect of such an "anonymity order"  may
    therefore be to prohibit anyone (not merely the parties  in  the  case)
    from disclosing relevant information.   Breach  of  the  order  may  be
    punishable as a contempt of court.

 2. The appellant claims to have entered the United Kingdom on May 11, 2012
    as a student.  On July 11, 2013 he was given notice that his leave  was
    curtailed with effect from September 10, 2013.  The appellant lodged  a
    further application for leave to remain as a student and he  was  given
    leave until  June  5,  2015.   However,  this  leave  was  subsequently
    curtailed with effect from January 6, 2015.

 3. The appellant lodged an application for leave to remain on the basis of
    his family and private life on  January  6,  2015  but  the  respondent
    refused this on March 24, 2015.  The appellant appealed  that  decision
    and the appeal came before the First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    dismissed on October 22, 2015.

 4. The appellant subsequently lodged a claim for  asylum  on  October  11,
    2017 on the grounds that he was homosexual and that  returning  him  to
    Pakistan would place  him  at  risk  of  persecution.   The  respondent
    refused his application under paragraphs 336 and 339M/339F  HC  395  on
    April 14, 2018.  The appellant appealed that decision under Section  82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on April 24,  2018.



 5. His appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hussain on  May
    25, 2018 and in a decision promulgated  on  June  29,  2018  the  Judge
    dismissed the appellant's claim for protection.

 6. On July 13, 2018 the appellant lodged an application for permission  to
    appeal and  on  August  13,  2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Hollingworth found it was arguable there had been an error in law.

 7. The matter came before me on the above date  and  on  that  occasion  I
    heard submissions from both representatives.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Iqbal adopted the grounds of appeal that had been  prepared  by  his
    instructing solicitors.  He submitted that there were three grounds  of
    appeal, two of which  overlapped,  namely  grounds  1  and  grounds  3.
    Ground 2 was a separate ground but  he  submitted  that  these  grounds
    together amounted to an error in law.

 9. Mr Iqbal submitted that in considering the appellant's appeal the Judge
    had materially erred in his approach to the witness  evidence  provided
    by Mr A and Mr S.  He submitted that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  make
    findings on credibility in relation to their evidence when  he  was  of
    course required to do  so.   He  further  argued  that  the  Judge  had
    attached too much weight to Section 8 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.  The  Judge  had  started  his
    assessment on credibility with  his  assessment  under  Section  8  and
    whilst a finding under Section 8 was a factor the Judge could take into
    account when considering overall credibility, he  submitted  the  Judge
    had focused on this point excessively.   The  appellant  had  explained
    that he had only felt it necessary to claim asylum when he did  because
    that was when he became aware he could claim asylum.

10. Mr Tarlow responded to the application and  submitted  that  there  had
    been no material error and that the arguments now being advanced were a
    mere disagreement.  He pointed to the Judge's decision  which  set  out
    adequate and well-reasoned findings.  All findings had been open to the
    Judge and the assessment under Section 8 was clearly one  open  to  the
    Judge.

11. Mr Iqbal submitted that the finding in  paragraph  43  of  the  Judge's
    decision lacked reasons.  Whilst it was open to the Judge to make  such
    a finding it was necessary to provide reasons for that conclusion.   He
    invited me to find an error in law and to remit the matter back to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

12. Having heard submissions, I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS

13. The appellant's appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was based  solely
    on a protection claim.  The appellant argued that he was homosexual and
    that as a gay person he would face persecution from the authorities  in
    Pakistan.  The current CPIN and case law  supports  such  an  argument.
    The issue therefore for the Judge was whether he accepted the appellant
    was a homosexual.

14. In deciding the appeal, the appellant had a bundle of  documents  which
    included supporting evidence.  Two witnesses also attended the  hearing
    and gave evidence on behalf of the appellant and  both  witnesses  were
    cross-examined by the  respondent's  representative.   Neither  witness
    claimed to have been in any relationship with the  appellant  but  both
    expressed their views that they believed he was gay as  they  had  both
    seen him kissing other men.  Witness  S  had  previously  been  granted
    refugee status on the basis of his sexuality.

15. In considering the appellant's claim the Judge also had regard  to  the
    background evidence and noted, as I accepted earlier,  that  being  gay
    would place the appellant at risk of persecution.  At paragraph  28  of
    his decision the Judge identified the sole issue to be whether  or  not
    the appellant was homosexual.

16. Mr Iqbal criticised the Judge for placing too much emphasis on  Section
    8 of the 2004 Act.  The Judge quite fairly at paragraph 30 stated  that
    the starting point was assessing whether the respondent  was  justified
    in attacking the appellant's  credibility.   Mr  Iqbal  criticised  the
    Judge's  approach   but   the   Judge   concluded   that   there   were
    inconsistencies between his written evidence and other documents as  to
    when he first became aware of  his  sexuality.   The  Judge  ultimately
    proceeded on the basis that by 2015 he was involved in  the  gay  scene
    and concluded that the appellant knew being gay would place him at risk
    of persecution in Pakistan and ultimately found  that  his  failure  to
    raise this as an issue prior to lodging his application in October 2017
    meant an adverse credibility finding could be drawn against him.

17. The Judge accepted that the appellant may have given the appearance  of
    socialising with other men but he concluded, as was open to  him,  that
    he did this to bolster a claim for asylum.  He noted at paragraph 40 of
    the decision that in his detailed written statement he had not  claimed
    to have had a sexual partner in the United Kingdom but  had  identified
    one of the persons in the photographs as being a  sexual  partner,  but
    that he had now returned to Pakistan.  Put simply, the  Judge  did  not
    accept the account and coupled with his failure to claim asylum earlier
    than 2017 he found the appellant's  claim  to  be  homosexual  to  lack
    credibility.

18. Mr Iqbal  has  criticised  this  approach  but  I  accept  Mr  Tarlow's
    submission that those findings were both open to  the  Judge  and  were
    well-reasoned.  The  Judge  had  taken  into  account  the  appellant's
    immigration history and other factors before reaching that  conclusion.



19. The second criticism raised by Mr Iqbal was the approach taken  to  the
    two witness  statements.   Those  witness  statements  and  their  live
    evidence had to be looked at against a background that  the  Judge  did
    not accept the appellant's core claim.  These witnesses saw  what  they
    claimed to have seen but were not the appellant's partners.  The  Judge
    concluded that even if they had seen the appellant  kissing  other  men
    this was part of the appellant's attempt to be granted  protection  and
    was a claim he had put forward after all other applications had failed.



20. The Judge considered the evidence of both witnesses at paragraph 42 and
    in respect of the evidence provided by Mr A he found that  the  account
    put forward by the witness did not make  sense,  bearing  in  mind  the
    appellant had claimed that he had been exploring  his  sexuality  since
    2013.  With regard to Mr S the Judge had concerns  about  his  evidence
    given the timing of their accounts.

21. The Judge concluded at paragraph 43 that the account  was  manufactured
    and that there was no truth in his claim.  Mr Iqbal  argued  that  this
    was a strong finding to make,  but  the  Judge  gave  his  reasons  for
    reaching that finding.

22. I am satisfied there is no material error in law.

    DECISION

23. I find there is no material error in law  and  I  uphold  the  original
    decision.


Signed                              Date     10/10/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     10/10/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
