
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/05672/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 August 2019                        |On 09 September 2019              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     LK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr I Fraczyk, Counsel
For the respondent:  Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

      1. In a decision sent on 10 July 2019, I found that  the  decision  of
         the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') dismissing the  appellant's  appeal
         against a decision dated 23 May 2017  in  which  the  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department ('SSHD') refused her claim for asylum
         and humanitarian protection, contains errors of law and  should  be
         remade in the Upper Tribunal ('UT').  I now re-make the decision.

      2. The appellant is a citizen of  Albania.   She  was  the  victim  of
         sustained and serious domestic violence at the hands of her husband
         in northern Albania.  The appellant claims she and her two children
         are at risk from her husband in her  home  area  in  the  north  of
         Albania, and  cannot  internally  relocate  to  Tirana.   For  this
         reason, she left Albania  with  the  assistance  of  a  cousin  and
         claimed asylum in the UK.

      3. The appellant has been treated as a vulnerable  witness  throughout
         the UT proceedings.  The FTT accepted that the  appellant  provided
         credible evidence, even though she  did  not  give  oral  evidence.
         This must be considered in the context of  the  report  before  the
         FTT, prepared by a psychiatrist, Professor Katona dated 16  October
         2017, which concluded that  the  appellant  was  likely  to  become
         significantly  distressed  in  the  adversarial  setting   of   the
         Tribunal,  without  measures  being  implemented  to  address   her
         vulnerability.

Procedural history

      4. In my 'error of law' decision  and  the  directions  that  followed
         this, I found that the  FTT's  positive  credibility  findings  are
         preserved but the decision should be re-made regarding risk in home
         area,  sufficiency  of  protection,  internal  relocation  and  the
         availability of a Convention Reason.

      5. The re-making hearing before me has been regrettably delayed.   The
         hearing listed for February 2019 was adjourned with  the  agreement
         of both parties, to enable the appellant to provide updated medical
         evidence.

      6. Since that time  the  appellant's  solicitors  have  filed  updated
         medical evidence including GP records  and  a  further  psychiatric
         report from Professor Katona dated 23 May 2019  ('the  2019  Katona
         report').  This repeats his earlier opinion (see  above)  that  the
         appellant should be treated as a vulnerable witness.

Hearing

      7. At the beginning of the hearing before me Mr Kotas  apologised  for
         not providing a position statement in advance of  the  hearing,  in
         breach of directions.  However, Mr Kotas  helpfully  confirmed  the
         SSHD's position as follows:

              i) The observations and prognosis set out in the  2019  Katona
                 report are accepted.  Although the SSHD  had  subjected  Dr
                 Katona's 2017 report to sustained criticism before the FTT,
                 there  had  since  been  an  extensive  analysis   of   the
                 appellant's GP records, and in the circumstances the  joint
                 diagnosis of PTSD and major depression in the appellant  is
                 now accepted.

             ii) The SSHD accepts that the appellant is reasonably likely to
                 be at risk from her husband in her  home  area.   Mr  Kotas
                 therefore clarified that it follows that the only issue  in
                 dispute relates to the viability of internal relocation  in
                 terms of safety and reasonableness.

      8. I asked Mr Kotas to clarify whether there was any dispute that  the
         appellant is a member of a particular  social  group  ('PSG').   He
         confirmed that although DM (Sufficiency of  Protection-PSG-Domestic
         Violence)  Albania  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  59  is  authority  for   the
         proposition that victims of domestic violence do not  belong  to  a
         PSG in Albania, this decision is very  dated.   Mr  Kotas  accepted
         that this appellant is a member of a PSG, i.e. she is a  woman  who
         the SSHD accepts will not be protected by the  state  in  her  home
         area.  I therefore need say no more about the Convention Reason  in
         this case.

      9. Both parties also agreed that there was no need  to  hear  evidence
         from  the  appellant  as  her  claim  that  she  cannot  safely  or
         reasonably relocate to Tirana could be  fairly  determined  on  the
         documentary evidence available and by way of oral submissions.

     10. Mr Kotas relied upon a helpful skeleton  argument  to  support  his
         submission that the appellant could relocate to  Tirana  where  she
         and her children would be safely and adequately looked after  in  a
         shelter with government and NGO assistance.   In  support  of  this
         submission, Mr Kotas made extensive reference to the SSHD's Country
         Policy  and  Information  Note  on  'Albania:  Domestic  abuse  and
         violence against women' ('the 2018 CPIN') and BR (Tirana - gay men)
         Albania CG [2019] UKUT 93 (IAC).  The latter does  not  address  in
         any meaningful detail the likely circumstances for  a  woman  in  a
         shelter  in  Tirana  but  describes  the  general  improvements  in
         societal and  state  attitudes,  that  have  resulted  in  tangible
         changes in Tirana.  When I pointed out that the 2018  CPIN  appears
         to conflict with the general  guidance  on  the  reasonableness  of
         shelters for women with mental health concerns, as contained in the
         Country  Policy  and   Information   Note   on   'Albania:   people
         trafficking' dated March 2019 ('the  2019  CPIN')  and  TD  and  AD
         (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC), Mr Kotas invited  me
         to find that the evidence before TD, vis a vis victims of  domestic
         violence ('VDV'), as opposed to victims of trafficking ('VOT')  had
         been updated and I should prefer the evidence and  guidance  to  be
         found in the 2018 CPIN.

     11. Mr Fraczyk relied  upon  his  comprehensive  skeleton  argument  to
         support the  submission  that  the  appellant's  circumstances,  in
         particular the serious mental health concerns  as  outlined  by  Dr
         Katona, are such that she could not safely or reasonably internally
         relocate.

     12. At the end of the submissions, I reserved my decision, which I  now
         provide with reasons.



Legal framework

     13. There is no need to set out in detail the legal test to be  applied
         when determining whether an asylum seeker  should  be  expected  to
         internally relocate.  This has  recently  been  summarised  in  the
         Court of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  873.
         The parties agreed that the accepted test  is  now  straightforward
         and comprises two limbs, in the context of this case.  Firstly, can
         the appellant safely relocate to Tirana, notwithstanding the SSHD's
         acceptance that she remains at risk of violence from her husband in
         her home area in northern Albania? In other words, is it reasonably
         likely that the appellant will suffer serious harm from her husband
         in Tirana, against which  the  state  will  be  unable  to  provide
         sufficient  protection?   Second,  would  the  appellant's   living
         conditions in Tirana be unduly harsh?  That is an assessment to  be
         made taking account of all relevant circumstances pertaining to the
         appellant in the  context  of  her  likely  living  arrangements  /
         circumstances and the support available to her in Tirana.

Country background evidence and country guidance

     14. As noted above,  and  as  accepted  by  the  parties,  the  country
         guidance in DM, in relation to VDV in Albania, is very  dated.   It
         provides a background framework but the  updated  evidence  is  now
         summarised in the 2018 CPIN.  TG provides country guidance for  VOT
         from Albania.  However, at [77] the Tribunal  accepted  that  there
         may be many parallels between VOT and VDV, including the perception
         by many in Albanian society that there is prejudice  and  hostility
         to VDV and VOT on the  basis  that  they  are  'kurva'  for  having
         perceived to breach a code of 'honour'.  Nonetheless, the  guidance
         contained in the headnote of TG clearly applies only to  VOT.   For
         convenience I set out the relevant extracts from the headnote below
         (my emphasis underlined):


                 "d) In the past few years the Albanian government has  made
                 significant efforts to improve its response to trafficking.
                 This includes widening the scope of legislation, publishing
                 the  Standard   Operating   Procedures,   implementing   an
                 effective National Referral  Mechanism,  appointing  a  new
                 Anti-trafficking Co-ordinator, and  providing  training  to
                 law enforcement officials. There is in general  a  Horvath-
                 standard sufficiency of protection,  but  it  will  not  be
                 effective in every case. When considering  whether  or  not
                 there is a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  a  victim  of
                 trafficking   her   particular   circumstances   must    be
                 considered.


                 e) There is now in  place  a  reception  and  reintegration
                 programme for victims of trafficking. Returning victims  of
                 trafficking are able to stay in a shelter on  arrival,  and
                 in 'heavy cases' may be able to stay  there  for  up  to  2
                 years. During this initial period after return  victims  of
                 trafficking  are  supported  and  protected.   Unless   the
                 individual has particular vulnerabilities such as  physical
                 or mental health issues, this option  cannot  generally  be
                 said to be unreasonable; whether it is must  be  determined
                 on a case by case basis.


                 f) Once asked to leave the shelter a victim of  trafficking
                 can live on her own. In doing so she will face  significant
                 challenges  including,  but   not   limited   to,   stigma,
                 isolation, financial hardship and uncertainty, a  sense  of
                 physical insecurity and the subjective fear of being  found
                 either by their families or former traffickers. Some  women
                 will  have  the  capacity  to  negotiate  these  challenges
                 without undue hardship. There will however  be  victims  of
                 trafficking with characteristics, such as mental illness or
                 psychological scarring, for  whom  living  alone  in  these
                 circumstances would not be reasonable. Whether a particular
                 appellant falls into that category will call for a  careful
                 assessment of all the circumstances.


                 ...


                 h) Trafficked women from Albania may well be members  of  a
                 particular social group on that account alone. Whether they
                 are at risk of persecution on account  of  such  membership
                 and whether they will be  able  to  access  sufficiency  of
                 protection from the  authorities  will  depend  upon  their
                 individual circumstances including but not limited  to  the
                 following:


                 1)       The social status  and  economic  standing  of her
                 family
                 2)         The  level  of  education   of   the   victim of
                 trafficking or her family
                 3)        The  victim  of  trafficking's  state  of health,
                 particularly her mental health
                 4)       The presence of an illegitimate child
                 5)       The area of origin
                 6)       Age
                 7)       What support network will be available."


  15. BF provides country guidance on the position of gay men in Tirana  but
      it is relevant to the instant case because it provides  a  summary  of
      improvements made by the state to address  negative  attitudes  toward
      vulnerable people.  The Tribunal also found Antonia Young's  evidence,
      in her capacity as a country expert, to  be  unreliable.   The  report
      dated 9 June 2015 that Ms Young has prepared  in  this  case  must  be
      considered in this light, albeit in  any  event  little  reliance  was
      placed upon it.  Apart from the  2018  CPIN,  the  country  background
      evidence relevant to VDV available to me is sparse and of considerable
      vintage.  This is limited to a 2013 UNDP report and a  special  report
      dating back to 2012.  Neither party took me to these reports.



Re-making the decision



  16. In re-making the decision I have considered all the evidence available
      to me, including the appellant's witness statements (the  most  up  to
      date one is dated 31 May  2019,  the  medical  evidence,  the  country
      background evidence including that contained in the CG cases  and  the
      CPINs.



  17. The appellant's account has been accepted  as  well  as  the  risk  of
      persecution she faces in her home area for reasons related to being  a
      woman.  In accordance  with  the  agreement  of  the  parties  I  have
      therefore focussed upon internal relocation to Tirana.  I now  address
      the  evidence  available  regarding  the  two  limbs  of  safety   and
      reasonableness.



Safety in Tirana

  18. Mr Frazyk submitted that a combination of factors render it reasonably
      likely that the appellant's husband will be willing and able to pursue
      the appellant and seriously  harm  her  in  Tirana:  her  husband  was
      severely violent toward the appellant for a prolonged period  of  time
      from 2007 to 2013, when the appellant fled Albania  for  this  reason;
      domestic violence and adverse attitudes to women who flee  from  their
      husbands, particularly in rural northern  Albania  support  the  claim
      that the husband is reasonably likely to harbour resentment toward the
      appellant and would wish to track her  down;  the  husband's  contacts
      within the police force mean that he is reasonably likely to  be  able
      to do so.



  19. The appellant fled from her husband some six years ago and  there  has
      been no contact between  them  since.   The  appellant  has  now  been
      separated from her husband for a longer period than they were married.
       There is no  cogent  evidence  that  the  husband  has  tried  to  or
      currently wishes to track down the appellant for  retribution  or  any
      other reason.  I appreciate that it would be practically difficult for
      the appellant to demonstrate evidence of such attempts.   Nonetheless,
      given the passage of time and the complete lack of contact, I  do  not
      accept that the appellant's fears that her husband will have the  will
      or motivation to seek her out to be reasonably likely.  In so  finding
      I note that the appellant comes from a farming community, where  there
      was little education.  Although the husband clearly has an  entrenched
      repugnant attitude toward his wife, in the particular circumstances of
      this case, it is not reasonably likely that he will pro-actively  seek
      her out or find her, outside of their home area.


  20. The appellant's evidence has been accepted.  I  therefore  accept  her
      evidence that she believes  that  her  husband  has  contacts  in  the
      police.  However, this evidence is vague.  The contacts are not  close
      family members.  The appellant did not even know if the contacts  were
      in fact policemen (see Q 224 of the asylum interview).  There will  be
      little incentive for non-family contacts seeking to corruptly use  the
      registration system to locate  the  appellant.   Given  the  husband's
      background, he is unlikely to have the financial resources to  support
      any substantial bribery.  I note from the 2018 CPIN at  [8.73-4]  that
      not all officers have access to  the  civil  registration  system  and
      those that do would leave an electronic trace, and this may result  in
      substantial punishment.  I also note the evidence, as accepted  in  BF
      that the evidence of an individual being 'traced' in  this  manner  is
      "very limited".


  21. Having applied the lower standard  of  proof,  and  having  cumulative
      regard to all the factors relied upon by Mr Fraczyk in the context  of
      the country background evidence,  I  do  not  consider  it  reasonably
      likely that the husband will be willing or able to track the appellant
      down in Tirana.


  22. In any event, the protection available to the appellant in Tirana will
      be very different to that available to her in her rural home area.  In
      all the circumstances of her case, the protection available in  Tirana
      is  reasonably  likely  to  be  sufficient.  The  appellant  will   be
      accommodated in a shelter with her two children.  They  are  currently
      aged 16 and 7.  The elder child will turn 18  in  December  2020,  and
      according to the fact finding report in the 2018 CPIN  can  remain  at
      the shelter with his mother until then - see  6.2.4.   The  2018  CPIN
      also goes into detail about the availability of security  provided  by
      the two VDV shelters in Tirana, as well as the state's willingness and
      ability to provide protection  in  Tirana.   The  appellant  can  also
      obtain a Protection Order from her husband.



  23. Having considered and evaluated the documentary evidence relied on  by
      both parties and applying the test in Horvath v SSHD [2001] 1 AC  489,
      in respect of the availability of a sufficiency of protection, and  in
      the  context  of  the  country  guidance,  I  find  that,  although  a
      sufficiency  of  protection  is  not  available  for  this  particular
      appellant in her home area, she will  be  able  to  access  sufficient
      protection in Tirana.


  24. I now draw together the findings set out above.  The appellant has  no
      family members in Tirana and they have no firm contacts  or  links  to
      Tirana.  It is not reasonably likely that her own  family  members  or
      husband will be intent on tracking her down in Tirana.  The  situation
      is quite different from the  appellant  returning  to  her  home  area
      wherein the husband's perceived shame in having the appellant  in  the
      area, may lead to 'honour' based violence.  I do not accept  that  the
      appellant is reasonably likely to be at risk in Tirana.  In any event,
      the appellant will be able to access the protection of a  shelter  and
      the authorities there for the reasons I have set out above.   Although
      the appellant has been subjected to past persecution, there  are  good
      reasons to consider that such persecution will not be repeated.

Reasonableness of internal relocation to Tirana

  25. I must now consider whether it would be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh
      to expect this appellant to avail herself of the  internal  relocation
      alternative in Tirana.  Such an assessment must be holistic  and  take
      into  account  the  appellant's   particular   characteristics.    The
      appellant will be returning to Tirana as  a  single  mother  with  two
      dependent children and no resources of her own.  Her limited education
      and mental health concerns make it most unlikely that she will be able
      to obtain employment.



  26. Notwithstanding the appellant's personal circumstances, Mr Fraczyk did
      not dispute that she would be able to access  adequate  accommodation,
      general support and education in a  shelter  in  Tirana.   Mr  Fraczyk
      focussed his submission that the appellant's  circumstances  would  be
      unduly harsh, on her mental health presentation.  I now turn to this.


  27. Professor Katona, who is extremely experienced, being a Fellow of  the
      Royal  College  of  Psychiatrists,  Professor  of  Psychiatry  at  the
      University of Kent and part-time Medical Director of the Helen  Bamber
      Foundation, met with the appellant on two occasions in 2017 and  2019.
      His  most  recent  detailed  assessment  of  her   psychological   and
      psychiatric state (after seeing her on 22 May 2019) has been  accepted
      by the SSHD.  The 2019 Katona report must also be seen in the  context
      of this being an appellant  who  has  been  accepted  to  be  entirely
      credible, which of course is  supported  by  [7.2]  wherein  Professor
      Katona repeated his opinion that the appellant was not feigning any of
      her symptoms.


  28. When the GP records are read together with Professor Katona's  reports
      the following emerges:  the  appellant  has  credibly  attributed  the
      stress, worry, discomfort, insomnia, stress  headaches,  anxiety,  low
      and negative mood, intrusion phenomena (intrusive thoughts, nightmares
      and flashbacks) and avoidance-related behaviour  she  has  experienced
      for many years, to her husband's violence toward her in  Albania.   It
      is important to recall that the violence  was  intense  and  prolonged
      over a number of years.  It  resulted  in  miscarriages,  as  well  as
      physical and emotional scarring.  The GP records from Feb 2014 to date
      are consistent with this summary.  Professor Katona has  explained  in
      some detail why the appellant's clinical  features  support  both  the
      diagnosis of PTSD and Major Depressive Disorder, before concluding  at
      [6.5] that these have resulted from the domestic abuse she suffered at
      the hands of her husband.  In so finding, Professor  Katona  expressly
      took  into  account  the  possibility  that  other  factors  (such  as
      separation from her parents and country, lack of support as  a  single
      parent and ongoing  /  prolonged  immigration  uncertainty)  may  have
      caused the mental health problems.  He however concluded that these do
      not provide a  clinically  adequate  explanation  for  her  core  PTSD
      symptoms  such  as  intrusive  thoughts  and  nightmares,  albeit   he
      acknowledged at  [9.5]  that  they  probably  aggravated  her  overall
      distress and contributed to her major depression.


  29. Professor Katona went  on  to  address  the  possible  effect  on  the
      appellant's mental health if returned to Tirana.  He  highlighted  the
      nature and extent of the appellant's fear that her husband would  find
      her in Tirana.  I have already found  that  this  fear  is  not  well-
      founded.  Professor Katona has also noted that the appellant would not
      be able to support herself given her mental state and  might  in  turn
      lead to her and the children being  without  basic  accommodation  and
      support.  Professor Katona did not have the benefit of  the  evidence,
      accepted by Mr Fraczyk, that the appellant and her children  would  be
      provided  with  basic  support  needs  in   a   shelter   in   Tirana.
      Nonetheless, I entirely accept Professor  Katona's  opinion  at  [9.6]
      that if the appellant "perceives herself  to  be  in  a  situation  of
      threat or danger then her PTSD and associated depressive symptoms  are
      likely to worsen" and [10.3] that:


           "Ms [K]'s fear of the  consequences  of  return  to  Albania  is
           genuine, whether or not it  is  objectively  well-founded.   Any
           threat of forced return  to  Albania  (and  consequent  constant
           sense of threat  and  danger)  would  be  likely  to  result  in
           significant deterioration in her already  severe  PTSD  symptoms
           and her now full-blown major depression.   This  would  in  turn
           cause her very considerable mental suffering."


  30. I also accept Professor Katona's opinion at [10.5] that given the  co-
      existence of PTSD  and  major  depression,  and  notwithstanding  that
      suicide risk remains  currently  low  and  her  children  represent  a
      powerful protective factor, there is a "very significant risk" that in
      response to a forced return to Albania and once back  in  Albania  she
      would become "actively suicidal".


  31. Mr Kotas  submitted  that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to  obtain
      appropriate mental health treatment in a shelter.  This is because the
      2018 CPIN, quoting from a  Home  Office  Fact  Finding  Mission  dated
      February 2018, states that when placed  in  a  shelter  for  VDV,  the
      appellant will be subject to a mental health assessment  and  provided
      with the appropriate treatment in response to this.


  32. Having considered all the country background  evidence  available,  in
      particular the 2018 CPIN and the clear  and  cogent  medical  evidence
      from Professor Katona, I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  mental
      health is likely  to  significantly  deteriorate  during  the  removal
      process and / or when placed at a shelter in Tirana.  This  is  likely
      notwithstanding the protective factor provided by her children and any
      additional measures to support her during the removal process  and  on
      arrival in Tirana at the shelter.  This is because she has a genuinely
      (but not well-founded) entrenched and enduring fear for her safety  in
      Albania, which will  exacerbate  her  already  serious  mental  health
      problems, which are of an 'inter-personal' nature, have existed for  a
      prolonged period of time and have  not  responded  to  anti-depressant
      medication in the UK.


  33. In reaching this  finding  I  have  carefully  considered  the  likely
      availability of support and mental health treatment at the shelter  in
      Tirana and note the following:


              i) There are two shelters specifically for VDV in Tirana:  the
                 national reception centre for VDV  and  an  NGO  shelter  -
                 6.1.2 of the 2018 CPIN;

             ii)  According  to  a  2017  Ombudsman  report,  the   national
                 reception centre for VDV does not have a  psychologist  and
                 this is provided by the other centre for VOT - see 6.2.1 of
                 the 2018 CPIN;

            iii) The 'D and E' NGO shelter is open to  all  women  including
                 VDV and VOT.  This contains a  psychologist  and  typically
                 the first 3-6 months involves  crisis  intervention  -  see
                 6.3.1 and 7.1.1 of the 2018 CPIN;

             iv) On arrival at a shelter every person is subject to a mental
                 health assessment and a report is produced.   Depending  on
                 the level of treatment required and  severity,  it  can  be
                 dealt with in the shelter or the person can be  sent  to  a
                 specific centre - see 7.3.2 of the 2018 CPIN;

              v) The 'specific centre' referred to above  is  not  explained
                 but appears to refer to either a psychiatric hospital or  a
                 community based clinic as set out in the  preceding  7.3.1.
                 This describes a ratio of 1.5  psychiatrists  per  100,000.
                 With a population  of  approximately  three  million,  this
                 amounts to approximately 45  psychiatrists.   In  addition,
                 the D and  E  commented  that  the  community  centres  and
                 religious organisations that deal with mental  health  "are
                 always full" and "there  are  few  chances  for  long  term
                 support for really serious cases".  Reference is also  made
                 to nine mental health  community  day  centres  around  the
                 country but no details are provided as to the  extent  they
                 would be able to support a person resident in a shelter.

             vi) Reference is made at 7.3.2 to "normally, the  shelters  are
                 equipped with a psychiatrist".  No source is  provided  for
                 this statement.  It was made  at  a  meeting  with  NRCVHT,
                 NRCVDV and the Albanian social services.


  34. Having considered all the evidence available holistically,  I  am  not
      satisfied that the shelters are "equipped" with a psychiatrist.   That
      statement is unsourced and unparticularised.  It is inconsistent  with
      the evidence emanating from the  NRCVDV  that  the  range  of  support
      extends to a psychologist and not a psychiatrist - see 6.3.1 and 7.3.3
      of the 2018 CPIN.  Indeed, the  evidence  relevant  to  mental  health
      provision at the two centres for VDV in Tirana, as summarised  in  the
      2018 CPIN is open to question.  The 2017 Ombudsman report is quoted as
      stating that one of the two VDV centres, the NRCVDV, did  not  have  a
      psychologist at the time and they had  to  depend  on  a  psychologist
      being provided by the centre for the VOT.  The  evidence  relevant  to
      mental health provision in the shelters for VOT was considered in some
      detail in TD as follows:

           "100.      As to healthcare the  UNP  report  states  that women
           receive "medical examinations and treatment" and that the  costs
           of hospital visits are covered. Women  are  also  provided  with
           "psycho-social  counselling".  In  contrast  the  TIP  report  -
           covering the same  period  -  records  that  the  mental  health
           services in the Linza shelter  are  "inadequate",  that  medical
           staff need training and that the funds allocated to pay for VOTs
           medical expenses were never in fact released, resulting in  VOTs
           having to pay their own bills. It is not explained in  what  way
           the provision that does exist is  "inadequate".  When  we  asked
           Professor Haxhiymeri about this she drew a  distinction  between
           "psycho-social counselling" and actual  mental  health  therapy.
           She explained that the workers in the shelters are not medically
           qualified and are only trained to deliver basic counselling. The
           treatment referred to  in,  for  instance  the  UNP  report,  is
           confined to the dispensing of medication. Her conclusion is that
           whilst free mental health care is available in the shelters, the
           quality  is  very  low.  In  giving  this   evidence   Professor
           Haxhiymeri again drew on her own experience but we note that she
           has actually visited at least two of these shelters herself  and
           that her evidence accords with the information provided  in  the
           TIP report.

           101.      Taking  all  of  the  evidence  in  the  round  we are
           satisfied that there is a basic level of healthcare provided  in
           the shelters, but that there  must  remain  concerns  about  the
           quality and extent of it, particularly  in  relation  to  mental
           health treatment. On  the  evidence  before  us,  such  care  is
           limited  to  the  prescription  of  anti-depressants  and  where
           available, counselling by  shelter  staff  who  have  no  formal
           training in psychiatry or psychology."

  35. I note that this assessment, and the guidance based  upon  it  I  have
      summarised in TD's headnote above, was based upon  evidence  available
      to the Tribunal as at a hearing date in June 2015.  However, the  SSHD
      has very recently endorsed the  headnote  relevant  to  mental  health
      provision in VOT shelters within the 2019 CPIN - see 2.4.3 to  4.   It
      is with this guidance in mind, that I invited Mr Kotas to take  me  to
      evidence that those VDV with serious mental health concerns,  such  as
      the appellant, would be able to cope with life in a shelter and  would
      be able to obtain  the  required  treatment  to  be  able  to  live  a
      relatively normal life with her children.  Mr Kotas submitted that the
      facilities and support, including psychiatric  support,  available  in
      shelters had clearly improved since the date of the hearing in  TD  in
      2015, some four years ago.  Apart from  the  references  in  the  2018
      CPIN, he was unable to take me to any other evidence to  support  that
      proposition.  Whilst I accept that the  trend  has  been  toward  more
      funding and greater facilities  in  shelters,  the  specific  evidence
      regarding the  psychological  and  psychiatric  support  available  in
      shelters for both VOT and VDV is unclear.   I  was  not  taken  to  or
      provided with a copy of the fact finding mission referred  to  in  the
      2018 CPIN.  There was no up to date country  expert  report  or  human
      rights report provided to me.  Both representatives made it clear that
      given the delays involved in this case and the likelihood that another
      adjournment would not lead to any clear evidence on  the  point,  that
      they did not wish for the case to be adjourned again.  Notwithstanding
      the limited nature of the evidence available and  the  inconsistencies
      within it, I decided at the hearing that I could fairly determine  the
      matter without an adjournment.



  36. The medical evidence in support  of  the  appellant's  current  mental
      health and likely deterioration upon removal to Tirana  is  clear  and
      cogent.  The appellant has had six  years  in  the  UK  to  build  her
      resilience in the aftermath  of  a  very  distressing,  traumatic  and
      prolonged period of domestic violence when in Albania.   The  evidence
      available demonstrates that even with support, she has found  it  very
      difficult to cope with even  day  to  day  activities.   That  is  the
      position  notwithstanding  the  relative  stability  (save   for   her
      immigration status) and security life in the UK presents for her.  The
      appellant has an enduring and entrenched fear that she will be  harmed
      in Albania.  She will also have to cope with the inevitable stigma  of
      being a single mother in Albania.  Her mental health will  deteriorate
      and cause her,  according  to  Professor  Katona:  "very  considerable
      mental suffering" with a  "significant  risk"  of  becoming  "actively
      suicidal".  I note that the appellant has not  put  her  case  on  the
      basis of Article 3 of the ECHR.  I rather  assess  her  likely  mental
      health as part of a holistic analysis of her circumstances  in  Tirana
      for the purposes of the reasonableness of  internal  relocation.   For
      these  reasons  it  is  unnecessary  to  explore  in  any  detail  the
      principles established in J v SSHD [2005] EWCA 629,  although  I  bear
      those principles in mind, particularly in the light of my finding that
      the appellant's fears that she will be at risk  from  her  husband  in
      Tirana are not well-founded.


  37. It is reasonably likely that shortly after her arrival at a shelter in
      Tirana, the appellant will be subject to a  mental  health  assessment
      and her needs will be identified as  being  serious  and  significant.
      Professor Katona has  already  highlighted  at  [9.2-9.3]  that  anti-
      depressants have been unsuccessful and she is unlikely to  respond  to
      the  standard  trauma  course  but  will  "require  more  individually
      tailored therapy which requires the slow  building  up  of  trust  and
      needs to continue for considerably longer".  Professor Katona has also
      emphasised at [9.6] that any such treatment must be in a  setting  the
      appellant perceives to be safe.


  38. In my judgment, there is cogent evidence  to  support  the  conclusion
      that the appellant's already serious PTSD  and  associated  depressive
      symptoms are likely to worsen upon removal to Tirana.  This will  have
      a detrimental effect on her ability to parent her children and respond
      to any treatment that may be available in the short  to  medium  term.
      Given the severity of the appellant's likely mental  health  concerns,
      such treatment is unlikely to be available in the shelter and there is
      the additional risk that she may  be  separated  from  her  family  to
      receive treatment elsewhere.


  39. I am satisfied that notwithstanding all the evidence contained in  the
      SSHD's 2018 CPIN, this particular appellant's mental  health  concerns
      are such that, when viewed  as  part  of  her  overall  circumstances,
      internal relocation to a shelter in Tirana  will  be  unreasonable  or
      unduly harsh.

Decision

  40. I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal on asylum and
      humanitarian protection grounds.



Signed: UTJ Plimmer
Ms Melanie Plimmer                               Dated: 22 August 2019
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
