
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05325/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 February 2018                           |On 26 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    N K E
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The decision under challenge in this appeal is that of  Judge  C  Burns
    of the First-tier Tribunal posted on 19 July 2017 dismissing the appeal
    of the appellant, a national of Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  (DRC),
    against a decision made by the respondent on 14 May 2017  refusing  her
    international protection claim.  Judge Burns found that  the  appellant
    had not given a credible account of having been an active member of the
    UDPS who would be at risk of persecution on return.

2.   At the hearing before me there was  no  appearance  by  the  appellant.
    There was a letter from Howe & Co dated 20 February stating that having
    unsuccessfully attempted to contact the appellant on numerous occasions
    and after several missed appointments, they were without  instructions.
    There  was  nothing  from  the   appellant   explaining   her   absence
    notwithstanding that notice of the hearing had been sent  to  her  last
    known address.  In such circumstances I decided  to  proceed  with  the
    appeal in the absence of one of the parties.  I heard brief submissions
    from Mr Nath.

3.   The grounds effectively raised five arguments stating  that  the  judge
    had materially erred in law in (i) failing to  give  clear,  reasonable
    and cogent reasons why the appellant was found not to be credible; (ii)
    erroneously discounting the evidence from the leader of the UDPS in the
    UK; (iii) seeking to reject credibility on the basis  of  discrepancies
    which did not alter the centrepiece or the main thread  of  her  claim;
    (iv) in placing reliance on a ten year old country guidance  case;  and
    (v) in making findings on  s.  8  of  the  2004  Act  before  assessing
    credibility generally.  I am not persuaded  that  any  of  the  grounds
    discloses a material error of law.

4.   It is convenient to deal first with point (v) which was extracted  from
    the written argument by Judge Chalkley of the Upper Tribunal.  I see no
    error in the judge dealing with s. 8 considerations first in order.  By
    statute this provision requires judges to identify  if  there  are  any
    relevant matters damaging to credibility, one being whether a  claimant
    could have claimed asylum on arrival but did not.  At paragraph 37  the
    judge properly identified that the appellant did not  claim  asylum  on
    arrival but delayed six days.  I do not consider either that the  judge
    put the s. 8 cart before the general credibility horse.   In  paragraph
    38 the judge did say she had "separately considered the credibility  of
    the appellant", but phrasing matters that way only serves to  reinforce
    the fact that she clearly understood s. 8 considerations could  not  be
    determinative; and, indeed, with reference to  paragraph  339L  of  the
    Immigration Rules, she went on  to  note  the  relevance,  among  other
    factors, of the  claimant  claiming  asylum  later  than  her  earliest
    opportunity.

5.   Reverting to normal ordering, I see nothing in point (i).  The  judge's
    decision sets out clear and intelligible reasons based squarely on  the
    evidence for rejecting the appellant's credibility.  It is true that at
    paragraph 53 the judge accepted that  the  appellant  was  an  ordinary
    member of the UDPS.   That  was  consistent  with  what  the  appellant
    herself had said at her screening interview.  Elsewhere  the  appellant
    had claimed to have an active role, but it was open  to  the  judge  to
    reject the latter claim as it was not what she first  claimed  and  was
    also at odds with the background country evidence.

6.   As regards (ii), the judge  gave  sound  reasons  for  placing  limited
    weight on the letter from the UDPS leader in the UK,  noting  that  its
    contents were at variance with the appellant's own account (unlike  the
    UDPS leader's  account,  the  appellant  never  claimed  to  have  been
    threatened with arrest).

7.   I reject the contention that the judge relied on  minor  or  peripheral
    discrepancies.  The appellant's claim to be an active UDPS  member  was
    at the heart of her claim and not only was her  own  evidence  on  this
    matter inconsistent, but the UDPS letter  asserting  that  she  was  an
    active member made a claim that was in conflict with  her  own  account
    that she had never been threatened with arrest.

8.   There is no arguable merit in the contention that the  judge  erred  in
    relying on a ten  year  old  country  guidance  case.   Upper  Tribunal
    Practice Directions (I paraphrase) allow a judge to  rely  on  existing
    country guidance unless there is fresh evidence,  casting  a  different
    light.  It is  clear  from  the  judge's  decision  that  she  properly
    focussed on the issue of whether ordinary members of the UDPS  were  at
    risk on return.  The country guidance case of  MM  [2007]  UKAIT  00023
    held that they were not  at  risk.   In  citing  this  case  the  judge
    properly focused on whether there was fresh  evidence  indicating  that
    the situation had changed for UDPS members.  At paragraph 33 the  judge
    correctly observed that  "[t]he  appellant  has  not  put  satisfactory
    evidence before me that the political  situation  has  deteriorated  to
    such an extent that I should depart from MM".  There was no legal error
    here.

Notice of Decision

9.   For the above reasons I conclude that the appellant's challenge to  the
    judge's decision fails to disclose an error of  law.   Accordingly  the
    judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal must stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 22 March 2018

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
