

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05194/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision and Reasons promulgated  |
|on 30 January 2018                       |on 31 January 2018                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     PB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr Holt instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy promulgated on 4  October  2017  in
        which the Judge allowed the appellant's appeal  on  protection  and
        human rights grounds against the order for her deportation from the
        United Kingdom.



Background


     2. PB, a citizen of Cameroon born in 1974, is the subject of a
        deportation order following her conviction for possessing a false
        Swedish passport that she was attempting to use to leave the United
        Kingdom to travel to Sweden.
     3. PB was advised that she was to face deportation. A deportation
        order was signed on 21 January 2016.  PB claimed asylum on 23 March
        2016.
     4. PB asserts that she cannot be deported from the United Kingdom as
        to do so will breach the United Kingdom's obligations under both
        the Refugee Convention and ECHR.




Error of law


     5. The Judge properly identified that the key question in this appeal
        was whether PB is a credible witness in relation to the core of her
        claim [19]. The Judge at [18] notes a number of serious evidential
        issues which it was found undermined PB's overall credibility.
     6. The Judge at [20] found "If the only evidence in support of her
        claimed sexuality was the unreliable word of the appellant, then I
        would have no hesitation in finding that her claim lacked any
        credibility".
     7. The Judge at [21 - 23], however, considered other aspects of the
        evidence originating from three witnesses supporting the appellants
        case. Having done so the Judge finds at [23] "I do find, on the
        lower standard of proof, that the relationship is genuine". The
        Judge therefore found that PB's account of being a bisexual woman
        was accepted.
     8. The Secretary of State's challenge to the decision can be classed,
        insofar as it challenges the findings, as being a challenge to the
        weight the Judge gave to the evidence relied upon in the appeal.
     9. It was not disputed by the Secretary of State that the Judge is
        fully entitled to reject some aspects of an individual's case,
        including those relating to what occurred in their home country,
        but to accept that what occurred in the United Kingdom is credible.


    10. I find the Judge clearly considered the evidence from all sources
        with the required degree of anxious scrutiny and has given adequate
        reasons in support of the findings made. As such the weight to be
        given to the evidence was a matter for the Judge
    11. It has not been made out the Judge was not entitled to give the
        evidence from the three witnesses the weight that evidence was
        given in the determination.
    12. No challenge on the basis of the rationality or perversity of the
        decision is pleaded or made out on the facts.
    13. It matters not whether another judge would not have made this
        decision. The Judge considered the evidence in a structured manner
        weighing up the relative strengths of the evidence that the First-
        tier Tribunal had been asked to consider before making adequately
        reasoned findings. The Secretary State fails to make out any
        arguable basis for the Upper Tribunal interfering with that aspect
        of the decision.
    14. At [24] the Judge found "If removed I find that the Appellant may
        well live her sexual life discreetly in Cameroon, but that will be
        because of her fear of persecution rather than her innate desire
        for discretion." The Secretary State claims the Judge failed to
        adequately address the decision of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran)
        [2010] UKSC 31 and that in light of the confirmation in the
        decision that PB has been dishonest, is prepared to deceive, and
        her poor credibility overall, the Judge has failed to give clear
        reasons for this conclusion.
    15. Cameroon is a country with a very poor human rights record in
        relation to same-sex relationships. There is evidence in the public
        domain of women being arrested in Cameroon on suspicion of being
        lesbians. This is a country where consensual same gender sex is
        considered a criminal act punishable by a jail sentence ranging
        from six months to 5 years and a fine. It is also a country in
        which detainees are frequently tortured in police stations to force
        them to confess. The Judge was satisfied on the evidence that the
        reason PB would act discreetly was to avoid the consequences of
        what is likely to happen to her as a result of the homophobia that
        has been witnessed in Cameroon and many countries across Africa in
        recent years. Again, the weight to be given to that evidence was a
        matter for the Judge. The Judge was entitled to reject parts but
        also accept other parts of PB's evidence. The Secretary State fails
        to arguably establish legal error material to the decision to allow
        the appeal on this basis either.


Decision

    16. There is no material error of law in the Immigration Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 30 January 2018






