
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05888/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 March 2018                               |On 27 March 2018              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     YS
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. E. Lanlehin, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity:
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on [ ] 1956. She arrived in
    the UK on a visit visa in July 2009 and remained unlawfully after her
    leave expired. On 23 November 2016, whilst detained and awaiting
    removal, she applied for asylum. The application was refused on 24 May
    2017. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where her
    appeal was heard by Judge Beg. In a decision promulgated on 31 July
    2017, Judge Beg dismissed the appeal. The appellant is now appealing
    against that decision.

Background

 2. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim is that she fears her
    estranged husband, from whom she has previously suffered domestic
    violence, will kill her if she is returned to Pakistan. In summary, she
    claims that she came to the UK in 2009 in order to look after her
    father, who was unwell, and that she remained in the UK despite her
    husband demanding she return to Pakistan. She claims that in 2013, in a
    telephone conversation, her husband accused her of having an affair.
    She also claims that after her father's death in February 2014 her
    husband said he would kill her if she returned to Pakistan.

 3. The appellant also claims that she would not be able to obtain any help
    from the police in Pakistan because of corruption and the influence of
    her husband's family. She also claims that although she has three
    brothers in Pakistan (who reside in the same district as her husband)
    they would not support her because of the threats from her husband and
    their own economic situation. She claims she could not move to another
    part of Pakistan because she has always lived with family and could not
    imagine living alone.

 4. The respondent accepted that the appellant had demonstrated a genuine
    subjective fear of return to Pakistan because of threats from her
    husband but rejected her asylum claim on the basis that the authorities
    in Pakistan would provide adequate protection (sufficiency of
    protection) and that it would be reasonable for her to live in one of
    the largest cities in Pakistan (internal relocation). The appellant's
    human rights (Article 8 ECHR) claim was also rejected. The respondent's
    position was that the appellant could not satisfy any of the
    Immigration Rules and there were not exceptional circumstances that
    would warrant allowing the appeal outside the rules.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The judge dismissed the appellant's claim for several reasons.

 6. Firstly, the judge did not accept that the appellant would face a risk
    from her husband if she returned to Pakistan and lived in the same
    district she had lived in previously. The judge rejected the
    appellant's claim to have been accused of an extramarital relationship
    (describing this as fabricated) and found that even if her husband had
    been violent to her in the past she would not be returning to him or
    his home and would have male protectors, in the form of her brothers.

 7. Before reaching this conclusion, the judge assessed the appellant's
    credibility and found it undermined by what she described as "a
    significant discrepancy in the appellant's evidence". The discrepancy
    in question is described at paragraph 23 of the decision, where the
    judge stated:

         "I find that there is a significant discrepancy in the  appellant's
         evidence. At question 24 of the substantive  asylum  interview  the
         appellant stated that it was in September  2013  when  her  husband
         accused her of having a  relationship  with  another  man.  Yet  at
         paragraph 6 of her witness statement she claims that the accusation
         of adultery was made in January 2014 after her father died. In  her
         oral evidence she said that her husband accused her of being  in  a
         relationship with someone else after that she spoke to him  on  the
         telephone when her father died."

 8. The judge found that the appellant's credibility was further damaged by
    the oral evidence she gave about her three brothers. The judge observed
    that in response to repeated questioning in cross examination about why
    she could not live with her brothers she spoke about their limited
    financial means and small homes but made no mention of their
    geographical proximity to her husband.

 9. The judge also found that the appellant's credibility was undermined by
    the delay in claiming asylum.

10. Secondly, the judge found that the appellant would be afforded
    sufficient protection from the state in the event that she faced
    violence from her husband. Citing KA and Others (domestic violence risk
    on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216, the judge stated that "whilst
    there is corruption within the police in Pakistan nonetheless there is
    a criminal justice system in force and offenders are punished through
    the courts. I find that there is no credible evidence that the
    authorities are unable or unwilling to offer effective protection."

11. Thirdly, the judge, relying on SM (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan CG
    [2016] UKUT 67, found that it would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh
    for the appellant to locate to one of the larger cities in Pakistan
    given that she would have the support of three brothers living in
    Pakistan and financial support from family in the UK.

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

12. The appellant lodged a lengthy grounds of appeal (written herself)
    which criticised both the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and the
    position taken by the respondent.

13. One of the points raised by the appellant was that she was not treated
    fairly at the hearing. In the grounds, she stated:

         "I was repeatedly stopped when replying because interpreter had to
         interpret and also the honourable judge had to write that down. I
         was told that once the honourable judge will finish writing then I
         can finish whatever I wanted to say. But sometimes when the
         honourable judge finished writing then instead of giving me the
         chance to finish my reply they used to put another question on to
         me and I could not answer my previous reply in a better and
         comprehensive way and missed important points. Sometimes I used to
         forget that I have the interpreter and answers directly to the
         honourable judge. It happened a couple of times. The honourable
         judge asked me to reply through interpreter. The honourable judge
         was right in saying that but it was just happening because I used
         to forget that I have the interpreter. When it happened two three
         times which was beyond my control than the honourable judge warned
         me that if it happened again and I can even stop continuing the
         hearing which put me under a lot of pressure. My brother [ ] my
         witness finished his night shift and came straight to the court for
         witness without having a sleep was very tired at the time of
         hearing and had to face the same sort of problems during the
         interview. My niece was also the witness and she spoke directly to
         the judge without interpreter and the honourable judge believed her
         more and accepted her witness credible".

  14. At the error of law hearing, Ms Lanlehin explained that the appellant
      was pursuing three grounds of appeal.


  15. The first ground was that the hearing was procedurally unfair. She
      contended there were two aspects to the unfairness. Firstly, appellant
      faced interruption from the judge and difficulties with the
      interpreter which impeded her from giving evidence. Secondly, the
      judge assessed the appellant's credibility even though this had been
      accepted by the respondent.


  16. The second ground of appeal was that the judge misunderstood the
      appellant's evidence. Ms Lanlehin argued that the appellant's evidence
      about her husband accusing her of adultery and her brothers' ability
      to support her was consistent and did not contain any discrepancies.


  17. The third ground of appeal advanced by Ms Lanlehin was that, in
      considering the reasonableness of internal relocation, the judge did
      not apply SM correctly. She claimed that because the appellant would
      not have family or financial support in the area to which she would
      need to relocate (as her brother's live in the same district as her
      husband), in accordance with SM it would be unduly harsh to expect her
      to relocate internally.


  18. Ms Aboni argued in response that there is nothing in the decision to
      indicate any procedural unfairness. She observed that the appellant
      was represented and asserted that had there been a concern about the
      proceedings the representative could have raised it at the time. She
      maintained that the grounds are no more than a disagreement but that
      even if the judge had erred in respect of credibility, any such error
      would not be material given the sustainable findings on sufficiency of
      protection and internal relocation.


Analysis


  19. The appellant was represented at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.
      There is no indication in the decision (or elsewhere) that her
      representative raised any concerns at the time about the conduct of
      the hearing or the interpreter. Nor has the representative given a
      statement concerning the alleged misconduct, as would normally be
      expected if there was cause for concern. See HA (Conduct of hearing:
      evidence required) Somalia [2009] UKAIT 00018.


  20. In order for an appeal to be set aside on the basis of procedural
      unfairness there needs to be evidence of unfairness. As there is no
      such evidence, this ground of appeal cannot succeed. In any event, the
      experience described by the appellant, as set out at paragraph 13
      above, does not on its face appear unfair. It may well be that it was
      frustrating for the appellant and her brother to give evidence through
      an interpreter and that because of the interpreter frequent
      interruptions occurred. However, it does not follow from this that the
      judge failed to listen appropriately to the appellant or that she did
      not have a full opportunity to give evidence.


  21. I also do not accept the argument that it was unfair or improper for
      the First-tier Tribunal to assess the appellant's credibility. In the
      respondent's letter to the appellant of 24 May 2017 ("the refusal
      letter") it is explicitly accepted that the appellant had been
      threatened by her husband and that she genuinely feared returning to
      Pakistan because of him. However, the refusal letter does not state
      whether or not it is accepted that the appellant had been accused of
      adultery. Nor does the refusal letter state that the appellant's claim
      about the absence of support she would receive from her brothers in
      Pakistan was accepted. It was for the judge to assess, based on the
      evidence before her, whether the appellant's account of being accused
      of adultery and of not having family support in Pakistan was credible
      and to make findings of fact on these issues. Accordingly, the
      procedural unfairness challenge to the decision cannot succeed.


  22. I also do not accept that the judge misunderstood the appellant's
      evidence. A core part of the appellant's account concerned when her
      husband first accused her of adultery. In her witness statement she
      referred to the accusation of adultery being made after her father
      died but in the asylum interview, and orally before the First-tier
      Tribunal, she stated that the accusations were made sometime earlier,
      in 2013. Ms Lanlehin argued that there is no real discrepancy within
      the evidence, because the accounts are consistent. However, the
      timeline in the witness statement does not, on its face, match the
      other evidence. It was for the judge, who had the benefit of hearing
      the appellant give oral evidence, to determine whether this amounted
      to a discrepancy; and if so, the weight it should be given. It was
      therefore not an error of law for the judge to characterise the
      differences in the evidence as a discrepancy and to give it weight in
      the assessment of credibility.


  23. I now turn to the third ground of appeal, which concerns the judge's
      approach to internal relocation.


  24. SM sets out factors relevant to whether internal relocation would be
      unduly harsh. These include a woman's age, the extent of family
      support she will receive (in particular whether there is a male
      guardian in the place of relocation) and the extent to which the woman
      is likely to be ostracised.


  25. For the reasons explained above, I am satisfied that the judge's
      factual findings were open to her. This includes the findings that:





   a) The appellant, although she had been threatened by, and feared, her
      husband, had not been accused of having an affair. The implication of
      this is that she is not likely to face ostracism.






   b) The appellant was in contact with, and would receive support from her
      three brothers. Although the appellant's brothers live in the same
      district as her husband (and therefore do not live in the city to
      which she would relocate) this does not mean they would not be able to
      provide her with assistance. It is clear from the decision (notably at
      paragraph 32) that the judge appreciated that the brothers live in the
      same district as the husband but still found that they would provide
      the appellant with support.






   c) The appellant is financially supported by her brother in the UK and
      that there was no reason this would not continue if she is returned to
      Pakistan.


  26. I am satisfied that in light of the judge's findings of fact, as
      explained above, it was not inconsistent with SM to conclude that it
      would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh for the appellant to
      relocate within Pakistan.


  27. In conclusion, I am satisfied that the judge has reached a decision
      that was open to her based on the evidence and that the decision does
      not contain a material error of law.

Decision

  28. The appeal is dismissed.


  29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material
      error of law and stands.
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  25 March 2018        |

