
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05596/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8th August 2017                         |On 25th August 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                               MOHAMMED AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharif of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Iraq born on 26th August  1991.   He
    arrived in the UK on 30th November 2015  and  applied  for  asylum  the
    following day.  That application was refused for the reasons  given  in
    the Respondent's letter of 27th May 2016.  The Appellant appealed,  and
    his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Birmingham on 5th October 2016.  She decided to dismiss  the
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds for the reasons given in  her
    Decision dated 17th January 2017.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal
    that decision and on 3rd May 2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. Prior to the hearing the Respondent had submitted a Rule 24 response in
    which it was conceded that there was a material error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the Judge and inviting the Tribunal to remit the appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for the decision in the  appeal  to  be  remade
    there.  At the hearing before me, I clarified with  Mrs  Aboni  that  a
    material error of law was conceded in respect of the  first  ground  in
    the grounds of application being that when the Judge had considered the
    issue of internal relocation within the  IKR  part  of  Iraq,  she  had
    failed to take into account the guidance provided by AA (Article 15(c))
    Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).  As a consequence of that information,
    Mr Sharif confirmed that he did not wish to argue the second ground  of
    the grounds of application which related to the Judge's Article 8  ECHR
    decision.

 4. On the basis of these comments I  find  a  material  error  of  law  in
    respect of the Judge's asylum decision and that decision is set  aside.
    I need not give my reasons for that decision in  accordance  with  Rule
    40(3)(a) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   I
    decided that that decision in the appeal should be remade by the First-
    tier Tribunal in accordance  with  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Practice
    Statements.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.



Signed                              Date   25th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
