
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05719/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th January 2018                   |On 06th February 2018                |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                    M O N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Mughal (instructed by Montague Solicitors LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant, who is a young man  from  Afghanistan  born  in  2003.   His
    asylum claim was refused by the  Secretary  of  State  and  his  appeal
    against that Decision came before Judge M A Khan  at  Harmondsworth  on
    13th July 2017.  In a Decision  promulgated  on  7th  August  2017  the
    appeal was dismissed.

 2. The grounds assert that the  judge  made  no  findings  about  how  the
    Appellant was expected to return to Kabul and whom he was  expected  to
    stay with and failed to deal properly with the issue of risk on return.
     It is also said that the judge failed to  consider  that  the  Taliban
    would be able to pursue the Appellant in Kabul.

 3. The Decision and Reasons sets out the claim and the evidence  that  the
    judge heard, which was from the Appellant and his father.  It sets  out
    the evidence and the cross-examination of both witnesses in some detail
    as well as the submissions.

 4. The judge then starts to make findings on credibility at  paragraph  33
    through to paragraph 39 and it is fair to say that the judge found  the
    claim to  be  entirely  without  credibility.   He  correctly  reminded
    himself that the Appellant was only 14 and that he should  be  cautious
    when considering his evidence.  However, the judge also found that  the
    Appellant was old enough to know  whether  he  was  telling  truths  or
    untruths and found for numerous reasons that the evidence  contained  a
    mixture of truths and half-truths and complete untruths.

 5. There were  significant  discrepancies  between  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and his father and it  is  fair  to  say  that  the  father's
    evidence was woeful in that he was evasive, vague and certain questions
    he simply refused to answer.  The father had been back to  Afghanistan,
    as the judge found, more than three occasions and as a result the judge
    simply did not believe that nobody knew where his wife, the Appellant's
    mother, and siblings were and in fact in all likelihood  they  were  in
    Kabul.

 6. As Mr Kotas points out, the Appellant's claimed fear was of his  uncle,
    not specifically the Taliban and so the point about the  Taliban  being
    able to locate him is without merit.  The point about the risk  to  him
    in Kabul is properly dealt with by the judge on the basis  that  it  is
    likely that his mother and siblings are  living  in  safety  in  Kabul.
    They have had the protection of the authorities in  the  past  and  the
    Appellant would not be travelling alone to Kabul in any  event.   There
    is nothing to prevent his father going with him, his father having been
    back several times already and that being the case this is not the case
    of a child being returned unaccompanied to Kabul.

 7. I therefore find that there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  this
    Decision and Reasons and therefore the appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 2nd February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
