
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA057672016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 May 2017                                |On 7 June 2017                |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                  reza zare
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Reza Zare, born on 13 June 1994 is  a  male  citizen  of
    Iran.  By a decision dated 27 May  2016,  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's claim for asylum.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Hillis) which, in a decision which was  promulgated  on
    13 December 2016, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claims to fear persecution in  Iran  on  account  of  his
    conversion from Islam to Christianity.  Judge  Hillis  did  not  accept
    that the appellant had given a truthful account of  his  conversion  or
    that he would be at real risk of persecution or ill-treatment on return
    to Iran [27].

 3. I find that the First-tier Tribunal's decision  should  be  set  aside.
    There are a number of grounds of appeal but I find that  the  first  of
    these grounds has been established and is such that the decision cannot
    stand.  Since the decision will have to be returned to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and none of the findings  of  fact  shall  stand,  I  make  no
    findings as regards grounds 2-4.

 4. As the grounds state, four witnesses gave evidence  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant at  the  hearing.   These  witnesses  include  the  appellant
    himself, [GZ], [ZG] and  a  friend,  [YS].   Judge  Hillis  incorrectly
    states [8] that only three witnesses  gave  evidence.   He  incorrectly
    states that the names of the witnesses in  addition  to  the  appellant
    were [GZ] and [YG], a confusion of the two of the  witnesses  who  gave
    evidence.  Most seriously, however, is  what  Judge  Hillis  states  at
    [25]:

         [YS] did not attend the  hearing  and  have  the  evidence  in  his
         witness statement dated 8 November 2016 tested in cross-examination
         and I conclude that  I  can  place  no  evidential  weight  on  its
         contents.

 5. The parties are agreed that [YS] did attend the hearing and was  cross-
    examined  by  the  Presenting   Officer.    The   judge's   error   has
    fundamentally undermined his assessment of the evidence  given  in  the
    appeal on behalf of the appellant.  In consequence, the  appellant  has
    been denied a fair hearing of his appeal.  I set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  There will need  to  be  a  new  fact-finding
    exercise which is best conducted by the First-tier  Tribunal  to  which
    this case is now returned.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  13
December 2016 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.   The
appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge  Hillis)  for  that
Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 2 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 2 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
