
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05814/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 March 2018                              |On 26 March 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                 Deniz Umek
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins instructed by Sentinel Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Turkey.  He appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of  2  June  2017
    refusing to grant asylum.  In addition the  respondent  concluded  that
    the appellant did  not  qualify  for  humanitarian  protection  or  for
    discretionary leave.

2.   The appellant claims to be at risk on return to Turkey  on  account  of
    his activities with the BDP and HDP political parties.   He  said  that
    the BDP was shut down in 2014 and became the HDP but  he  was  never  a
    member of either party.  His brother was a member  of  the  BDP.   That
    party had been shut  down  because  it  was  affiliated  with  the  PKK
    terrorist organisation.  The appellant's evidence was  that  he  joined
    meetings with the BDP/HDP and went to  their  marches  and  distributed
    leaflets.  He visited the party offices and had tea there  but  he  did
    not attend meetings.  The HDP unlike the BDP had not been shut down  on
    account with links with the PKK.  He denied that  the  authorities  had
    evidence of him being linked with the PKK.

3.   He gave an account of  having  problems  with  the  authorities  on  20
    September 2016 when he was at university at  which  time  there  was  a
    police raid and he was taken with some of his  friends  to  the  police
    station and  ill-treated.   He  was  released  some  four  days  later.
    Subsequently two plain clothes policemen stopped him when he was on his
    way to classes some ten days later and blindfolded him and took him  to
    a basement and detained him for three days and ill-treated him.  He was
    released because he begged them and told them he only studied  and  did
    not have anything to do with anything.  On a subsequent occasion one of
    the plain clothes policeman who had been involved in  that  arrest  saw
    him at the university and pointed his gun at him and told him he  would
    teach him a lesson soon and would kill him and throw his body into  the
    mountains.  It was after this incident that the  appellant  decided  to
    come to the United Kingdom.  He also claims  that  before  he  had  any
    involvement with the authorities members of the  MHP  (National  Turkey
    Party) had  beaten  him  up  after  he  attended  marches  because  his
    political views were different from theirs and they  told  him  not  to
    attend marches again.  That had happened in 2014.

4.   The judge considered all the evidence and concluded that  the  core  of
    the appellant's claim as to what would happen to him in Turkey and  his
    claim to fear persecution on return was not credible.  The judge  found
    that if he had involvement with the HDP it  had  been  as  a  low-level
    supporter only and not as someone who  would  be  of  interest  to  the
    authorities and his claim to have been arrested and ill-treated by  the
    authorities was not credible.  Accordingly the appeal was dismissed.

5.   In his grounds of appeal the appellant argued that the judge had  erred
    in failing to provide any proper or adequate analysis  of  the  copious
    background material which had been provided and there was simply a bare
    reference at paragraph 19 to the judge having  given  consideration  to
    all the documents in the papers.  It  was  argued  that  that  evidence
    showed that even low-level separatist activities were targeted  by  the
    Turkish authorities particularly  in  the  volatile  southeast  of  the
    country.

6.   It was also argued that the judge had  erred  in  not  considering  the
    matter through the extant country guidance of IK  [2004]  UKIAT  00312.
    It was argued that the judge was required to make a careful and nuanced
    analysis of risk on return on the accepted facts.  It was  also  argued
    that the judge had highlighted  aspects  of  the  evidence  which  were
    unsatisfactory and had overlooked those parts of the appellant's  claim
    which were accurate and  tied  in  with  the  background  material  and
    available information on Kurdish separatist groups in Turkey.

7.   Permission  to  appeal  was  refused  by  a  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, but subsequently  a  judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted
    permission on the basis that it was arguable that despite the  detailed
    credibility findings the judge, though indicating  that  the  appellant
    was a low-level  supporter  of  the  HDP,  had  not  analysed  how  the
    appellant on his individual facts would be perceived nor assessed  risk
    to him on return with reference to IK.

8.   In his submissions Mr Collins referred to the fact that  the  appellant
    was 21 at the date of hearing and was an Alevi Kurd who did not have  a
    valid Turkish passport and  had  left  Turkey  from  Gaziantep  in  the
    conflict area.  His brother was a refugee, as appeared to  be  accepted
    at paragraph 23 of the judge's decision.  There was a family background
    in separatist politics as could be seen from his answers  at  interview
    to questions 12, 23, 27 and 57 referring to  his  brother,  father  and
    uncles.  It was difficult to see that  the  appeal  could  properly  be
    assessed without taking into account the background material.   In  the
    bundle were such matters as the US State Department Report of 2016 with
    reference to torture and arbitrary detention and at  pages  49  onwards
    the CIG of March 2016 with regard to the HDP.  This referred largely to
    higher profile members, but at paragraph 8.1.1 there was reference also
    to supporters,  at  paragraph  68  and  paragraph  8.1.3  the  HDP  CIG
    referring to particular problems for people in the southeast which  was
    the conflict zone.

9.   The judge had made scant reference to this material which  should  have
    been the starting point, by contrast to the endorsement of  the  points
    made in the refusal letter.  The judge had  rejected  the  two  claimed
    detentions but accepted that the appellant was a low-level supporter of
    the HDP and given that and the other facts it was difficult to see  how
    the determination could stand.

10.  In IK the Tribunal set out in its country  guidance  risk  factors  and
    noted that this was not a box ticking exercise.  It could be  that  the
    appellant there was never detained or a member of HADEP but perhaps for
    his family connection as he was a low-level supporter of  the  PKK  and
    that was a crucial factor and there was a family  connection  with  the
    PKK.

11.  IK was to be found at page 171 of the bundle with the risk factors  set
    out at paragraph 14, paragraphs 82 to 85 dealing with such  matters  as
    the likely period of detention on return, the question  of  what  would
    happen in detention and further checks in the  home  area.   The  judge
    needed to consider what checks would be made including the relevance of
    the acceptance that the appellant was a low-level supporter of the HDP.
     The judge had failed to refer  to  IK  or  to  analyse  the  situation
    properly.  The facts of IK could be seen  in  particular  at  paragraph
    129.  A lesser argument was that made at paragraph  7  of  the  grounds
    concerning the failure to concentrate on  the  accurate  parts  of  the
    account.  The case required a nuanced analysis of the accepted facts.

12.  In her submissions Ms Everett argued that the judge's  decision  should
    stand.  The appellant had been found not to be credible in almost every
    respect and that  was  not  challenged.   The  judge  had  set  out  in
    significant detail why he rejected the claim.  The position was that at
    its highest at paragraph 46 where the judge concluded that the core  of
    the appellant's claim as regards what had happened to him in Turkey and
    to fear persecution on return was not credible and even if he were low-
    level that had to be on the  spectrum.   The  judge  had  given  cogent
    reasons for not accepting the credibility of the claim.

13.  With regard to the current situation in Turkey  on  the  basis  of  the
    accepted factors, it was unclear what the basis of the brother's asylum
    claim was although it was accepted it was likely to be  connected  with
    politics, but it was not known what the association was.  It  was  true
    that there was violation of human rights in Turkey and circumstances of
    impunity, but there was not background evidence  to  show  that  anyone
    from that area who had not come to the authorities' attention  and  did
    not really do anything politically was at risk.  In IK the  facts  were
    that there were family  connections  with  the  PKK  and  the  PKK  was
    proscribed not just in Turkey but in many  countries  so  there  was  a
    distinction there and also there was no further information  about  the
    brother albeit as was noted earlier  likely  to  be  on  the  basis  of
    political activity.  There was not a strong enough argument  about  the
    background evidence concerning a  possible  low-level  supporter  of  a
    political party with no history of arrest or  detentions  as  being  at
    risk on return.  The case needed more to succeed than  the  fact  of  a
    brother who was a refugee.   The  ethnicity  of  the  appellant  was  a
    significant part of his political landscape and conflict but it was not
    enough to show risk on return.

14.  By way of reply Mr Collins argued that even if one  took  the  findings
    at their lowest the appellant was not credible.  With regard to the two
    detentions it was the case that the brother was not part of the  appeal
    as he had been in the United Kingdom at all material  times  and  could
    not say what had happened to the appellant in Turkey.  It seemed to  be
    accepted that the brother was a refugee  and  also  the  father  was  a
    member of the BNP as part of the claim and also  the  two  uncles  were
    politically affiliated and the family  had  had  to  move  house.   The
    family was perceived as  being  supporters  of  the  separatist  cause.
    Paragraph 3.1.1 of the CIG referred to the BDP and the PKK and at  page
    55 there was an accusation of links to the PKK and the BDP seemed to be
    seen as the political wing of the PKK.  It was not argued that  it  was
    enough for the claim to succeed as the appellant was a Kurd  Alevi  and
    had no passport and was a low-level supporter at risk but it was argued
    there had not been a proper assessment.   What  had  been  said  by  Ms
    Everett was doing the judge's job for her.  There was  no  marrying  of
    the facts of the case with the background  material  or  to  IK.   That
    meant that the analysis was flawed.

15.  I reserved my determination.

16.  The essential challenge in this case is to the failure as  it  is  said
    to be by the judge to  take  proper  consideration  of  the  background
    material when considering the appellant's claim to be at risk as a  low
    level separatist activist from the southeast of Turkey and the  failure
    to take into account the guidance in  IK.   Mr  Collins  placed  lesser
    weight on the point at paragraph 7 of the grounds that  the  judge  had
    concentrated more on the unsatisfactory elements on the  parts  of  the
    claim that which were  accurate.   I  do  not  read  this  as  being  a
    challenge to the judge's credibility findings and indeed that  was  not
    the line taken by Mr Collins in his submissions.

17.  As regards the credibility findings, it  is  clear  from  paragraph  46
    that the judge did not find credible the core of the appellant's  claim
    with regard to what happened to him in Turkey and  his  claim  to  fear
    persecution.  In particular the claim to have been  arrested  and  ill-
    treated by the authorities was found to be lacking in  credibility  and
    to have been fabricated.  As regards the remark by the  judge  also  at
    paragraph 46  that  she  found  that  if  the  appellant  had  had  any
    involvement with the HDP it has been as a low-level supporter only  and
    not as someone who would be of interest to the authorities, I  consider
    that that was a matter of taking things in the alternative rather  than
    accepting that the appellant had been involved with the HDP as  a  low-
    level supporter.  But it may be sensible to consider whether the  claim
    could have succeeded on that basis in  any  event  in  considering  the
    challenges to the judge's decision.

18.  It is helpful I think to look at the skeleton argument that was  before
    the judge which was drafted by and the  appellant  was  represented  by
    Counsel other than Mr Collins.  This as I read it is essentially geared
    to a claim on the basis that the  appellant  could  show  that  he  had
    previously come to the adverse attention  of  the  authorities  due  to
    suspected involvement of the PKK.  In particular it is said that if the
    appellant is found credible he fears persecution at the  hands  of  the
    state and would not be able to avail himself  of  protection  from  the
    authorities or internal relocation.  The submissions  in  the  skeleton
    argument are essentially premised on the fact of  the  appellant  being
    known to be involved with the  HDP  and  therefore  being  seen  to  be
    involved with the PKK.  There is reference from the US State Department
    Report to the use of anti-terror laws to  silence  political  opponents
    and not  only  high-profile  figures,  but  it  includes  reference  to
    suspected PKK sympathisers and allegations that many detainees  had  no
    substantial link to terrorism and were detained to weaken the  HDP  and
    the DBP.  There is also a quotation from the  CIG  concerning  the  HDP
    where it is said that where ordinary members of the HDP  have  come  to
    the adverse attention of the authorities this has generally been whilst
    participating in demonstrations and  rallies  and  an  ordinary  member
    would not otherwise generally attract  the  adverse  attention  of  the
    authorities on account of their political beliefs.   It  is  said  that
    however if the person is a senior member of the HDP  or  has  otherwise
    come to the adverse attention of the authorities because  of  suspected
    involvement with the PKK or support for  autonomy  for  Kurdish  people
    then they may be at risk but each case must be  assessed  according  to
    its individual facts.  It is perhaps worth noting in passing also there
    is no reference to IK in the skeleton argument.   I  accept  of  course
    there was a good deal of background evidence in the bundle and  also  a
    copy of  IK,  but  inevitably  the  judge  would  be  likely  to  focus
    consideration on the specific submissions that were put before her.

19.  In  light  of  the  judge's  findings,  taken  at  their  highest,  the
    appellant is an Alevi Kurd from  the  southeast  who  would  return  to
    Turkey without a passport, and as a low-level supporter of the HDP  who
    had never come to the adverse attention of the authorities.   When  one
    looks at  the  guidance  in  IK  the  list  of  factors  which  are  in
    exhaustively considered to be material  in  giving  rise  to  potential
    suspicion in the minds  of  the  authorities  concerning  a  particular
    claimant, a good deal of such matters is geared towards  a  history  of
    adverse interest on the part of the  authorities  in  the  claimant  in
    question.  There are however factors relevant to this  case,  including
    that  the  appellant  has  family   connections   with   a   separatist
    organisation,  Alevi  faith,  lack  of  a  current  up-to-date  Turkish
    passport.  With regard to the first of these, it is  relevant  to  note
    that in  light  of  the  judge's  findings,  the  appellant  had  never
    experienced any problems on account of  connections  with  his  father,
    brother and uncles and their separatist connections other than the fact
    which the judge does not appear to have addressed that they had to move
    house regularly.  That is far from persecution.   The  judge  does  not
    appear to have been taken to any evidence and nor have  I  to  indicate
    that a person with the kind of profile that the appellant would have on
    return even taken at its highest would place him at risk.  There is  no
    indication that the authorities have ever been aware of  his  political
    sympathies except insofar as the family  found  it  necessary  to  move
    house periodically.  So insofar  as  the  judge  did  not  specifically
    address the appellant's background material referred to by Mr  Collins,
    it does not seem to me that that evidence indicates that a person  with
    a profile as found by the appellant would face a real risk on return to
    Turkey.  In that regard particularly I note paragraph 3.1.5 of the  CIG
    which I have referred to above,  which  emphasises  the  need  for  the
    person to have come to the adverse attention of the authorities because
    of suspected involvement with the PKK as placing them at risk.  Nor  do
    I consider the judge could be said to  have  erred  materially  in  not
    referring to the IK guidance.  It was not the matter that was  referred
    to in the appellant's skeleton before the judge,  and  the  very  small
    number of the relevant factors to be taken into account under  IK  that
    are relevant to this case are not such as in my view could properly  be
    said to give rise to a real risk on  return.   Accordingly  I  consider
    that it has not  been  shown  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  his
    evaluation of this claim and her  decision  dismissing  the  appeal  is
    therefore maintained.

20.  No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
