
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/05714/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24th August 2017                      | On 01st September 2017             |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  mr G. G.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Patyna (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Chowdhury promulgated  on  27th  February  2017  in
    which the judge allowed the claimant's appeal against the Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse his protection claim. The judge allowed  the
    appeal on asylum grounds, finding that the Appellant would be at a real
    risk of persecution because of his political opinion,  were  he  to  be
    returned to Turkey.

 2. The Secretary of State now seeks to appeal against  that  decision  and
    within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued by  the  Secretary  of  State
    that the judge erred firstly in failing to consider the possibility  of
    the Appellant relocating internally within Turkey. It is  argued  there
    that within the case of IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey country
    guidance [2004] UKIAT 00312 that the Immigration Appeals Tribunal  took
    account of the fact that there may be people who would be identified as
    a PKK/Kurdish political supporter and  would  be  of  interest  to  the
    police in the south east but would be of little interest outside of the
    Kurdish areas.

 3. It is also argued within the Grounds of Appeal that  the  judge  relied
    upon the factors identified in the case of IA as a checklist to  assess
    risk, rather than taking  account  of  an  overall  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's risk.  It is  further  argued  that  the  judge  failed  to
    explain what would lead to the Appellant being at risk  upon  returning
    to the airport and the judge it was said had not properly explained her
    reason for finding the Appellant would be detained at the airport.

 4. Permission to appeal had been  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Brunnen on 16th June 2017.  He found that the Grounds of  Appeal  were
    arguable, however in respect of the argument  where  it  was  said  the
    judge had not properly explained her reason for finding  the  Appellant
    would be detained at the airport, Judge Brunnen found  that  the  judge
    made no such finding and what was stated by the judge at  paragraph  42
    did not specifically relate to questioning at the airport.

 5. I am grateful for the very helpful submissions made by both  the  legal
    representatives today which I have fully taken account of  in  reaching
    my decision.  I am most grateful to the position taken by  Mr  Staunton
    on behalf of the Secretary of  State  who,  having  consulted  with  Ms
    Patyna on behalf of the claimant, concedes that he is in difficulty  in
    respect of the first Ground of Appeal relating to internal  relocation,
    on the basis that Mr Staunton tells me that the  question  of  internal
    relocation was not in  fact  considered  within  the  original  refusal
    letter by the Secretary of State, nor was it argued before  the  First-
    tier tribunal Judge from what I am told by Ms Patyna who was present at
    the First-tier Tribunal and also after  consideration  of  the  judge's
    Record of Proceedings.

 6. In such circumstances and Mr Staunton quite properly concedes it  would
    be wholly wrong for the Upper Tribunal to consider that as a reason why
    the decision should be overturned, if the internal relocation  argument
    was neither raised in the original refusal  or  before  the  First-tier
    Judge.

 7. As Mr Staunton quite properly therefore concedes, the only issue really
    before the Upper Tribunal  today  is  whether  or  not  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge simply relied upon the factors identified in the country
    guidance case of IA (Turkey) [2003] UKAIT 0034 as confirmed in the case
    of IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey country guidance [2004] UKAIT
    00312 when considering the Appellant's risk.

 8. The argument within the Grounds  of  Appeal  that  the  judge  had  not
    properly explained the reason why the Appellant would  be  detained  at
    the airport, as stated by Judge Brunnen is not what the judge found  at
    paragraph 42. The judge makes no specific findings that  the  Appellant
    would be detained at the airport. He noted in paragraph 41 that  in  KI
    the Upper Tribunal found that "if a person  was  held  for  questioning
    either in the airport police  station  after  arrival  or  subsequently
    elsewhere  in  Turkey  and  the  situation  justifies  it,  then   some
    additional inquiry could be made with the Authorities in his local area
    about him where more extensive records may be kept, either manual or on
    computer".  The judge went on in paragraph 42 to find that there was  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood that such further  inquiries  would  be
    made in the  Appellant's  case.   That  was  not  a  finding  that  the
    Appellant would actually be detained at the airport.

 9. In respect of whether or not the judge simply relied upon a  checklist,
    the judge within her decision stated at  paragraph  29  that  she  must
    assess the risk to the Appellant on return guided by the approach in IA
    (Turkey).

10. As Ms Patyna rightly states in her skeleton argument the Tribunal in IA
    did set out various potential risk factors which the judge  should  and
    did quite properly consider, but she has not simply considered it as  a
    checklist in my judgment because as Ms Patyna rightly  argues  she  has
    gone on not only to consider the potential risk factors,  but  then  to
    state specifically at paragraph 42 that  she  has  had  regard  to  the
    existing overall political and human rights context in Turkey and noted
    that there had been an escalation of  the  action  between  pro-Kurdish
    parties and the Turkish Government and in the case of  this  particular
    Appellant she found that he now had a raised profile as a supporter  of
    the pro-Kurdish parties and found that it would be  likely  that  there
    would be a risk of treatment contrary to the  Refugee  Convention  also
    contrary to Article 3 of  the  ECHR  on  the  basis  of  his  political
    opinion.

11. The judge has not simply used a checklist.  It would be  wrong  of  the
    judge not to consider  the  potential  risk  factors  described  in  IA
    (Turkey),   but has clearly taken account not just of those factors but
    also the further factors  which  she  has  mentioned  in  paragraph  42
    regarding the political and human rights contexts and the escalation of
    the actions between the pro-Kurdish parties and the Turkish  Government
    when considering the evidence in the round.

12. In reaching  her  view  she  therefore  has  in  my  judgment  properly
    considered  the  overall  circumstances  and  the  risk  faced  by  the
    Appellant and in my judgment has given clear, adequate  and  sufficient
    reasons for her findings. She has made findings which were open to  her
    on the basis of the evidence before her.

13. I therefore do not find that the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Chowdhury contains any material error of law and in those circumstances
    I dismiss the appeal and uphold the error of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Chowdhury.



Notice of Decision

The  Respondent's  appeal  is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Chowdhury is upheld.

The Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  directed  that  the  Appellant  was
granted anonymity.  I consider that it is appropriate for such anonymity to
be continued.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 31st August 2017
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
