
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05321/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 February 2020                  |On 5 March 2020                      |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                     SMA

                                                               Appellant
                                     and

                  THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                     Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Gajjar of counsel, instructed by SMA
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Pakistan. He first  entered  the  United
    Kingdom, as a student, in 2002. He last entered the United  Kingdom  on
    17  August  2015  and  applied  for  asylum  on  6  October  2015.  His
    application was refused on 7 March 2016 and his subsequent  appeal  was
    dismissed           on           11            October            2016.



















































2.   The Appellant made further submissions  on  11  April  2017  which  the
    Respondent accepted amounted to a  fresh  claim  but  she  refused  his
    application on 24 May 2019. He appealed against this decision and First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hussain  dismissed  his  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 1 November 2019. The Appellant appealed  and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gumsley granted him permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 15 December 2019.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

3.   Counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office Presenting  Officer  made
    oral submissions and I have taken these into account when  reaching  my
    decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

4.    The  Appellant's  first  ground  of  appeal  relates  to  the  Judge's
    assessment of the weight to be given to a letter from  Jholey  Lal  Law
    Associates. In paragraph 13 of his decision, the Judge  referred  to  a
    letter, dated 6 April 2017, but this would appear to be  a  mistake  as
    the letter in question, which was at page 16 of the Appellant's Bundle,
    is dated 28 January 2017. In this letter, the lawyer confirms that  the
    Appellant's father  had  sought  his  assistance  and  mentioned  that,
    although he could not assist him, he did call the local police  station
    on 10 January 2017 and ascertained that  the  police  had  visited  the
    family home and were looking for the Appellant.

5.   The letter does not mention when the Appellant's  father  attended  the
    attorney's office and, the Judge asserted that  this  was  inconsistent
    with the affidavit of the Appellant's father, dated  6  February  2017,
    which says that he visited on 5 January 2017. However, in my view, this
    is not necessarily the case. Nor can it necessarily  be  inferred  from
    the wording of the affidavit that  the  attorney  contacted  the  local
    police station on 5 January 2017.

6.   There was another letter from Jholey Lal Law Associates  which  had  an
    address at the bottom of it but it  was  open  to  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to cast doubt on the reliability of the letter, dated 28  January
    2017, on the basis that it did not give an address for the firm. It was
    also open to him to note that the extract from the  Sindh  Bar  Council
    only refers to an Abdul Raqaque Channa and says that  he  practices  in
    Lakarna district and division. No explanation was given at the error of
    law hearing for the difference in the name on the letters and the  name
    in the extract from the Sindh Bar Council.

7.   The record of proceedings on my file was difficult to read but  I  note
    that the refusal letter made it  clear  that  the  Respondent  did  not
    believe that the letter, dated 28 January 2017, was an official  letter
    from a legal firm in Karachi. It was also confirmed by the parties' own
    records of proceedings that the Home Office Presenting Officer had  put
    it to the Appellant at the First-tier Tribunal that lawyers can be paid
    to write letters which were not accurate. Therefore, whether or not the
    lack of an address on the letter was  out  to  the  Appellant,  he  was
    generally on notice that the Respondent did not believe it was a letter
    which could be relied upon, as required  by  AM  (fair  hearing)  Sudan
    [2015] UKUT 00656. The  very  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  provided
    another letter from the Jholey Lal Law Associates with an address on it
    indicates that he was aware that the lack of an address may go  to  the
    credibility of the earlier letter.

8.   But I have also taken  into  account  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hussain made an error of fact in paragraph  17  of  his  decision  when
    considering the letter from the MQM, dated 21 January 2017. It may well
    be the case that the Appellant's family had informed  the  MQM  of  the
    difficulties that they  were  experiencing  since  the  Appellant  left
    Pakistan. But this did not  detract  from  the  fact  that  the  letter
    confirmed that the Appellant had worked with the Party until 2013. This
    was evidence which was within the knowledge of the Rabita Committee and
    did not derive from anything it may have been told by  the  Appellant's
    family. As a consequence, First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain should have
    considered what weight to give to this aspect of the letter.

9.   In addition, the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  asked  witnesses  to
    provide evidence to assist him  at  his  appeal  does  not  necessarily
    render any such evidence self-serving, as was suggested in paragraph 18
    of the decision. If this was the case, an appellant would have  serious
    difficulties in succeeding in an appeal where the burden of proof falls
    upon him.

10.  It is also the case that when considering  whether  there  would  be  a
    sufficiency of protection for the Appellant in Pakistan and whether  he
    had a well-founded fear of persecution the Judge failed to consider the
    evidence provided by the Appellant in the context of relevant objective
    and  country  evidence  contained  within  pages  102  -  131  of   the
    Appellant's Bundle. In particular, he failed to take into  account  the
    information about the Rule of Law provided in paragraphs F1 and  F2  of
    the Freedom House Report Freedom in the World 2019: Pakistan.

11.  For all  of  these  reasons  I  find  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hussain's decision did contain errors of law.

12.  The parties agreed, that if an error  of  law  was  found,  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  due  to  the  extent  to
    which credibility had  been  in  issue  in  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hussain's decision.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Hussain, Anstis or Gumsley.

Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 20 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

