
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/05275/2017 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2020                  |On 23 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  YAMA [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 22 May 2017.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge McFatridge, promulgated  on  6  September
         2017.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  her
         applications for permission to appeal  made  to  the  FtT  and,  in
         slightly expanded form, to the UT.

      v) The joint minute between the parties in the Court of  Session  (the
         copy on the UT file is signed, but not dated).

     vi) The interlocutor of the Court, dated 13 June  2019,  remitting  the
         case to the UT to reconsider the grant of permission to  appeal  to
         itself.

    vii) The grant of permission by the UT, dated 22 January 2020, in  light
         of the interlocutor of the Court [and of the joint minute].

   viii) The various directions of the UT (in particular, directions  issued
         on 19 August 2020).

     ix) The submission for the appellant, dated 22 May 2020

 2.  I  conducted  the  hearing  on  17   November   from   George   House.
    Representatives attended remotely. No members of the  public  attended,
    either in person or remotely.   The  technology  enabled  an  effective
    hearing.

 3. The joint minute is based on the UT  not  having  provided  "sufficient
    reasons to support the FtT's finding that the [appellant's] expert  had
    no expertise of authenticating documents from the Gambia".  The FtT  at
    [19] found that the expert did not  have  such  expertise,  overlooking
    that his methods were explained at pages 9 - 11 of the  report.   There
    was no agreement on other grounds of appeal, but they were not excluded
    from consideration.

 4. The submission for the appellant dated 22 May  2020  contended  at  [4]
    that in terms of the minute "the respondent accepted that the FtT erred
    in law" on ground 1 (i) (the expert report).

 5. The UT's directions issued on 19 August 2020 required the respondent to
    clarify whether, as stated by the appellant, she conceded error of  law
    by the FtT.

 6. Having heard submissions on ground 1 (1), I indicated my view  that  it
    disclosed material error.  It is accordingly unnecessary to decide  the
    precise intention of the joint minute.

 7. Parties agreed that the result, on that view, should be a fresh hearing
    in the FtT.

 8. The judge erred at [19] in holding that the report did not suggest that
    the author had any  expertise  in  authenticating  documents  from  The
    Gambia.  As stated in the grounds, her (not his) methods are  explained
    at 2.1, 2.3, pp. 9 - 11 of the report.

 9. The judge might have been  entitled  to  find  the  report  of  limited
    assistance; but to find it of none went too far, and  the  reasons  for
    doing so are wrong.

10. In course of submissions I observed a source of confusion.  The  report
    was before the FtT in the SSHD's bundle of documents, item G.  At  page
    3 it lists 3 appendices, the first of which is "expert  background  and
    statement of methodology". The appendices are not in  that  bundle  and
    were  not  produced  by  the  appellant.     The  respondent  made   an
    apparently misleading submission, recorded at [13 (h)] of the decision,
    on absence of the expert's  qualifications  and  methodology,  and  the
    judge does not record whether it was countered for the appellant.

11. The error disclosed by ground 1 (i) requires a fresh hearing, so I  did
    not hear substantially from parties on the remaining grounds.  However,
    it may be useful to record that the judge's apparent acceptance at [24]
    that a new law on FGM made a significant difference appears to be based
    on  rather  cursory  reasons.   The  question  was  not   whether   the
    appellant's position on that issue was based on  "objective  evidence",
    but whether there was evidence that the  law  had  made  a  significant
    difference, bearing on country guidance set prior to that change.

12. It would help the FtT if parties were to agree on an  updated,  unified
    and complete set of documents for reference at the next hearing.

13. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  The case is remitted to the  FtT
    for a fresh hearing, not before Judge McFatridge.

14. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      18 November 2020
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

