
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05800/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 February 2020                 |On 3 March 2020                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKIC
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ANDREW [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Jaisri, Counsel instructed by Arlington Crown
                    Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department.
      However, for the sake of clarity, we shall use the titles by which the
      parties were known before the First-tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda born on 17 May 1979.  He  entered
      the UK as a visitor in September 2002 and  remained  unlawfully  after
      his leave expired in February 2003. He was granted  limited  leave  to
      remain on 20 March 2014 until 20 September 2016.

   3. On 23 December 2015 the appellant was convicted  of  causing  grievous
      bodily harm and sentenced to 90 months imprisonment.

   4. On 31 October 2017 he was served with a notice of decision  to  deport
      him.

   5. The appellant made submissions contending that:

              a. his deportation would breach article 8 ECHR because of  his
                 family and private life in the UK, in particular the family
                 life he enjoys with his son who is a British  citizen  born
                 on 16 August 2010; and


              b. he would be at risk of persecution in Uganda because he  is
                 bisexual.

   6. In  a  decision  dated  5  June  2019,  the  respondent  rejected  the
      appellant's human rights and protection claim. The appellant's  asylum
      claim was certified under section 72(2) of the Nationality Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"). It was also not accepted that he
      was bisexual or would be at risk on return to Uganda  because  of  his
      sexuality.

   7. With respect to the appellant's human rights (article  8)  claim,  the
      respondent accepted that the appellant has a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship with his (British national) son, but not that it would be
      unduly harsh for the child to either live in Uganda or remain  without
      the appellant in the UK (where  he  would  continue  living  with  his
      mother).

   8. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was
      heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Juss  ("the  judge").  In  a
      decision promulgated on 23 October 2019, the judge allowed the appeal.
      The respondent is now appealing against that decision.


   Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   9. The judge dismissed the appellant's asylum claim.  This  part  of  the
      decision has not been  appealed.  We  therefore  do  not  consider  it
      further.

  10. The judge allowed the appellant's appeal under article 8 ECHR  on  the
      basis of his relationship with his son. The judge's reasoning  is  set
      out a paragraph 30, where he stated:

           "What is not accepted [by the respondent] is that  it  would  be
           unduly harsh for this child to live in Uganda should it come  to
           that. I  do  not  agree  that  this  is  so.  Not  only  is  the
           appellant's son a British citizen but the son's mother  [  ]  is
           also a British citizen. She has  not  indicated  that  she  will
           leave the UK to go and live in Uganda. The appellant needs  both
           his loving parents, particularly given that he  has  behavioural
           problems at school. The effect of the  decision  to  remove  the
           appellant is to sever the child's relationship with one  parent.
           Most importantly, his deportation will  extinguish  what  family
           life he has maintained with his son in  difficult  circumstances
           of long-term imprisonment. Even if this is not so, the  decision
           puts a vulnerable child at a critical developmental stage in his
           life in a position of having to relocate which is unduly  harsh.
           This is because there is not only a handwritten letter from  the
           son stating that "I have missed my dad for so long" and that  he
           misses being picked up from school by him, which I accept to  be
           genuine. There is also a letter from [the son's  school]  states
           [sic] that the son had  a  problem  with  "temper  tantrums  and
           aggression" such that there has been "cause to request  meetings
           with [his] parents..."  and  there  have  been  two  fixed  term
           exclusions in his case. There is  nothing  to  suggest  in  this
           letter that the child's difficulties arise from  his  separation
           from his father. Nevertheless, the  stabilising  and  supportive
           effect of a parent, such as the appellant who was  always  shown
           devotion to his child cannot be discounted,  particularly  as  a
           Community Development Worker  refers  to  the  appellant  as  "a
           devoted father to his son" and "who he has kept regular  contact
           with while serving his time in prison"."

  11. At paragraph 31 the judge stated that a situation where an  individual
      has a "genuine and subsisting relationship with  a  partner"  is  also
      relevant in this appeal.

  12. At paragraph 39 the judge set out his  conclusion  that  it  would  be
      unduly harsh for the appellant's child to remain  in  the  UK  without
      him.

  13. At  paragraph  40  the  judge  stated  that  the  public  interest  in
      deportation is "an additional and very weighty  factor  that  must  be
      taken into account" and that the public interest "is reflected in  the
      stringent nature of the test  of  unduly  harsh".  He  then  found  at
      paragraph 41:

           "Even so I do find  that  there  are  compelling  circumstances,
           outside of matters considered within the Rules.  Ultimately  the
           balance of the scales tips in favour of the  appellant  and  the
           appeal is allowed."

Grounds of Appeal

  14. The respondent has advanced four grounds of appeal.

  15. Firstly, it is argued that the  judge  failed  to  provide  sufficient
      reasons to support the finding that it would be "unduly harsh" for the
      appellant's son to remain in the UK without him.

  16. Secondly, it is submitted that the judge failed to  identify  how  the
      "unduly harsh" threshold was met, given that, as stated in SSHD  v  PG
      (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213 at [39], "the fact that a parent who is
      a foreign criminal will no longer  be  in  a  position  to  assist  in
      [difficult periods faced by a child] cannot of itself  mean  that  the
      effects of his deportation are unduly harsh  for  his  partner  and/or
      children".

  17. Thirdly, the grounds submit that the judge has referred  at  paragraph
      31  to  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  partner  as   being
      "relevant" but has not explained how or why this is the case.

  18. Fourthly, it is submitted that the judge failed to consider,  or  make
      findings as to, whether there are  very  compelling  circumstances  as
      required by s117C(6) of the 2002 Act.

Submissions

  19. Ms Fijiwala argued that the judge conflated the issue  of  whether  it
      would be unduly harsh for the appellant's son to live in  Uganda  with
      the entirely distinct question of whether it would be unduly harsh for
      him to remain in the UK without the appellant. She drew  attention  to
      the intermingling of these issues in  the  analysis  contained  within
      paragraph 30 of the decision (cited above at paragraph 10).  She  also
      argued that the judge had not properly considered the  threshold  that
      must be crossed before separation from a parent can  be  characterised
      as "unduly harsh".

  20. She also submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  properly  direct
      himself to, or apply, the correct test under s117C(6), which  required
      an evaluation of whether there were "very compelling circumstances".

  21. Mr Jaisri argued that paragraph 30 of the decision contains within  it
      an adequate evaluation of whether the appellant's deportation would be
      unduly harsh for his son. He argued that it is evident the  judge  had
      regard to all of the relevant factors when assessing undue  harshness.
      He also maintained that paragraph 30 needs to be read  in  conjunction
      with paragraph 39, which is where the judge set out his conclusion  on
      this issue.

  22. He also argued  that  the  evidence,  as  set  out  in  the  decision,
      adequately establishes the basis upon which the judge found  there  to
      be "very compelling circumstances" and that mere omission of the  word
      "very" is not a basis to set aside the decision when the judge plainly
      was aware of, and had in mind, the correct test.


Relevant Law


  23. Section 117C of the 2002 Act provides as follows:

          1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.


         (2)      The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.


         (3)      In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


         (4)      Exception 1 applies where-


             (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,


             (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.


         (5)      Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


         (6)      In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.


         (7)      The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
             taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

  24. In KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53, the  Supreme  Court  considered
      the nature of  the  exercise  required  by  section  117C  (5).   Lord
      Carnwath stated at [23]:

           "... [T]he expression 'unduly harsh' seems clearly  intended  to
           introduce a higher hurdle  than  that  of  reasonableness  under
           section 117B (6), taking account of the public interest  in  the
           deportation of foreign  criminals.  Further  the  word  'unduly'
           implies an element of comparison. It assumes  that  there  is  a
           'due' level of  'harshness',  that  is  a  level  which  may  be
           acceptable or justifiable  in  the  relevant  context.  'Unduly'
           implies something going beyond that level. The relevant  context
           is that set by section 117C (1), that is the public interest  in
           the deportation of foreign  criminals.  One  is  looking  for  a
           degree of harshness  going  beyond  what  would  necessarily  be
           involved for any child faced with the deportation of  a  parent.
           What it does  not  require  in  my  view  (and  subject  to  the
           discussion of the cases in the next section) is a  balancing  of
           relative levels of severity of the parent's offence, other  than
           is inherent in the distinction drawn by the  section  itself  by
           reference to length of sentence.  Nor ... can it be equated with
           a requirement to show 'very compelling reasons'. That  would  be
           in effect to replicate the additional test  applied  by  section
           117C (6) with respect to  sentences  of  four  years  or  more."
           [emphasis added]

  25. The need for there to be a degree of harshness going beyond what would
      necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of  a
      parent has been confirmed - and emphasised - by the Court of Appeal in
      subsequent cases. For example, in SSHD v KF (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA  Civ
      2051 at [30], it is stated:

           "Furthermore, and with respect to the First-tier Tribunal judge,
           I consider that his conclusion on the evidence about the
           respondent's family that his deportation would be unduly harsh
           is unsustainable in the light of Lord Carnwath's analysis of the
           proper interpretation of Exception 2 in s.117C(5), namely that:


                 "One is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond what
                 would necessarily be involved for any child faced with the
                 deportation of a parent."


           Looking at the facts as found by the First-tier Tribunal that
           led to the conclusion that family would suffer adverse
           consequences as a result of the deportation, and in particular
           the consequences for the respondent's son separated from his
           father, it is difficult to identify anything which distinguishes
           this case from other cases where a family is separated. The
           First-tier Tribunal judge found that the respondent's son would
           be deprived of his father at a crucial time in his life. His
           view that "there is no substitute for the emotional and
           developmental benefits for a three-year-old child that are
           associated with being brought up by both parents during its
           formative years" is indisputable. But those benefits are enjoyed
           by all three-year-old children in the care of both parents. The
           judge observed that it was a "fact that being deprived of a
           parent is something a child is likely to find traumatic and that
           will potentially have long-lasting adverse consequences for that
           child" and that he was entitled to take judicial notice of that
           fact. But the "fact" of which he was taking "judicial notice" is
           likely to arise in every case where a child is deprived of a
           parent. All children should, where possible, be brought up with
           a close relationship with both parents. All children deprived of
           a parent's company during their formative years will be at risk
           of suffering harm. Given the changes to the law introduced by
           the amendments to 2002 Act, as interpreted by the Supreme Court,
           it is necessary to look for consequences characterised by a
           degree of harshness over and beyond what every child would
           experience in such circumstances."

  26. Similarly, in SSHD v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ  1213  at  [39]  the
      Court of Appeal stated:

           "I recognise of course the human realities of the situation, and
           I do not doubt that SAT and the three children will suffer great
           distress if PG is deported. Nor do I doubt that their lives will
           in a number of ways be made more  difficult  than  they  are  at
           present. But those, sadly, are the likely  consequences  of  the
           deportation of any  foreign  criminal  who  has  a  genuine  and
           subsisting relationship with a partner and/or children  in  this
           country. I accept Mr Lewis's submission that if PG is  deported,
           the effect on SAT and/or their three children will not go beyond
           the degree of harshness which is necessarily  involved  for  the
           partner or child of a foreign criminal who is deported. That  is
           so, notwithstanding that the passage of  time  has  provided  an
           opportunity for the family ties between PG, SAT and their  three
           children to become stronger than they were at an earlier  stage.
           Although  no  detail  was  provided  to  this   court   of   the
           circumstances of what I have referred to as the knife  incident,
           there seems no reason to doubt that it was both a comfort and an
           advantage for SAT and the children, in particular R, that PG was
           available to intervene when his son was a  victim  of  crime.  I
           agree, however,  with  Mr  Lewis's  submission  that  the  knife
           incident, serious though it may  have  been,  cannot  of  itself
           elevate this case  above  the  norm.  Many  parents  of  teenage
           children are confronted with difficulties and  upsetting  events
           of one sort or another, and have to face one or  more  of  their
           children going through "a difficult period" for  one  reason  or
           another, and the fact that a parent who is  a  foreign  criminal
           will no longer be in a position to assist in such  circumstances
           cannot of itself mean that the effects of  his  deportation  are
           unduly harsh for  his  partner  and/or  children.  Nor  can  the
           difficulties which SAT will inevitably face, increased  as  they
           are by her laudable ongoing efforts to further her education and
           so to improve her earning capacity, elevate the case  above  the
           commonplace so far as the effects of PG's deportation on her are
           concerned..."

  27. In this appeal, subsection (6) of  s117C  is  applicable  because  the
      appellant  was  sentenced  to  more   than   4   years   imprisonment.
      Accordingly, it was not sufficient for the appellant to  rely  on  the
      effect of his deportation on his son being "unduly harsh".  He  needed
      to show something "above and beyond" this, as was explained in SSHD  v
      JG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 982 at [16]:

           "... in so far as the Respondent sought to rely on the effect of
           his deportation on his son (who, being a British citizen, was  a
           qualifying child) it would not  be  enough  to  show  that  that
           effect would be "unduly harsh", in the sense  explained  in  KO.
           That would satisfy Exception [2],  but  because  his  case  fell
           within section 117C(6) he needed  to  show  something  over  and
           above that, which meant showing that the  circumstances  in  his
           case  were,  in  Jackson  LJ's   phrase   in   NA,   "especially
           compelling".   In short, at the risk of  sounding  flippant,  he
           needed to show that the impact on  his  son  was  "extra  unduly
           harsh"." [emphasis added]

Analysis

  28. Under s117C(5) of the 2002 Act, the judge  was  required  to  consider
      whether it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's son  to  live  in
      Uganda and/or whether it would be unduly harsh for him  to  remain  in
      the UK without the appellant.

  29. It is clear that at paragraph 30 of  the  decision  (quoted  above  at
      paragraph 10) the judge assessed - and determined - whether  it  would
      be unduly harsh for the appellant's son to live in Uganda. However, as
      argued by Ms Fijiwala, the assessment of whether it  would  be  unduly
      harsh for the  appellant's  son  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
      appellant appears to have been conflated with consideration of the son
      living in Uganda. For example,  at  paragraph  30,  immediately  after
      stating that deportation will "extinguish  what  family  life  he  has
      maintained with his son" (a factor relevant to the  harshness  of  the
      appellant's son remaining in the UK without him) the judge stated that
      the respondent's decision put a vulnerable child  in  a  position  "of
      having to relocate which is unduly harsh" (a factor  relevant  to  the
      appellant's son living in Uganda). Nonetheless,  as  submitted  by  Mr
      Jaisri, despite the conflation  of  issues  in  paragraph  30  of  the
      decision, the judge did make a clear  finding  that  it  would  unduly
      harsh for the  appellant's  son  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
      appellant (at paragraph 39), and did, in paragraph  30,  give  several
      reasons  that  support  this  conclusion.  The  difficulty   for   the
      appellant, however, is the adequacy of those reasons.

  30. The reasons given by the judge to support his finding that the  impact
      on the appellant's son of remaining in the UK  without  the  appellant
      would be unduly harsh comprise of the following:

              a. the appellant's son needs both his loving parents;


              b. the appellant's relationship with his son will be severed;


              c. the child has missed the appellant whilst the appellant was
                 in prison;


              d. the appellant's son has problems with temper  tantrums  and
                 aggression, and has had  two  fixed  term  exclusions  from
                 school; and


              e. the appellant has always been devoted to his son and has  a
                 strong relationship with him.

  31. In order to substantiate a finding of undue harshness  under  s117C(5)
      of the 2002 Act the judge was required,  in  accordance  with  KO,  to
      identify a degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily  be
      involved for any  child  faced  with  the  deportation  of  a  parent.
      However,  the  factors  identified  by  the  judge,  considered   both
      individually and cumulatively, do not do this. The  only  factor  that
      could, potentially, have  indicated  a  harshness  beyond  that  which
      ordinarily will follow from a child being separated from  a  committed
      and loving parent is the appellant's  son's  difficulties  at  school.
      However, there was no evidence from the school (or  any  professional,
      such as a social worker) indicating that there is a link  between  the
      child's difficulties and separation from the  appellant.  Indeed,  the
      judge acknowledged this at paragraph 30 where he stated that "there is
      nothing to suggest in [the letter from the appellant's  son's  school]
      that the child's difficulties  arise  from  his  separation  from  his
      father". Accordingly, it was, in our view,  not  open  to  the  judge,
      based on his findings of fact  and  evaluation  of  the  evidence,  to
      conclude that the effect of separating  the  appellant  from  his  son
      would be "unduly harsh", in the sense explained in KO.

  32. The judge also fell into error by not applying the correct legal  test
      under s117C(6). At paragraph  41  the  judge  found  that  there  were
      "compelling circumstances outside of  matters  considered  within  the
      Rules". There are three mistakes in this formulation of the test under
      s117C(6):

              a. First, the judge omitted the word "very". Under  s  117C(6)
                 there must  be  very  compelling  circumstances,  not  just
                 compelling circumstances.


              b. Second, the very compelling circumstances must be over  and
                 above undue harshness. By using  the  phrase  "outside  of"
                 rather than "over and above" it appears the judge  may  not
                 have had in mind the elevated threshold in s117C(6).


              c. Third, the reference  to  "outside  of  matters  considered
                 within  the  Rules"  suggests  that  the  judge  failed  to
                 appreciate that the test of "very compelling circumstances"
                 is  not  only  within  the  Rules  (paragraph  398  of  the
                 Immigration Rules) but is also within  primary  legislation
                 (s117C(6)  of  the  2002  Act).  It  is  not  "outside  of"
                 anything.

  33. Moreover, the conclusion that there were  very  significant  obstacles
      over and above undue harshness was not open to the  judge  because  it
      cannot be established that s117C(6) is satisfied by relying solely  on
      the contention that the effect of deportation would be unduly harsh on
      a child, if the effect on the child does not even meet  the  threshold
      in 117C(5). Indeed, reliance on such factors would not  be  sufficient
      to meet s117C(6) even if they were enough to  (just)   meet  s117C(5).
      This is explained NA (Pakistan) & Another v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  662
      at [30], where it is stated:

           "In  the  case  of  a  serious  offender  who  could  point   to
           circumstances in his own case which could be said to  correspond
           to the circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2, but  where
           he could only just succeed in such an argument, it would not  be
           possible to describe his situation as involving very  compelling
           circumstances, over and above those described  in  Exceptions  1
           and 2. One might describe that  as  a  bare  case  of  the  kind
           described in Exceptions 1 or 2. On the other hand, if  he  could
           point to factors identified in the descriptions of Exceptions  1
           and 2 of an especially compelling kind in support of an  Article
           8 claim, going well beyond what would be necessary to make out a
           bare case of the kind described in  Exceptions  1  and  2,  they
           could in principle constitute"  very  compelling  circumstances,
           over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and  2",  whether
           taken  by  themselves  or  in  conjunction  with  other  factors
           relevant to application of Article 8." [emphasis added]

  34. Another way of framing this, using the language of the Court of Appeal
      in JG, is that if the effect of deportation  on  the  appellant's  son
      would not be "unduly harsh" it could not be "extra unduly harsh".

  35. Accordingly, we set aside the decision of the First-Tier  Tribunal  on
      the basis that it involved the making of an error on a point of law.

Remade Decision

  36. Both parties accepted that we should proceed to remake the decision.

  37. The appellant submitted a single item of further evidence, which is  a
      letter from his son's school dated 4 February 2020. This letter states
      that the appellant's son has experienced episodes of extreme anger and
      emotional outbursts (with inconsistent and unpredictable triggers) and
      that he receives emotional support from the  special  education  needs
      department. The letter  states  that  the  appellant  shares  parental
      responsibility with the child's mother, and that he is listed  as  the
      second point of contact. It is also stated that the appellant has:

           "...begun to take on more  responsibility  for  collecting  [his
           son] from school at the end of the school  day,  and  frequently
           takes the opportunity to discuss [his] progress with staff  when
           he is collecting his son."

  38. The appellant's son lives with his mother. In  her  witness  statement
      dated 19 September 2019 she described the appellant as being a devoted
      and loving father and expressed her desire for him to  stay  in  their
      son's life and continue helping with his upbringing. She  stated  that
      it has been hard for her son having his father in prison and she would
      not want him to grow up without a father figure.

  39. The evidence of the appellant's son, by  way  of  a  letter  dated  19
      September 2019, is that he is sad because he  misses  his  father  and
      that he will not see him if he is sent to Uganda.

  40. The appellant's evidence, in his witness statement before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal, is that he has a very close bond with his son and wants
      to maintain the relationship. He states that he  was  given  a  "clear
      indication" that his child's aggressive behaviour leading to expulsion
      from school was due to his absence.

  41. We are in no doubt that the appellant's deportation will cause his son
      to be distressed and upset. Nor do we doubt that his life will be more
      difficult - and worse - because of the absence of his father. It is in
      the best interests of the appellant's son to have both of his  parents
      living close to him, and for his father to continue to be  engaged  in
      his life. The effect of deportation would certainly be harsh.

  42. However, for the effect to be "unduly harsh" there must, as  explained
      by the Supreme Court in KO and confirmed subsequently by the Court  of
      Appeal in KF, PG and JG, be a degree of  harshness  that  goes  beyond
      what would necessarily be  involved  for  any  child  faced  with  the
      deportation of a parent. The evidence, taken at its very highest, does
      not show there to be such a degree of harshness. There is  nothing  in
      the evidence of the appellant, his son, or his son's mother  -  or  in
      any documents that have been submitted - which  shows  the  effect  of
      deportation on the  appellant's  son  goes  beyond  that  which  is  a
      necessary and expected consequence  of  deportation.  The  appellant's
      strongest argument is that the degree of harshness  goes  beyond  that
      which would necessarily be involved because of his son's  difficulties
      with extreme anger and  emotional  outbursts.  However,  there  is  no
      evidence from the school or any  professional  indicating  that  these
      difficulties are related to the appellant's absence or  will  be  made
      worse by his deportation. Accordingly, Exception 2  in  s117C(5)  does
      not apply because it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's son
      to remain in the UK without the appellant, in the sense  explained  in
      KO.

  43. As it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's son to  remain  in
      the UK without him, it is not necessary for us to determine whether it
      would be unduly harsh for the  appellant's  son  to  live  in  Uganda.
      However, our finding on this issue is that it would  be  unduly  harsh
      because it would entail separation from his mother, with whom  he  has
      lived his entire life.

  44. Where, as here, an appellant who has been sentenced to over four years
      imprisonment is relying on the effect of his deportation on his  child
      to resist deportation under article 8 ECHR he must show something over
      and above undue harshness.  The  appellant  is  unable  to  meet  this
      requirement because, for the reasons explained above,  the  effect  of
      his deportation on his  son  does  not  even  meet  the  unduly  harsh
      threshold.


Decision


  45. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law.

  46. We do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss
      the appellant's claim that  his  deportation  would  breach  the  UK's
      obligations under the Refugee Convention because this  aspect  of  the
      decision has not been challenged.

  47. We set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
      appellant's appeal on the basis that his deportation would be unlawful
      under s6 of the Human Rights Act  1998  and  remake  the  decision  by
      dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds.
|                                      |                               |
|                                      |                               |
|Signed                                |                               |
|                                      |                               |
|                                      |                               |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan         |Dated: 13 February 2020        |

