
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05012/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 April 2017                     |On 12 May 2017                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                               mr behrouz ahmi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs John-Rose (Solicitor) Immigration Advice Service
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of  Iran  of  Kurdish  origin,  challenges  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Clarke sent on 30  November
    2016 dismissing his appeal against a decision made by the respondent on
    5 May 2016 refusing to grant him asylum.

2.   I should mention at the  outset  that  a  few  days  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing before me the appellant's  representatives  faxed  two
    bundles of documents, the first some 101 pages being mainly  background
    matters that were before the  FtT  judge,   The  second  being  further
    materials.  I made clear at the outset  that  the  latter  being  post-
    decision, they were not relevant to the error of law issue.

3.   The grounds of appeal stated that the judge's finding at  paragraph  66
    that "the appellant was not credible regarding his claims of  illegally
    exiting Iran" were not determinative of the  alternative  limb  of  his
    claim which was that he faced risk on return as an undocumented  asylum
    seeker of Kurdish ethnicity.  The grounds  stated  that  there  was  no
    country guidance to justify treating a failure to show illegal exit  as
    determinative of the issue of risk on return as an  undocumented  Kurd.
    They go further and indicate that there was further up-to-date evidence
    that had been produced to the judge which the judge failed to consider.

4.   I am grateful to both representatives for their concise submissions.

5.   I have no hesitation in rejecting the grounds of appeal.   It  is  true
    that the judge failed to specifically address  the  issue  of  risk  on
    return as an undocumented Kurd, but that cannot be said to amount to an
    error of law or a material error.

6.   In this regard I would first of all observe that the  grounds  rely  on
    what was an alternative submission made to the FtT judge.  The  primary
    submission had been that the appellant was at risk by virtue of  having
    illegally exited in order to escape the  Iranian  authorities  who  had
    become aware he was actively assisting the Party Free Life of Kurdistan
    (PJAK).  However  this  primary  submission  had  been  comprehensively
    rejected by the judge who found his account not  credible  in  material
    respects.   The  judge  specifically  found  that  the  appellant   had
    completed his military service and had not left Iran illegally.

7.   Having found that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  show  that  he  was
    targeted by the  Iranian  authorities,  the  judge  should  have  given
    separate consideration to whether the appellant would  be  at  risk  on
    return by virtue of his  Kurdish  origin  which  was  not  in  dispute.
    However, I do not consider this error was material.  First of all there
    was no Tribunal country guidance decision identifying such persons as a
    risk category.  Mrs John-Rose sought to argue that this  was  an  issue
    which was still live and reference was made  to  the  country  guidance
    case of SSH & HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker)  CG  [2016]  UKUT
    308 (IAC) and a passage in that decision at paragraph 34 in  which  the
    UT panel had noted: "It was not suggested  to  us  that  an  individual
    faces risk on return on the sole basis of being  Kurdish".   This  case
    was before the judge in the appellant's bundle. The problem  with  that
    submission is that the panel in SSH & HR went on to address  the  issue
    in any event, first reviewing the country evidence as set  out  in  the
    Home Office Operational Guidance Note (OGN) and concluding that:

    (i)  whilst there was evidence  of  the  government  disproportionately
         targeting minority groups including Kurds  for  arbitrary  arrests,
         prolonged detention and physical abuse; and that

    (ii) there were

             "no examples provided of ill-treatment of  returnees  with  no
             relevant adverse interest factors  other  than  their  Kurdish
             ethnicity and we conclude that the evidence does not show risk
             of ill-treatment to such returnees ...".

    Hence there was not only no support in the  country  guidance  for  the
    appellant's alternative submission but a firm finding contrary to it.

8.   Mrs John-Rose submitted that  separately  from  the  issue  of  country
    guidance, it was incumbent on the judge to have considered the  further
    evidence  that  was  submitted  including  the  Home   Office   Country
    Information and Guidance on Iran and Background  Information  on  Kurds
    and Kurdish political groups both dated July 2016.  Asked  to  identify
    any passage in these supporting the appellant's alternative submission,
    she drew attention to passages that noted that in the past nine  months
    the authorities had executed more than 750 people, the majority of whom
    were Kurdish (5.2.10 of the first-mentioned document).  Yet neither  of
    these documents contain any suggestion  that  the  increased  level  of
    executions  demonstrated  that  persons  of  Kurdish  origin  were  now
    generally at risk of ill-treatment and  indeed  paragraph  2.3  of  the
    letter  expressly  states  that  "...   in   general   the   level   of
    discrimination faced by Kurds in Iran is not such that  it  will  reach
    the level of being persecutory or otherwise inhuman or  degrading  ill-
    treatment."

9.   The appellant's submission also sought to rely on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant would on return be  "undocumented".   She  referred  in  this
    context to what the panel had said in SHS at paragraph 33 about persons
    who do not possess a passport being "returned on a laissez passer which
    he can obtain from the Iranian Embassy in proof identity ....".  It  is
    far from clear to me that the appellant in this case would  be  in  the
    position of having no passport, since it was the judge's findings  that
    he had left lawfully and accordingly it would be open to him  to  apply
    for or obtain  another  passport.   But  even  if  the  appellant  were
    returned on a laissez passer, he would be someone who, on  the  judge's
    finding, had left lawfully.  There is no background evidence that  even
    remotely suggests that persons in this category would be at risk,  even
    adding into the equation that such a person is of Kurdish origin.

10.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly the judge's decision must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 8 May 2017
    [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
