
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05917/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House,       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|Newport                         |                                |
|On: 25 August 2017              |On: 27 September 2017           |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                     AR
                          (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:      Ms S Alban, Fountain solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Eames in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a  citizen  of
    Iran, against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse  asylum  and
    issue removal directions.


 2. The application under appeal was refused on 31 May 2016.  The Appellant
    exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  This is  the
    appeal which came before Judge  Eames  on  18  November  2016  and  was
    dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The application was refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Garro on 21 February 2017 but on renewal to the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Lindsley  on  10  April  2017  in  the
    following terms

       The grounds of appeal contend that firstly the  First-tier  Tribunal
       erred in law by concluding that the  appellant's  inability  to  say
       which book, chapter and verse in the Bible his favourite Bible story
       came from meant that his conversion was  not  genuine.  This  is  an
       error of  law  as  it  is  irrational  and  insufficiently  reasoned
       conclusion. Secondly it is contended that the  failure  to  remember
       whether Easter was in March or April was  not  a  matter  which  was
       sufficiently reasoned as to be an adequate reason why the  appellant
       was not a genuine convert in the context of the other evidence which
       supported his having genuinely converted. Thirdly it is argued  that
       the First-tier Tribunal failed to engage with the evidence from  the
       appellant's Facebook where he discusses  his  Christian  faith,  and
       whether this created a risk on return in the light of AB and  Others
       (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT  0257  even
       if the appellant was found not to be a credible witness.






 3. By a rule 24 response dated 25 April 2017 the  Respondent  opposed  the
    appeal arguing that the judge gave adequate reasons for his credibility
    findings.




 4. At the hearing before me Mr McVeety appeared to represent the Secretary
    of State and Ms Alban represented the Appellant.


Background

 5.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 13 June
    1992.  He left Iran as a minor  arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    claiming asylum in December 2008. His  application  was  refused  on  4
    January 2010 and his  appeal  dismissed  on  18  February  2010.  After
    becoming appeal rights exhausted he applied for voluntary return before
    making  further  representations  in  2013  and  2016.  These   further
    representations formed the basis of the claim  now  under  appeal.  The
    Appellant accepts that his original claim for asylum  was  based  on  a
    false premise.




 6. The application under appeal is  based  upon  the  Appellant's  claimed
    conversion to Christianity.  The  Respondent  accepts  that  a  genuine
    convert will face danger on a return to Iran but in the refusal  letter
    gives detailed reasons for not accepting  the  Appellant's  conversion.
    The genuineness of his conversion was the sole matter  for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to decide and in dismissing his  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds  the  Judge  found  that  the  core  of  his   account   lacked
    credibility.




 7. The grounds of appeal are summarised in the grant of permission. It  is
    suggested that the Judge's reasons for  finding  that  the  Appellant's
    account was not credible were irrational and/or  inadequately  reasoned
    and that in any event he failed to take into account the effect of  the
    Appellant's Facebook activity.




Submissions

 8. For the Appellant Ms Alban said that the  Judge  had  given  inadequate
    reasons for finding that the Appellant's failure to recall the  chapter
    and  verse  of  his  favourite  Bible  story  militated   against   his
    credibility. The interview record shows that he  offered  to  show  the
    interviewer where in the Bible the story could be  found.  Equally  his
    failure to recall the month of Easter correctly was a very minor matter
    that should not have been held against him. Easter  fell  on  27  March
    2016. Ms Alban accepted that the interview took place on 19 April 2016.
    Ms Alban added that the Judge had failed to consider the effect of  the
    Appellant's Facebook activity and this should have been  considered  in
    isolation from the credibility of his conversion. Ms Alban was not able
    to say whether AB and others (internet activity -  state  of  evidence)
    Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 had been raised in submissions and accepted  that
    it was not raised in the grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    or the skeleton argument.


 9. For the Respondent Mr McVeety said that the adverse credibility finding
    was not just down to  the  two  points  highlighted.  It  is  wrong  to
    artificially separate these issues. The Judge dealt with credibility in
    detail. Looking at these two matters the Appellant was not even able to
    say that the story was found in the New Testament. So far as Easter  is
    concerned it was the same month as the interview.  The  starting  point
    however was the Appellant's  record  of  telling  lies  and  the  Judge
    highlights this in his decision. The  Appellant's  previous  dishonesty
    was held against him and there was nothing irrational in this.  So  far
    as the Facebook activity is concerned this  was  not  advanced  at  the
    hearing on the Appellant's behalf.




10. Ms Alban responded to say that the Facebook question was raised on  the
    day according to her instructions. I consulted the Judge's typed record
    of proceedings and noted that there was nothing to suggest that it  was
    raised. I gave leave for a  statement  to  be  filed  by  the  advocate
    representing the Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal. A  statement
    was duly filed by Lauren Franchina dated 30 August 2017.  Ms  Franchina
    states that her notes show that the  Judge's  attention  was  drawn  to
    pages 408-410 of the Appellant's bundle which contained evidence of the
    Appellant's Facebook posts but there is no reference in the notes to AB
    and others and there is no copy of the case on  the  Appellant's  file.
    She was unable to confirm that it had been raised in submissions.




11. I reserved my decision.


Error of law

12. This is a case where the First-tier Tribunal Judge has a simple factual
    issue to decide. The issue was  whether  the  Appellant  had  genuinely
    converted to Christianity. It was the  Appellant's  case  that  he  had
    converted, or at least begun the process of  conversion,  in  2013  and
    this was supported by documentary and oral evidence. The Respondent did
    not accept that his conversion was genuine and pointed to a  number  of
    matters to substantiate this doubt including  the  two  raised  in  the
    grant of permission to appeal.




13. In his statement of reasons, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  deals  with
    the Appellant's credibility at paragraph 64 onwards before reaching his
    conclusion as  to  credibility  at  paragraph  80.  It  is  a  detailed
    explanation covering more than three pages and fourteen  paragraphs  of
    the decision. The two specific  matters  taken  from  the  Respondent's
    reasons for refusal letter and referred to in submissions and the grant
    of permission to appeal  are  dealt  with  in  one  of  those  fourteen
    paragraphs. At paragraph  69  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  having
    accepted in the previous paragraph that the Appellant has answered some
    of the Respondent's doubts, continues ...


         "In other areas, however, I find that doubts remain. The main  ones
         are these:
          . I do find it particularly strange that  when  asked  about  his
            favourite part of the Bible, while he could describe the story,
            he could not name the parts of the  Bible  it  came  from.  The
            appellant has explained that by saying, in  essence,  that  the
            story  occurred  in  several  places  in  the  Bible,  and  the
            structure of the Bible, with chapter and verse numbers etc, was
            superimposed  on  its  substance  and  was  merely  a  way   of
            identifying parts of the Bible one wanted to refer to.  He  may
            have a point, but it is still true that  those  who  study  the
            Bible use that referencing  system  and  it  is  reasonable  to
            assume it is important to know the context of  stories  in  the
            Bible, particularly one's favourite ones. I do find that to  be
            a weakness in the appellant's case.


          . It is also said by the respondent that it is curious  that  the
            appellant did not know the month in which Easter fell in  2016,
            the year  in  which  he  was  being  asked  this  question.  He
            justified this  by  saying  that  in  previous  years  and  the
            following year it was indeed April. But it does  seem  unlikely
            to me that a person who had converted with  all  his  heart  to
            Christianity was not aware of the month of this most  important
            of  Christian  festivals.  I  take  into   account   that   the
            appellant's background is Iranian and hence his  possible  lack
            of familiarity with the Western calendar, but on the other hand
            he has not shown any difficulties with the Western calendar  in
            other parts of his evidence. This then is  also  a  shortcoming
            which weakens his claim to have converted."




14. Having identified these two weaknesses the Judge examines other aspects
    of the Appellant's  claim  finding,  as  already  noted,  that  he  has
    answered some of the Respondent's doubts but also finding factors  that
    militate  against  his   credulity.   These   factors   including   his
    acknowledged dishonesty relating to his previous claim (paragraph  65),
    the timing of his claimed conversion (paragraph  73)  and  his  overall
    dishonesty (paragraph 74-77). It is a comprehensive assessment and,  in
    my judgement, a balanced assessment.  Whilst  it  is  possible  that  a
    different Tribunal may have reached a different decision  as  to  where
    the balance lay there is nothing that could be said to  be  irrational,
    perverse or inadequately reasoned. Indeed,  the  Judge's  reasoning  is
    very clearly set out. It is abundantly clear that  the  Judge  has  not
    taken the two highlighted issues in isolation, if he had  done  it  may
    well be that his conclusion could be considered  irrational  for  these
    are indeed relatively minor matters. However, these  two  aspects  form
    only part of the Judge's overall credibility assessment. He finds  them
    to be 'shortcomings' or 'weaknesses' and the fundamental factor leading
    to the adverse credibility finding is the Appellant's dishonesty. It is
    a finding that the Judge  was  manifestly  entitled  to  make  and  the
    conclusion at paragraph 80


         "Putting those shortcomings all together, I find they  collectively
         cast enough doubt on the appellant's account that overall I do  not
         find he has shown to the lower standard  of  proof  that  he  is  a
         genuine  Christian  convert,  or  that  he  has  genuinely  adopted
         Christianity as his faith"


    reflects the balanced nature of the reasoning and the decision.  In  my
    judgement there is no error of law.




15. The other point raised by the Appellant relates to the Facebook  posts.
    The complaint before me is that the Judge failed to take account of  AB
    and others and,  if  he  had  done  so,  he  should  have  reached  the
    conclusion despite the adverse credibility finding that  the  Appellant
    was at risk on return.




16. In the first place, I am satisfied that AB and others was  not  brought
    to the attention of the Judge. It is not referred to in the grounds  of
    appeal, the skeleton argument, the Judge's record of proceedings or the
    decision. Ms Franchina, the advocate at  the  hearing,  cannot  confirm
    that it was raised but can confirm that there is no mention  of  it  in
    her notes and that there is no copy on file. I am sure that there would
    have been if it had been raised in submissions. It  is  not  a  Country
    Guidance decision. There can in my judgement be  no  criticism  of  the
    Judge in these  circumstances  for  not  mentioning  the  case  in  his
    decision.




17. So far as the substance of the  allegation  of  risk  is  concerned  Ms
    Franchina says that the Judge's attention was drawn to pages 408-410 of
    the Appellant's bundle which  contained  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    Facebook posts. This does not fit very well  with  the  indexed  bundle
    submitted to the First-tier Tribunal which records pages 393-413 of the
    bundle as "Various Photographs with Church Members".  Further  this  is
    not supported by the Judge's typed record of proceedings but of  course
    this is not meant to be a verbatim  transcript.  I  accept  that  these
    pages were mentioned because Ms Franchina has made a statement to  that
    effect but it certainly appears that they can have  been  mentioned  no
    more than in passing.




18. Nevertheless, the failure of the Judge to mention  these  two  Facebook
    posts in his decision and the failure to  mention  AB  and  others  may
    still amount to an error of law so those posts must be examined.  There
    are two relevant posts by the Appellant. The first (at page 409) reads


         "Good morning beautiful people. We have bible study  today  at  ...
         Bethel Church at one pm. It is  going  to  be  in  English,  Farsi,
         Kurdish (surani). I have provided some Kurdish, Farsi  and  English
         bible books. Pastor AC has provided this service.  I  be  there  as
         well. God bless you all."


    The second (at page 410) dated 13 October reads


         "Hello everyone, we have bible study today at ... Bethel church  at
         one pm. It is going to be in English, Farsi,  Kurdish  (surani)  by
         Pastor AC. Come along"


    This is the entirety of the Appellant's relevant Facebook  activity  as
    evidenced in the  bundle  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  indeed
    elsewhere.




19. The headnote to AB and others makes it  clear  that  the  case  is  not
    intended to give guidance because there was  no  sufficient  evidential
    basis to do so and that the decision was  reported  only  so  that  the
    evidence considered by the Upper Tribunal was in the public domain.  It
    must follow from this that, if an argument is to be put forward to  the
    Upper Tribunal relating to the effect of Facebook activity on a  return
    to Iran that those putting forward such an argument must expect  to  do
    so armed with more evidence than was the case in AB  and  others.  This
    case is the very antithesis of that. There was no argument  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and no evidence relating to reception in  Iran  put
    forward. As noted above the Facebook posts were raised no more than  in
    passing and no argument was put forward as to their  relevance  on  the
    Appellant's return. It is raised for the first time in the  application
    for permission to appeal and then without any of the evidence that  was
    absent in AB and others and indeed without any argument other than  the
    reference to AB and others. Although the skeleton argument submitted to
    the Upper Tribunal mentions the Facebook posts and AB  and  others  the
    bundle of documents, whilst copying most of the bundle put  forward  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, does not include Section E (pages 393-462)  of
    the First-tier bundle) containing the Facebook posts. Section C -  Case
    Law does not include AB and others. Every indication is given that  the
    Facebook posts and AB and others is an afterthought and, in the hearing
    before me, Ms Alban did little to suggest otherwise doing no more  than
    repeating the grounds of appeal.




20. In my judgement, the failure of the Judge to mention the  two  Facebook
    posts in his decision and the failure to mention AB and others does not
    amount to a material error of law. These two posts are brief and in  my
    judgment inconsequential. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that  the
    Appellant's claimed conversion was not genuine so these posts cannot be
    said to be evidence of conversion. They  are  evidence  only  that  the
    Appellant has posted notification, one two occasions, of a Bible  study
    class. There was no argument put before me, and no  reason  for  me  to
    consider that the Iranian authorities would take such posts as evidence
    of apostasy causing them to have an adverse interest in  the  Appellant
    on his return.




21. My conclusion from all of the above is that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contains no error of law  material  to  the  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal


  Summary

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.




Signed:                                 Date: 26 September 2017


[pic]


J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
