
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05426/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd April 2019                             |On 25th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                 Mrs D R H H
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs C Jaquiss
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant, born on 14th October 1971, is a citizen  of  Iraq.   The
    Appellant  was  represented  by  Mrs  Jaquiss.   The   Respondent   was
    represented by Ms Cunha, a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made an application for asylum on 26th September 2016
    which had been refused by the  Respondent  on  11th  April  2018.   The
    Appellant had appealed that decision and her appeal was heard by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Asjad sitting at Birmingham  on  9th  August
    2018.  The judge had dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  Application for
    permission to appeal had been made and had been refused by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 17th October 2018.  Application to renew  the  Grounds
    of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal had been made and permission  had  been
    granted on 24th January 2019 by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill.   On  6th
    February 2019 the Respondent had provided a Rule 24 notice.

Submissions

 3.  After  considering  the  judge's  decision  it  was  agreed   by   the
    representatives that a material error of law had been made due  to  the
    failure of the judge to consider evidence provided by  the  Appellant's
    daughter within his decision.

 4. This was in many  ways  a  properly  considered  and  argued  decision.
    However, as accepted by  both  representatives,  at  no  stage  in  her
    consideration of the evidence did  the  judge  make  reference  to,  or
    consider, the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  daughter.   She  had  at
    paragraph 2 recorded the fact that she  had  heard  evidence  from  the
    daughter, noted that evidence in the  Record  of  Proceedings  and  had
    stated that she  had taken all evidence into account.   While  she  may
    well have done so there  is  no  clue  within  the  decision  that  the
    daughter's evidence was considered.

 5. The daughter had provided a five page witness statement which  she  had
    adopted in oral evidence.  The cross-examination recorded in the Record
    of Proceedings at the First-tier Tribunal was very limited and did  not
    on  the  face  of  it  challenge  or  undermine  that  evidence.    The
    Appellant's claim for asylum was on  the  basis  of  a  fear  that  her
    daughter would be subjected to a forced marriage on return to the  IKR.
    The daughter had provided written evidence of the background facts that
    led her to conclude  such  marriage  was  in  contemplation.   She  had
    provided an explanation as to why her mother (the Appellant)  initially
    still intended to return to the IKR and what thereafter had prompted  a
    change of mind and then the claim  for  asylum.   Those  were  material
    matters that may, had the judge accepted them as credible, provided  an
    explanation for actions taken by the  Appellant  which  the  judge  had
    found adverse to her credibility.  It is possible  therefore  that  had
    the judge considered and accepted the daughter's evidence it could have
    had a material effect upon the outcome of the case.

 6.  It  was  in  those  circumstances  that  it   was   agreed   by   both
    representatives following a helpful skeleton produced from Mrs  Jaquiss
    which distilled the germane points  from  earlier  lengthy  Grounds  of
    Appeal that for the above reason a material error of law had been  made
    requiring a fresh decision to be made in the First-tier Tribunal.





Notice of Decision

 7. I find that a material error of law was made by the judge in the First-
    tier Tribunal and direct that the matter be remitted back to the First-
    tier Tribunal to make a fresh decision before a judge other than  Judge
    Asjad.

 8. An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




