
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
pa/05174/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8 January 2018                         |  On 5 February 2018              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                      nk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Parkin, Counsel instructed by AHZ Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Lebanon. Her  date  of  birth  is  3  May
    1991.  She came to the UK as a visitor  on  10  August  2015  with  her
    mother. Her visa expired on 9 December 2015.  She claimed asylum on  13
    November 2015.  Her application was refused by the Secretary  of  State
    in a decision of 13 May 2016.   The  Appellant  appealed  against  this
    decision and her appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge J  K
    Swaney in a decision promulgated on 6 July 2017 following a hearing  on
    5 June 2017.  The Appellant was  granted  permission  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge R Chapman on 11 October 2017.

2.   The Appellant's evidence before the Tribunal can  be  summarised.   She
    is a qualified nutritionist. She worked in a caf�.  Shortly  after  her
    arrival here she was falsely accused of  assisting  Israel  by  passing
    information through an informer.  A warrant was issued for her  arrest.
    Her father was arrested and  ill-  treated.   Her  mother  returned  to
    Lebanon on 19 August 2015.    She was told  by  her  father  whilst  in
    Lebanon she had been observed by someone meeting an Israeli agent in  a
    coffee shop.  The Appellant believes that the  incident  on  which  the
    authorities rely is an occasion when she met a client called Khalil  in
    a coffee shop whilst she was working as a nutritionist at  the  end  of
    July 2015, two weeks before she came to the UK. He was with another man
    whom she did not know.  They had coffee and a chat and they spoke about
    politics.  She told them that she was more interested in  fashion  than
    politics. They  laughed  at  her.  They  asked  her  if  she  would  be
    interested in working as an informer.  She thought it was  a  joke  and
    laughed it off. The men were Israeli agents under  observation  by  the
    authorities.  They were arrested. The police were arresting  all  those
    who had been in contact with them.   Her  father  stated  that  he  had
    received threats from Hezbollah.  The Appellant's  father  sent  her  a
    copy of the arrest warrant.

3.   She met a Lebanese man called Ibrahim in London and had a  relationship
    with him.  She became pregnant.   He  was  not  happy  about  this  and
    informed her that he was married and asked her  to  have  an  abortion.
    They are no longer in contact. She  gave  birth  to  a  daughter  on  3
    September 2016.  Her family disapprove  and  have  disowned  her.   The
    child has neurological problems and was  initially  kept  in  the  high
    dependency unit.  She suffered from a subdural haemorrhage and now  has
    epilepsy.

The Decision of the FtT

4.   The Appellant asserted that she would be at risk of persecution at  the
    hands of the authorities and Hezbollah. She is at risk as an  unmarried
    mother. Her daughter is stateless.  The Appellant gave evidence at  the
    hearing before Judge Swaney.  She  was  represented.   The  judge  made
    findings at paragraphs 30 through to 65.  The salient paragraphs are as
    follows:

         "31. In relation to the appellant's  claim  based  on  her  imputed
             political opinion, I find she does  not  have  a  well-founded
             fear of  persecution.   The  appellant  claims  to  have  been
             accused of being an informer or support of Israel based on one
             meeting with two men, one of whom was a client of the business
             where she worked.  She does not claim to  have  any  political
             views or to have been politically active in any way.  She is a
             nutritionist and there is nothing to suggest  her  work  would
             have given her access to information likely to be of  interest
             to  Israeli  sympathisers.   Similarly,  her  family  is   not
             politically active and therefore her family background is  not
             likely to have created interest in her.  The appellant's  only
             explanation for why  Khalil  and  his  friend  may  have  been
             interested in her is because she is from the same area as  the
             leader of Hezbollah.  This is simply speculation on her  part.
             She did not state that she had told Khalil this is  where  she
             was from, as according to her evidence prior to their  meeting
             they had  had  limited  contact  with  each  other,  sometimes
             greeting each other in her workplace.

         32.  At interview the appellant said that  Khalil  and  his  friend
             asked her questions about where she was from  when  they  met.
             She said their questions included which village she  was  from
             and what the political affiliation of the village  was.   Even
             if they found out at that point she was from the same area  as
             the leader of Hezbollah, she did not explain  how  that  might
             make her privy to any information such that she  would  be  of
             interest to an Israeli sympathiser.  This is particularly true
             given her evidence she told them that she was  not  interested
             or involved in politics and asked them to change the  subject.
             I do not accept that the meeting with Khalil  and  his  friend
             took place as  claimed  or  that  it  involved  discussion  of
             political issues or an invitation for her to be an informer.

         33.  I have considered the document  the  appellant  states  is  an
             arrest warrant issued in her absence.  The appellant was asked
             at interview if she had been sentenced and  she  replied  that
             she had been sentenced to more than  ten  years'  imprisonment
             (questions 145 to 147, B21 respondent's bundle).  This is  not
             what the translated document says.  There is reference to hard
             labour for 15 years however this is in relation to  two  legal
             provisions cited  and  the  translation  does  not  state  the
             appellant has been sentenced to imprisonment for 15 years.   I
             find this document does not establish the appellant  has  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment in her absence.

         34.  It does not appear the original document has been produced and
             I  note  the  appellant's  solicitor  sent  a  copy   to   the
             respondent.  Mr Ahmed criticised the respondent for failing to
             take any steps to verify the document.  The same criticism can
             be made of the appellant.  She did not provide any evidence to
             establish the reliability of  the  document  even  though  the
             respondent had refused to place any weight  on  it  (albeit  I
             accept that was because it was untranslated).

         35.  The appellant claims to have had  some  passing  contact  with
             Khalil at her workplace prior to meeting  him.   There  is  no
             evidence to suggest that this was known to anyone, for example
             the authorities.  She denied having  any  prior  contact  with
             Khalil's friend and her evidence was that she was surprised he
             was present, as she had thought the meeting with Khalil was  a
             date and she expected him to  be  alone.   The  basis  of  the
             authorities' claimed interest in the  appellant  is  therefore
             one short meeting with Khalil and his friend.   The  appellant
             has provided very little by way of explanation as to how  that
             meeting may have come to the  attention  of  the  authorities.
             She was asked at her interview (Q143, B21 respondent's bundle)
             if Khalil and his friend had  been  arrested.   The  appellant
             replied 'Possibly' and went on to say that certainly they  had
             informed on her.  She speculates that they must have  informed
             on her because no one else knew what they had talked about.

         36.  When asked why they would inform on her when she had told them
             nothing, she suggested it was because she was a woman  and  so
             they could secure their own release.   This  is  nothing  more
             than speculation in my view.  The appellant does not appear to
             have made any enquiries in this regard.  Khalil was  a  client
             of the appellant's workplace.  There is no evidence she  tried
             to contact her work colleague to make enquiries about  Khalil,
             i.e. to see if he continued to attend  or  if  she  had  heard
             anything.  She did not ask her family to contact her workplace
             on her behalf in the event she felt unable to do it herself.

         37.  Given my finding that the appellant did not meet  with  Khalil
             and his friend as claimed, and that they did not ask her to be
             an informer, I do not accept that she has come to the  adverse
             attention of the Lebanese authorities.  For that reason  I  do
             not place any weight on the  purported  arrest  warrant.   The
             appellant does not have a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
             from  the  authorities  in  Lebanon  because  of  her  imputed
             political opinion."


5.   The judge concluded that the background evidence supported  that  there
    was discrimination against women in Lebanon  but  concluded  that  this
    would not amount to persecution or ill-treatment or serious harm  which
    would engage the Refugee Convention or Article 3.

6.   The judge found that there were some difficulties  for  single  mothers
    in registering the birth of children born outside  marriage.   However,
    he attached weight to the evidence relied on by  the  Respondent  which
    established that despite difficulties it was possible. He accepted that
    children who cannot establish a right to Lebanese  citizenship  may  be
    treated differently than those who can in terms of access  to  publicly
    funded services.  He considered that citizenship  is  passed  from  the
    father (in this  case  the  child's  father  is  Lebanese).  The  judge
    considered the Appellant's evidence that she is no  longer  in  contact
    with the father of her child. He considered that he was  not  named  on
    the birth certificate and accepted that it may be  more  difficult  for
    the Appellant to establish entitlement for  her  daughter  to  Lebanese
    citizenship from her father.  However, the judge found that she had not
    given evidence about efforts, if any, she  had  made  to  find  him  to
    assist her with the registration of the child's  birth  and  to  obtain
    citizenship. He took account  of  the  email  correspondence  from  the
    solicitors to the Lebanese authorities in the United Kingdom  to  which
    there had been no response.  However, the judge was unimpressed by  the
    lack of effort made to trace the father or to personally  approach  the
    authorities here to register her daughter. The judge concluded that the
    evidence suggested that a child born outside  marriage  would  eligible
    for citizenship. The Appellant had not on the evidence before the judge
    taken any effective  steps  to  attempt  to  establish  her  daughter's
    entitlement to Lebanese citizenship.   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant's  daughter  is  not  stateless  albeit  she   is   presently
    undocumented.

7.   The judge found the Appellant did not establish  that  she  would  face
    very significant obstacles to integration.   The  Appellant's  evidence
    was that she would not seek the support of her family on return because
    she has been disowned by her father.  The judge found that  she  is  an
    adult and would not be bound to return to her  family.   He  considered
    that she was  a  qualified  nutritionist  and  previously  employed  in
    Lebanon.  He concluded (see [50]) that it may be difficult as a  single
    parent but she is entitled to work and with her qualifications and work
    experience she has a realistic prospect  of  finding  employment  which
    would enable her to  support  herself  and  her  daughter.   The  judge
    concluded that the Appellant spent the majority of her  life  including
    her formative years in Lebanon and has only been here for a short time.
     Whilst here the Appellant and her daughter are supported by  a  family
    friend and that family friend may well provide some assistance  to  the
    Appellant in the short term.

8.   The judge considered the position  of  the  Appellant's  daughter  (see
    [52]), concluding that her life at  this  stage  is  likely  to  centre
    around the Appellant and it is unlikely that she has started to develop
    ties  to  the  community  outside  her  immediate  family.   The  judge
    considered the medical evidence concluding that there was some evidence
    that she requires ongoing monitoring  of  complications  following  her
    birth. She had remained in hospital until 12 September  2016.  She  was
    treated with anti-epileptic medication.  The judge concluded that there
    was no evidence about what, if any  ongoing  treatment  the  child  now
    received or what further follow-up she requires in the future.

9.   The judge  made  the  following  findings  in  relation  to  return  to
    Lebanon:

        "53. The appellant claimed that her daughter would not be  able  to
             access education or healthcare in Lebanon  without  appropriate
             identity documents.  It appears the appellant is  referring  to
             state funded education and healthcare.  There is no  suggestion
             that privately funded education  or  healthcare  would  not  be
             available to her.  The appellant's daughter is less than a year
             old.  She is some way off attending school.   This  means  that
             the appellant would have  some  time  to  sort  outweighed  her
             daughter's status and obtain the necessary identity  documents,
             etc. to enable her daughter to enter education in  the  future.
             I find it is likely the  appellant  would  be  able  to  access
             treatment for her daughter on a privately paying basis even  if
             state funded treatment is not available.  As I said, there  are
             steps the appellant can take  in  relation  to  her  daughter's
             status while she is in the United Kingdom and if not  resolved,
             the evidence shows there would be  help  available  to  her  in
             Lebanon."

10.  The judge went on to  conclude  that  there  are  no  very  significant
    obstacles to integration.  The judge concluded at [62] that  it  is  in
    the child's  best  interests  to  remain  with  her  mother,  her  only
    immediate family member and  primary  carer,  and  that  there  was  no
    evidence that it was in her best interests to remain  in  the  UK  (see
    [62]-[64]).


The Grounds of Appeal

11.  Mr Parkin helpfully narrowed the grounds relied on. There were two;

       1. the findings in relation to the arrest  warrant  are  inadequately
          reasoned and the evidence was  not  properly  dealt  with  by  the
          judge;


       2. the judge inadequately reasoned the decision under  Article  8  in
          respect of very significant obstacles.


Conclusions

12.  In respect of the arrest warrant the Appellant  submitted  as  part  of
    her evidence a copy of an arrest warrant (page 42 of the AB). The judge
    made findings in respect of this at [33] and [34].  The  thrust  of  Mr
    Parkin's submissions on the issue of the arrest warrant  was  that  the
    judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  and  reached  conclusions  about  the
    document that he was not entitled to  reach.  It  is  argued  that  any
    discrepancy  between  the  wording  of  the  arrest  warrant  and   the
    Appellant's interpretation of it was reasonable in  the  light  of  her
    lack of legal knowledge.  The Appellant stated in  her  interview  that
    she had been sentenced to more than ten years' imprisonment.  The judge
    was entitled to conclude that the arrest warrant did  not  support  her
    evidence.  The arrest warrant does not state  that  the  Appellant  has
    been convicted or sentenced.  There is reference  to  "legal  articles"
    and "278 and 220 with hard labour for fifteen years" which  appears  to
    relate to material legal provisions and sentencing powers.   The  judge
    was entitled to conclude that the document does not establish that  the
    Appellant has been sentenced  to  imprisonment  in  her  absence.   The
    Appellant submitted this document  to  support  her  evidence  that  an
    arrest warrant had been issued and that she has been sentenced  in  her
    absence. The judge made findings that were open to her on the evidence.
     The judge considered that the Appellant had not produced the  original
    document.  The issue in relation to the verification  of  the  document
    was not pursued by Mr Parkin, sensibly in my view.  It  is  clear  from
    [37] that the judge did not place weight on the arrest warrant,  having
    considered the evidence as a whole.   This was a matter  for  him.  His
    findings are adequately reasoned.

13.  Mr Parkin introduced a new issue that was not raised before the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge. This was that  if  the  arrest  warrant  does  not
    support  the  Appellant's  case  then  her  interpretation  of  it  was
    reasonable in the circumstances.  She is not a  lawyer  and  could  not
    reasonably be expected to understand criminal  procedure.   However,  I
    conclude that the Appellant was represented and  it  is  reasonable  to
    expect  her  legal  representative  to  have   taken   on   board   the
    inconsistency in the Appellant's evidence between what she said in  the
    interview and the wording on the arrest warrant.  She could have  given
    evidence that she did not understand the document but did  not  do  so.
    The judge drew reasonable inferences from the evidence before her.

14.  The judge granting permission raised  a  Mbanga  point  (Mbanga  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 367) in relation to the documents.  However, this was  not  an
    issue that was raised in the grounds of appeal and Mr  Parkin  did  not
    pursue this in oral submissions.  In any event,  although  I  note  the
    wording at [37], on a proper reading of the decision,  particularly  at
    [33] and [34], I am satisfied that the judge considered the evidence in
    the round.

15.  Mr Parkin submission on ground 2 was narrow. He argued  with  reference
    to [53] of the decision that the judge accepted that the  Appellant'  s
    daughter would not be able to access public services with reference and
    that she failed to factor this into the assessment under 276ADE(1)(vi).
    It is argued that the decision  is  inadequately  reasoned.  I  do  not
    agree. The premise of the argument is misconceived. It was not accepted
    by the judge that the Appellant and her daughter would not be  able  to
    access  education  or  healthcare.   The  judge   concluded   that   an
    illegitimate  child  could  be  granted  citizenship  (this   was   not
    challenged by the Appellant).  The Appellant's daughter's father  is  a
    Lebanese citizen according to the Appellant and the judge's  conclusion
    that  she  is  not  stateless  is  lawful  and  sustainable  (this   is
    unchallenged).   Whilst  the  judge  acknowledged  that  there  may  be
    difficulties for those children who cannot  establish  their  right  to
    Lebanese citizenship in accessing publicly funded  services  the  judge
    did not find that the Appellant's daughter  fell  into  this  category.
    Although the judge went on to find that there was  no  suggestion  that
    privately funded education or healthcare would not be available to  the
    Appellant, this was not the  basis  of  the  decision  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi). On a proper reading of the decision the judge  concluded
    that although there may be  difficulties  in  registering  the  child's
    birth because the Appellant is unmarried, the evidence established that
    this was possible and that illegitimacy is not a  bar  to  citizenship.
    The  judge  considered  all  material  matters  when  considering  very
    significant obstacles to integration.

16.  The decision of the judge in relation to very significant obstacles  is
    adequately reasoned.  The findings are reasoned  and  grounded  in  the
    evidence.

17.    There is no error  of  law  and  the  decision  of  Judge  Swaney  is
    maintained.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 28 January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

