
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05809/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for Business)|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 October 2020                           |On 21 October 2020            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                  aNWAR [M]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Winter, Counsel, instructed by Maguire
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of  which  there  has  not
objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by video (V),  the
platform was Skype for Business. A  face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Grant-Hutchison (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated
         on  2  November  2018,  dismissed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Anwar   [M]
         (appellant) against the decision of the Secretary of State for  the
         Home Department (respondent)  dated  10  April  2018  refusing  his
         asylum and human  rights  claim  and  his  claim  for  Humanitarian
         Protection (HP).

Background

      2. The appellant is a Kurdish national of Iraq who was aged 30 at  the
         date of the judge's decision. He hails from Kirkuk which, according
         to the Country Guidance (CG) case of AA  (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG
         [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC), was one of the contested areas of Iraq  in
         respect of which the Secretary of State conceded  that  a  civilian
         with no distinguishing characteristics  would,  by  virtue  of  his
         presence, be at real risk of suffering serious  harm  of  the  type
         identified in Article 15(c) of  the  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC
         (the Qualification Directive).

      3. The appellant claimed to have entered the UK  clandestinely  on  23
         August 2008 and made  an  asylum  application  the  same  day.  The
         appellant's asylum claimed was refused and an appeal  against  that
         refusal was dismissed on 19 December  2008.  The  appellant  became
         appeal rights  exhausted  on  26  March  2009.  Extracts  from  the
         December 2008 Tribunal decision in the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter
         suggest that the appellant was not found to be a credible  witness.
         At paragraph 8 of the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  the  following
         extract appears, with reference to paragraph  42  of  the  December
         2008 decision:

             "When I looked  at  the  overall  situation  in  the  round  I
             concluded that I  did  not  find  the  Appellant  credible.  I
             particularly  had  major  difficulties  with  regard  to   the
             problems concerning whether or not he was in the  army  and  I
             concluded on taking into account all the above matters that  I
             did not accept that the Appellant was a member  of  the  Iraqi
             army and that his account was not credible with regard to what
             had happened to both his father and himself."

      4. The appellant lodged several further applications for international
         protection, the last being on 6 April 2018. He maintained  that  he
         was fearful of returning to Kirkuk because of the general situation
         there and that he would be unable  to  relocate  elsewhere  in  the
         country.

      5. In her Reasons for Refusal  Letter  refusing  his  application  the
         respondent considered that the appellant could now return to Kirkuk
         as there was no longer considered to be a threat  of  serious  harm
         meeting  the  threshold  of  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
         Directive. The respondent considered the appellant  could,  in  any
         event, internally relocate to the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR)  (also
         known as the Kurdish Regional Government -  'KRG').  The  appellant
         appealed the respondent's decision to the First-tier Tribunal under
         s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      6. At [6] of his decision the judge noted, as a preliminary point, the
         appellant's representative's indication that he  would  proceed  by
         way of submissions only and that all that he required was that  the
         respondent had conceded  that  the  appellant  was  an  Iraqi  from
         Kirkuk. There was consequently no oral evidence.

      7. In reliance on an expert report the appellant submitted that Kirkuk
         was in a difficult situation as it was being  threatened  by  Iraqi
         forces, the Peshmerga and Isis, and  that  the  volatility  of  the
         situation meant that the appellant would be at real risk of serious
         harm if he were to return there. The appellant would not be able to
         relocate to the IKR/KRG. A summary of this aspect of the  appellant
         submissions is contained at [8(c)] of the judge's decision.

             "In relation to the KRG the availability  of  a  CSID  is  not
             enough to decide matters  however  for  present  purposes  the
             Appellant is content to proceed on the basis that he  has  one
             or it can be obtained  shortly.  If  the  Appellant  flies  to
             Baghdad and then Erbil what then? There is no suggestion  that
             he has family in the KRG. If he did it would be  the  cultural
             norm for them to assist. The Appellant would have to go  to  a
             refugee camp which AAH [a reference  to  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -
             internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212  (IAC)]  states
             are overcrowded. He would have 300 to 400 dollars which  would
             last him a month if he did not use it  on  flights.  AAH  says
             that this is unduly harsh in terms of the  basic  necessities.
             In terms of employment the Appellant arrived in  the  UK  aged
             20. He had effectively been a private in the Army. There is no
             suggestion that he has any work experience in the last decade.
             It would be very difficult to find an employer to take him on.
             In any event there is a high unemployment rate. There was also
             a patronage/nepotism system operating  from  which  he  cannot
             benefit. He would come off the plane with some money. It would
             run out. He would be living in a building site  or  a  disused
             government building."

      8. The judge then recorded the appellant's submission  that  he  would
         face  very  significant  obstacles  as  understood   in   paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules to integrating in society if
         required to return to Iraq.

      9. At [9] the judge summarised the respondent's submissions, including
         the submission that the appellant's claim that his father has  been
         killed was a credibility point, that the judge  who  dismissed  the
         appeal in 2008 found that the appellant was vague  on  this  matter
         and found him to be incredible. The respondent  submitted  that  it
         was not credible that the appellant was not  in  contact  with  his
         family and that there did not appear to have been any  steps  taken
         by him to trace his family.

     10. At [14], in the section of his decision headed 'The Decision',  the
         judge accepted that the appellant could not  return  to  Kirkuk  in
         reliance on the expert's report. The judge found that the situation
         in Kirkuk was "very far from stable" and that it was not  safe  for
         the appellant to return there.

     11. At [15] the judge  considered  the  possibility  of  the  appellant
         obtaining support from his family if he were  to  relocate  to  the
         KRG. The judge stated,

             "The next question that was canvassed before  me  was  whether
             the Appellant could internally  relocate  to  the  KRG.  I  am
             readily  persuaded   by   the   Appellant's   representatives'
             submissions  under  reference  to  AAH   that   the   economic
             circumstances in  the  KRG  are  very  difficult  indeed.  The
             difficulty I have in coming to a view on this matter  is  that
             there is simply no evidence before me as to what had  in  fact
             happened to his family particularly in relation to his  father
             and brother. There  is  some  mention  of  this  in  what  the
             appellant told the expert. However, this is not a  matter  for
             the  expert.  It  is  a  matter  to  be  decided   after   the
             consideration of evidence, preferably tested, relating to  the
             appellant's circumstances. In the absence of such  evidence  I
             am not able to make any finding  that  the  appellant  has  no
             family in the KRG. Similarly I have heard no  evidence  as  to
             the Appellant's working experience. These are  both  important
             matters in deciding whether relocation is  unduly  harsh.  But
             the Appellant's representative has conceded that  for  present
             purposes that [sic] the Appellant can or  can  soon  obtain  a
             CSID. Accordingly I can find that the Appellant can travel and
             gain entry to the KRG. He is a Kurd. He is from that  culture.
             He is healthy. He is resilient  and  can  safely  adapt  to  a
             different society as has [sic] shown by the amount of time  he
             has spent in the UK. Relocating to the KRG will  be  effective
             and not unduly harsh."

     12. The judge then considered whether there would be  very  significant
         obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration  in  Iraq  pursuant  to
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules but concluded,  in
         light of his earlier findings, that there would  not  be  any  very
         significant obstacles.

     13. The judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     14. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was initially refused by
         both the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal. The  appellant
         petitioned the Court of Session (Outer  House)  against  the  Upper
         Tribunal's refusal to grant  permission  to  appeal.  In  a  'Joint
         Minute for the Parties' the matter  was  settled  extra-judicially,
         the respondent accepting that the Upper Tribunal erred  in  law  in
         refusing permission by failing to address the appellant's  argument
         that the First-tier Tribunal judge left out of account his  witness
         statement relating to his family.

     15. On 14 February 2020 the Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal
         (in a decision of the Vice-President dated 10 February 2020).

     16. The Grounds of Appeal, briefly amplified by Mr Winters in his  oral
         submissions, contend that the judge failed to  consider  or  engage
         with the appellant's written statement, in which did refer  to  his
         family. At paragraph 3 of the appellant's statement he  claimed  he
         had no contact with his family. At paragraph 12  of  his  statement
         the appellant said, "I don't have  anyone  who  can  assist  me  in
         obtaining any of the documents and I do not have any sponsor in the
         IKR who is able to assist me."

     17. The appellant contends that this failure was material because if he
         had no sponsor or family support in the KRG he may have to access a
         critical shelter arrangement, which may, in turn, be  unduly  harsh
         (with reference to headnotes 8 & 9 of AAH).

     18. The appellant additionally contends that, contrary to  the  judge's
         indication that he "heard no evidence as to the appellant's working
         experience", this was also addressed in the statement  (he  claimed
         that prior to his arrival he had been a private in  the  army  from
         2006 - 2008 and had not been allowed to  work  for  the  decade  in
         which he resided in the UK) and that the  evidence  indicated  that
         the appellant had limited  work  experience.  The  appellant  would
         therefore be significantly disadvantaged in obtaining work  in  the
         KRG by the type of nepotism referred to in the  case  law  and  the
         high unemployment rate.

     19. A skeleton argument dated 29 May 2020,  prepared  by  Mr  C  Avery,
         contained an extract from the presenting officers note at the First-
         tier Tribunal hearing. This read,

             "As a preliminary issue Mr Cassie [sic] stated he will not  be
             calling the appellant as a witness, he would not  be  adopting
             his statement and the appellant wanted to proceed on the basis
             that it is accepted he is Iraqi and from Kirkuk. I objected as
             the appellant has  some  questions  to  answer  regarding  his
             family situation  in  Iraq.  The  IJ  explained  that  if  the
             appellant was  not  to  give  evidence  then  the  credibility
             finding would stand and any submissions I made  regarding  the
             appellant could be unchallenged. Mr Casskie [sic]  agreed  and
             proceeded with the hearing."

     20. Mr Clarke submitted that the respondent had always taken issue with
         the appellant's credibility relating to his contact with his family
         and his claim that he would be unable to support himself if removed
         to Iraq (including the IKR), and that  it  would  set  a  dangerous
         precedence if  the  appellant  were  able  to  rely  on  a  written
         statement which was not adopted, and  that  this  would  be  highly
         prejudicial to the respondent in any appeal hearing and that  there
         may be issues as to whether the mere existence of a signature meant
         that reliance could be placed on a statement  as  representing,  or
         continuing to represent, an appellant's position or claim.

Discussion

     21. There was evidence before the  judge,  albeit  in  the  form  of  a
         written statement which was not adopted by the appellant (but which
         he signed), in which he claimed he had no contact with  his  family
         in Iraq and no one to assist him in the KRG.

     22. Although the Practice Directions for  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
         Chambers, published on 19 December 2018,  indicate  (at  7.5)  that
         directions would, in most cases, be issued to the parties requiring
         witness statements of the evidence to be called at the  hearing  to
         be served and to stand as evidence-in-chief, it is  ultimately  for
         an appellant to decide whether to give  oral  evidence  (see,  e.g.
         SSHD v Sarigul [2002] UKIAT 06938, at [12] & [15]).  Moreover,  the
         Tribunal may admit evidence whether or not it would  be  admissible
         in a civil trial in the UK  (see  rule  14(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  &  Asylum  Chamber)
         Rules 2014). The fact that the appellant chose  not  to  adopt  his
         statement (which, if he had done, would have enabled the respondent
         to cross-examine him) does not prevent  the  statement  from  still
         being admitted.

     23. It was incumbent on the judge to make a finding in respect of  this
         evidence, one way or the other, having  regard  to  the  burden  of
         proof resting on the  appellant,  albeit  to  the  lower  standard,
         having regard to the fact that the appellant was not  tendered  for
         cross-examination and that the assertions in  his  statement  could
         not be tested, and having regard to the previous judicial  findings
         relating to the appellant's credibility, particularly in respect of
         what he claimed happened to his father and brother  (and,  I  note,
         his claim to have been in the army). It  would,  of  course,  be  a
         matter for the judge to determine what weight ought to be  attached
         to untested and otherwise unsupported assertions of  fact.  But  he
         could not ignore that evidence.

     24. For similar reasons, I am satisfied that  the  judge's  failure  to
         engage with the appellant's assertion in his witness statement that
         he had only worked for  the  Iraqi  Army,  that  he  had  not  been
         involved in any other activity or job, and that he had not done any
         other work, and that he had never worked in the UK.

     25. I cannot accept Mr Clarke's submission that requiring  a  judge  to
         consider a statement,  even  if  not  adopted,  sets  a  'dangerous
         precedent' or  is  otherwise  prejudicial  to  the  respondent.  It
         remains open to the respondent to make submissions that  the  judge
         ought to attach little if any weight to such  a  statement  in  the
         absence of any opportunity to test the assertions contained in  the
         statement.

     26. Given the headnote in AAH, and the  background  evidence  that  was
         before the judge relating to the conditions in the  KRI,  including
         the work conditions, I am satisfied that  the  judge's  failure  to
         engage with or assess the appellant's assertions contained  in  his
         witness statement may have materially affected the outcome  of  the
         appeal.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

     27. Under Part 3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
         Statement of the 18 June 2018 the case may be remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.

     28. I have determined that the judge's decision is  unsafe  because  he
         failed to take account of  relevant  written  evidence.  Mr  Winter
         indicated  that  if  a  material  legal  error  was  uncovered  the
         appellant would be likely  to  give  oral  evidence  at  a  further
         hearing. He also noted that there was now a new  CG  case  on  Iraq
         (SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq  CG  [2019]
         UKUT 00400 (IAC) which would need to be considered. Given that  the
         appellant is likely to give oral evidence at a  hearing  to  remake
         the decision, and that credibility is very much in issue, and given
         the absence of any credibility findings or other  material  factual
         findings relating to the appellant's family in  Iraq  or  his  work
         experience,  Mr  Clarke  and  Mr  Winter  agreed  that   in   these
         circumstances it was appropriate for the case to be  remitted  back
         to the First-tier Tribunal.

     29. The appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  so  that  a
         new fact-finding exercise can be undertaken.



Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved  the  making  of
errors on points of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
(de novo) by a judge other than judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Grant-
Hutchison.

No anonymity direction is made.


D.Blum   15 October 2020

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

