
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05855/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 August 2019                     |On 3 September 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                   mr t n
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who made an application to  the
    Respondent for international protection. He claimed to be  at  risk  of
    persecution due to his political and imputed political opinion,  namely
    that he was a supporter of the LTTE whilst  in  India,  that  he  is  a
    supporter of the TGTE in the  United  Kingdom  involved  in  sur  place
    activities and that his father and  sister  also  supported  the  LTTE.
    Beyond claiming asylum, he also relied on breaches of Article 2, 3  and
    8 of the European Convention on Human Rights if he were returned to Sri
    Lanka.

 2. He appealed the Respondent's decision which was heard by Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Hosie. In a decision promulgated on 7 February 2019
    the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. It was initially refused but
    a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 5 July  2019
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul. His reasons  for  granting  permission
    were: -

         "The application is out of time but only by a matter of  hours.  In
         the circumstances, I am satisfied that time should be  extended  to
         admit it.

         It  is  arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred   in   his
         application of UB (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 85 and in  particular
         the evidential value of the material identified in the  grounds  at
         [4] and [5] as well as the submission the he erred  by  in  effect,
         requiring high level involvement - see also KK (Sri  Lanka)  [2017]
         EWCA Civ 2412 at [9]

         There is less merit in grounds 2 and 3, and it is  not  clear  what
         the former adds to ground 1. In respect of ground 3 it  is  unclear
         whether the point made at [24] was put to the judge; this  must  be
         addressed  at  the  forthcoming  hearing.  Nevertheless,  I   grant
         permission on all grounds."

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5. Ms Jegarajah  relied  upon  the  grounds  which  supported  an  initial
    application for permission to appeal. At the outset,  she  acknowledged
    that ground 2 effectively  related  to  ground  1  and  that  the  main
    submission she wished to make was  that  the  Judge  materially  erred,
    having accepted that the Appellant  was  involved  with  the  TGTE,  in
    concluding that the Appellant was required  to  show  that  he  was  of
    "significant profile". In so doing,  the  Judge  failed  to  apply  the
    judgement in UB  (Sri  Lanka)  v.  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA CIV 85. She  highlighted  paragraph  23  of  the
    Judgement which states:-

         "If the material had been served, then the issue of TGTE membership
         would have been of more significance. As the matter stood, the  FTT
         reached no conclusion on the point.  The  Appellant's  argument  is
         that, if it had been accepted  that  he  was  a  member,  then  the
         indication from the High Commission's letters is that (1) he  would
         be questioned, (2) he might  be  arrested,  and  (3)  he  might  be
         detained. If Detained, the guidance in  GJ  points  to  a  risk  of
         mistreatment."

    She then referred me to the material not served being as follows:-

         "The following passage from the 28 August 2014 COIS report entitled
         "Tamil Separatism" which includes a letter from the  FCO  dated  16
         April 2014. This evidence illustrates  the  risk  that  our  client
         would face simply for being involved with proscribed groups."

         "The spokesperson from the SIS said that  people  being  'deported'
         will  always  be  questioned  about  their   overseas   activities,
         including  whether  they  have  been  involved  with  one  of   the
         proscribed organisations."

         "Among  the  organisations   proscribed   are   the   Transnational
         Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE)  and  the  UK-based  Global  Tamil
         Forum  (GTF)  and  British  Tamil  Forum  (BTF).  When  making  the
         announcement on 1 April, Brigadier Ruwan  Wanigasooriya  said  that
         individuals belonging to  these  organisations  would  face  arrest
         under anti-terrorism laws when to date, there have  been  no  known
         arrests based on membership of one of the newly proscribed groups."

 6. Ms Jegarajah further submitted that it was incumbent upon the Judge  in
    the First-tier Tribunal to engage with the judgement in  UB.  This  was
    not done. He has failed to appreciate that risk arises as a  result  of
    membership of the TGTE and not significant involvement. She  then  made
    reference  to  her  second  ground  and  the  facts   surrounding   the
    demonstration organised  by  the  TGTE  outside  the  Sri  Lankan  High
    Commission in London on 4 February 2018. The  Appellant  attended  both
    this demonstration and a further protest on 9 February 2018. There  was
    video evidence in relation to both protests. Both,  it  was  submitted,
    are significant events which were openly monitored by  the  Sri  Lankan
    High Commission. Ms Jegarajah's submission was that the Judge had erred
    in marginalising the effect of  the  Appellant's  attendance  at  these
    protests and the consequent adverse State interest in him.

 7. Further, the Judge failed to assess the resulting risk to the Appellant
    of political opinion that may be attributed to him as a result  of  his
    familial relationship with his sister.

 8. Miss Fijiwala argued that the Judge had taken everything  into  account
    and correctly applied the judgement in UB. She referred me to Paragraph
    120 of the Judge's decision which states:-

         "I have also considered the case of UB (Sri Lanka)  v  SSHD  [2017]
         EWCA Civ 85 and the Home Office policy guidance  (CPIN  Sri  Lanka:
         Tamil Separatism, version 5.0 June 2017).  I  note  that  the  most
         recent guidance supports the position as stated in GJ &  Others  in
         relation to risk on return and that it is no more beneficial to the
         Appellant (section 3). The fact that he has spent time in India and
         the UK does not of itself place him at real  risk  as  most  Tamils
         from the northern province were displaced during the civil  war  in
         Sri Lanka."

    She went on to submit that the conclusions (paragraph 24)  of  UB  were
    applied by the Judge to the Appellant's appeal at paragraph 115 of  his
    decision where he found that, even if the Appellant can  be  identified
    in relation to his activities, this in itself does  not  show  risk  on
    return. Even if he had been identified by the Sri Lankan authorities in
    relation to his involvement with the TGTE, he has failed to  show  that
    he would be viewed as a threat to the  Sri  Lankan  State  or  to  come
    within any of the risk categories within GJ & Others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG v. Secretary of State for the Home  Department,
    [2013] UKUT00319  (IAC).  She  Submitted  the  Judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that any activity by the Appellant in the United  Kingdom  was
    low level and not likely to carry  risks,  that  he  did  not  play  an
    integral role in the event outside the Sri Lankan High Commission  and,
    that even if he had, he failed to show that he would  be  viewed  as  a
    threat to the  Sri  Lankan  State  or  to  come  with  any  other  risk
    categories in GJ & Others. The Judge has considered the totality of the
    evidence before coming to conclusions that were open to be  made.  This
    includes considering the Appellant's claim in the context of his sister
    being granted asylum, which the Judge refers to at paragraph 75 of  his
    decision  and  analyses  at  paragraph  119  of  the  decision   before
    concluding that he  does  not  accept  that  the  Appellant's  sister's
    evidence or grounds for claiming asylum places the Appellant at risk on
    return.

 9. Albeit that this  is  a  very  lengthy  and  detailed  decision,  I  am
    persuaded that the Judge has failed to apply the judgement in  UB  (Sri
    Lanka) and has fallen into error in marginalising  the  effect  of  the
    Appellant's  attendance  at  protests  outside  the  Sri  Lankan   High
    Commission in London in February 2018. Further, that he has  failed  to
    assess the risk to the Appellant as a consequence of political  opinion
    that might be attributed to him by reason of his relationship with  his
    sister who herself had been arrested,  detained  and  tortured  in  Sri
    Lanka in 2013 and subsequently granted refugee status.

10. Especially for the reasons put forward by  Ms  Jegarajah,  I  find  the
    Judge has erred  in  his  application  of  UB  and  in  particular  the
    evidential value the material identified at  paragraph  23  of  UB  and
    referred to earlier in this decision. The Judge  has  looked  for  high
    level involvement or a significant profile and has failed to  recognise
    that mere involvement with a  proscribed  organisation  would  put  the
    Appellant at risk. I also conclude that there is a  failure  to  assess
    risk toward the Appellant by reason of the familial  relationship  with
    his sister.

11. Further fact finding is required  and,  in  the  circumstances,  it  is
    necessary for a de novo hearing.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judges Hosie and Boylan-
Kemp.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 21 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
