


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/05038/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                 |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On : 12 October 2017                   |      On : 13 October 2017          |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     PN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Turnbull, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  to
refuse his protection and human rights claim.

The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan whose date of  birth  is  recorded
as 1 January 2001. He arrived in the UK on 28  November  2016,  having  left
Afghanistan in February 2016 and travelled to Iran and Greece.  His  journey
to the UK from Greece was facilitated by the Home  Office  pursuant  to  the
Dublin III Regulation and he claimed asylum  upon  arrival.  His  claim  was
refused on 10 May 2017. He appealed that decision and his appeal  was  heard
in the First-tier Tribunal on 28 June 2017 and was dismissed in  a  decision
promulgated on 28 July 2017.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant claimed that his father  had  worked  for  the  government  of
Afghanistan, as a bodyguard for  Commander  Rajub  Khan,  and  that  he  was
killed by a landmine whilst at work in approximately 2010 (or killed by  the
Taliban in 2009). The appellant's uncle learned that the Taliban  was  going
to forcibly take him  away  to  become  a  suicide  bomber  and  his  mother
therefore sent him away to stay with relatives.  He  left  Afghanistan  with
another family who were his neighbours. He feared being captured and  killed
by the Taliban due to his father's work for the Afghan government.

It was noted, in refusing the appellant's claim, that his journey to the  UK
had been facilitated by the Home Office based on his relationship  with  his
uncle GG who was residing in the UK.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  the
appellant's account of the Taliban attempting to locate him to  recruit  him
and rejected his  claim  to  be  at  risk  on  return  to  Afghanistan.  The
respondent noted that the appellant  was  in  contact  with  his  family  in
Afghanistan and had provided contact details and considered  it  reasonable,
therefore, to expect him to arrange to  contact  them  and  to  arrange  his
return  to  Afghanistan.  It  was   considered   that   adequate   reception
arrangements were in place at his family home and  that  the  Home  Office's
tracing obligations had been met. It was not accepted, therefore,  that  the
appellant's removal to Afghanistan would breach his human rights.

The appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Oliver. The judge noted the appellant's claim  to  have  been
living with his uncle and his family since arriving  in  the  UK.  He  heard
oral evidence from the appellant and his uncle. The judge  considered  there
to be no reason to  believe  that  the  appellant's  father  was  personally
targeted by the Taliban and he did not accept that the appellant  was  being
sought  by  the  Taliban.  He  found  that  the  appellant  had  failed   to
substantiate his claim and had not demonstrated that  he  would  be  at  any
risk on return  to  Afghanistan.  He  concluded  that  the  public  interest
outweighed the appellant's interests  in  relation  to  family  and  private
life. He accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The appellant sought permission to appeal Judge  Oliver's  decision  to  the
Upper Tribunal, but only in relation to  his  human  rights  claim.  It  was
asserted in the grounds that the judge had  erred  by  failing  to  consider
that there were compelling circumstances outside the immigration rules.


Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  17  August
2017 on the grounds of inadequate reasoning in relation  to  proportionality
under Article 8.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appellant was present at the hearing before me, together with his  uncle
GG and another family member who spoke English. Ms Turnbull advised me  that
the appellant  and  his  uncle  were  fully  aware  of  the  nature  of  the
proceedings and that she was able to explain  everything  to  the  appellant
following the hearing.  I  was  satisfied  that  there  were  no  particular
adjustments to be made on account of the appellant's youth and that  he  was
adequately assisted by his legal representative.

Both parties made submissions. Ms Turnbull submitted that the two  lines  at
[23] of the judge's decision relating to Article 8  was  totally  inadequate
in terms of reasoning. The judge had failed to  consider  Article  8  within
the  immigration  rules  and  outside  the  rules  and  had  not  considered
discretionary leave. The judge had mentioned Razgar, R (on  the  Application
of) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]  UKHL  27  but  had
not demonstrated that he had conducted a balancing exercise,  which  was  of
particular concern given that the appellant was only 16 years  of  age.  His
findings on Article 8 could not be allowed  to  stand  and  had  to  be  set
aside.


Mr Nath submitted  that  the  judge  had  referred  to  Razgar  and  to  the
respondent's findings on Article 8 and had then gone on to consider  Article
8 at [23] taking into consideration the reasons given by the  respondent  in
that regard in the refusal letter. The  judge  had  considered  the  limited
time spent by the appellant in the UK and his  family  ties  here.  What  he
said at [23] was sufficient. It was important to consider what evidence  and
information the judge had before him. No further evidence had been  produced
today  in  accordance  with  the  directions  issued  with  the   grant   of
permission. There was no error of law in the judge's decision.

In response, Ms Turnbull reiterated the points previously made.

Consideration and findings.

It is undeniably the  case  that  the  judge's  findings  and  reasoning  in
relation to the appellant's Article 8 claim are brief and that  all  parties
would have been assisted by a more detailed analysis of  the  evidence.  The
judge's decision is  certainly  lacking  in  that  regard  and  that  is  of
particular concern where the appellant is a child.

However it is relevant to note that the focus  of  the  appeal  was  on  the
appellant's asylum claim. It is also important not  to  lose  sight  of  the
evidence that the judge had before him in relation to  an  Article  8  claim
and the limited nature of that evidence. Whether or not the appellant  is  a
child, he had the benefit of legal representation in  preparing  his  appeal
and at the hearing itself and therefore had a full  opportunity  to  present
all relevant evidence to the Tribunal.


The judge had before  him,  from  the  respondent,  the  appellant's  asylum
statement  and  the  record  of  his  interview  together  with  documentary
evidence  relating  to  his  identity  and  his  father's  death.  From  the
appellant's  representative  he  had  a  bundle  of   documentary   evidence
including appeal statements from the appellant and his uncle  together  with
a martyr identification card for his father,  a  migrant  health  assessment
and details of his handover from Greece to the UK.  That  evidence  included
very little of relevance to an Article 8 claim and made it  clear  that  the
appellant had his mother and siblings as well as extended family members  in
his home area in Afghanistan and was in contact with them, that  his  mother
received money from the government in  Afghanistan  following  his  father's
death and that the family were well with no particular  problems.  The  only
evidence of the appellant's circumstances in the UK was  the  evidence  from
himself and his uncle confirming that he had been living with his uncle  and
his uncle's wife and nine children since his arrival in the UK and  that  he
was financially and emotionally supported by them in the UK.  There  was  no
evidence of any studies or other activities in the UK  and  nothing  further
to support his Article 8 claim. The oral evidence  from  the  appellant  and
his uncle, and the submissions made on his behalf, were for  the  most  part
related to his asylum claim and barely touched upon any Article 8 issues.

In his decision, the judge set out the evidence and summarised  the  account
given in the statements and the appellant's interview, as well as  the  oral
evidence. He found that the appellant was in  contact  with  his  family  in
Afghanistan, that he was of no interest to the Taliban and at no  risk  from
any party and that he could safely return to his home country. His  findings
in that regard have not been challenged by or on behalf of the appellant.


With respect to her  submission  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider
Article 8 within the immigration rules, I asked Ms Turnbull if it was  being
asserted  that  the  evidence  before  the  judge  demonstrated   that   the
requirements of the rules could be met. Her response was that she could  not
say. I note, in fact, that the  grounds  seeking  permission  did  not  even
suggest that the requirements of the rules could  have  been  met  but  only
challenged the judge's findings (or lack of findings) outside the rules  and
permission was granted on that basis only. It seems to me  that  there  was,
in any event, nothing in the evidence before  the  judge  to  even  remotely
suggest that the requirements of the immigration rules on family or  private
life could be met, particularly when considering the  unchallenged  findings
made in regard to the asylum claim and as  to  the  appellant  remaining  in
contact with his family in Afghanistan. Indeed no submissions were  made  to
that effect before the judge. Accordingly I find no merit in  Ms  Turnbull's
submissions in that regard.


As regards the  actual  grounds  of  challenge  and  the  basis  upon  which
permission was  granted,  namely  the  judge's  findings  and  reasoning  on
Article 8 outside the immigration rules, it  seems  to  me  that  there  was
again no evidence before the judge upon which he could possibly  have  found
that there  were  compelling  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of  leave
outside the immigration rules. The submissions made  before  the  judge  did
not seek to identify any such circumstances and indeed Ms  Turnbull  had  no
instructions that there was any further evidence to  be  considered  if  the
decision were to be re-made.


On the limited  evidence  that  he  had  before  him,  the  judge  made  his
findings, albeit briefly, at [23]. He was  clearly  aware  of  the  relevant
considerations and caselaw in making his  findings,  setting  out  the  five
stages in Razgar at [10] and [11] and addressing the question  of  the  best
interests of the child at [12], and then referring to the respondent's  case
in that regard at [15]. At [23] the judge accepted  that  there  was  family
life between the appellant and his UK family, but also found that  his  main
family life was with his family in Afghanistan. He noted that  he  had  left
them only 17 months previously and considered that he had developed  a  very
limited private life in the UK in that short period of time.  His  reference
to the appellant's precarious immigration status was  plainly  part  of  the
consideration in section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
Act 2002. Whilst he  made  no  specific  finding  on  the  appellant's  best
interests, [23] suggests that the judge found those to be  with  his  mother
and siblings in Afghanistan, but in  any  event  to  be  outweighed  by  the
relevant public interest factors. All of those findings were  entirely  open
to the judge on the evidence and were properly made.

Accordingly, when considering the judge's overall findings on the  evidence,
and the nature of  the  evidence  before  him,  it  seems  to  me  that  his
proportionality assessment at [23], albeit brief,  was  adequate,  and  that
any arguable error made in terms of the brevity of his reasoning was not  in
fact material to the outcome of the appeal. Indeed  I  cannot  see  how  the
judge could have reached any other conclusion on the evidence he had  before
him.

For all of these reasons I find no error of  law  in  the  judge's  decision
requiring it to be set aside. I uphold the judge's decision.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  an  error  on  a  point  of  law
requiring the decision  to  be  set  aside.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the
appellant's appeal therefore stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.  I  maintain  that
    order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.



Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 12 October
2017
