
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05445/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Listed at Glasgow Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 4th October 2018    On 29th October 2018



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MRS S N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Aslam, McGlashan MacKay Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Mathews, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

        1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal to the Upper
           Tribunal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge S Gillespie.


        2. The appellant is a national of the Islamic Republic of Iran who
           made a claim for protection on arrival at Glasgow airport in
           December 2016. She claimed she would be at risk if returned
           because she had been discovered in an adulterous relationship.
           The respondent did not find that the claim engaged the Refugee
           Convention and, in any event, did not accept it was true.

        3. The day before the hearing the respondent presented the
           appellant's representatives with a Home Office minute prepared
           by an immigration officer who had interviewed the appellant on
           arrival. The date of birth given is that of her sister. There
           was also a landing card completed in the name of a Mr MF. It is
           believed that he travelled to Iran with her sister's travel
           documents give to her and that they travelled back together.

        4. The appellant's sister gave evidence before the judge indicating
           she had been granted refugee status in May 2015 and issued with
           a UK travel document which she claimed to have lost a month or
           so before the original hearing. She denied allowing her sister
           to use this document and said they knew Mr MF. She said she was
           unaware her sister was travelling to the United Kingdom.

        5. The judge concluded that the appellant and her sister sought to
           mislead the authorities as to how the appellant entered the
           United Kingdom. The judge found she had used her sister's travel
           document to enter the United Kingdom and had falsely claimed to
           have been accompanied by an agent. The judge did not believe
           their claims not to know Mr MF or that her sister had lost her
           travel document.

        6. The appellant claimed that since being in the United Kingdom she
           had learnt a summons was issued. The judge concluded that the
           arrest warrant could be afforded little weight in light of her
           dishonesty about travel.

        7. First-tier Judge Gillespie did not accept her underlying
           account. The judge did not accept she would have conducted an
           adulterous relationship the open way she described, particularly
           in light of the claim she suspected her husband had associations
           with the Iranian security services.

        8. Permission was granted on the basis the judge gave undue weight
           to the minute and did not make adequate allowance for linguistic
           issues. It was also arguable that the judge allowed his views to
           be coloured by the method of entry and did not properly evaluate
           the underlying claim.



The Upper Tribunal

        9. Mr Aslam referred me to the grounds upon which permission had
           been granted. He argued that the judge did not adequately
           consider the reliability of the memorandum. The appellant had
           only arrived at Glasgow airport on a flight from Amsterdam when
           she was questioned in English. She claimed that the minute and
           screening do not properly reflect the situation and she
           attributed this to the limited command of English.


       10.  Mr Aslam, who appeared below, said that he had asked for an
           adjournment on the day of the hearing so that he could take
           instructions on the matter. He said that he might have requested
           any notes or recording in relation to the minute. I have checked
           the record of proceedings. The record is legible and neatly set
           out events at the hearing. I cannot find any reference to
           adjournment application beyond the short break referred to. Mr
           Winters did not have any note of this on file and he had not
           appeared below.

       11. In the decision the judge recorded the presenting officer
           submitting that no unfairness arose in admitting the document.
           At paragraph 9 the judge records that paragraph 47 of the
           refusal letter refers to Home Office records indicating that
           when she 1st arrived she claimed to have travelled using her
           sisters travel document. Furthermore, at screening she was asked
           if she had used any other names and she said she had used her
           sister's name. First-tier Judge Gillespie therefore concluded
           she had noticed that this was an issue.

       12. The judge recorded he was admitting the document but allowing 20
           minutes for consideration. He noted that Mr Aslam made no
           objection. I asked Mr Aslam if in referring to an adjournment he
           meant being allowed time but he indicated this was not the
           situation. I cannot take this issue any further than I have set
           out. Mutual misunderstandings can occur but I do find it odd
           that the judge would record Mr Aslam had no objection if he had
           requested an adjournment and there is no record of this in the
           handwritten note. It is good practice to set out events that
           occur in the course of the hearing.

       13. The admissibility of and the weight to attach to the memorandum
           was a matter for the judge. Mr Winters has not indicated that
           there was any recording taken when the memorandum was produced
           and believed it was a contemporaneous note which was then typed.
           In the circumstance I do not find it established that there was
           any procedural unfairness.

       14. At paragraph 56 the judge said he did not find it credible that
           the appellant did not know her sister was in Glasgow. Mr Aslam
           submitted that he failed to give adequate reasons for this
           conclusion and that amounted to no more than an assertion.

       15. I have seen the minute that was before the judge and the landing
           card relating to a Mr MF. Times are inserted, starting from 1045
           through to 1300. There is a reference to the appellant being
           given food and then screened. At the bottom of the minute sheet
           it is recorded that subsequent checks revealed that she
           travelled using the name [M] and started her journey in Tiblisi,
           Georgia. The memoranda records that a further interview was
           carried out when she stated the document used to travel belonged
           to her sister and is a UK travel document. It is recorded that
           the document was taken to Teheran by Mr. MF. Over the page the
           travel document number and the date of birth correspond to her
           sister. The landing card relates to Mr MF, described as Iranian
           student living in Glasgow. The screening interview took place
           later that day in English. At section 1.3 the appellant was
           asked if she ever used any other names and gave the name of her
           sister. At 3.4 she was asked if she has any family in the UK and
           her response was `I don't know - I had family in London before
           but don't know if they are there.'

       16. In the papers before the judge was her substantive interview in
           April 2017. An interpreter was used. She indicated that she was
           living with her sister in Scotland. Her sister had been granted
           the right to remain. At question 102 she claimed she travelled
           on false documents arranged by an agent. At question 118 she was
           asked if she knew she was going to her sister. She said she was
           told this by the agent in Amsterdam. Her legal representative
           subsequently made amendments based on their instructions but
           none were material to this issue.

       17. The judge records at paragraph 34 the cross-examination of the
           appellant about her screening and her sister. In her oral
           evidence she denied saying she had used her sister's name and
           claimed she thought she was being asked if she had anybody in
           the United Kingdom. Paragraph 40 records her being questioned
           about Mr MF and she denied knowing him She suggested the
           immigration officer had misunderstood the situation in making
           the minute and screening.

       18. The judge heard from the appellant's sister, noting she had been
           granted refugee status 6 months before the appellant arrived.
           She had been issued with a travel document which she said she
           had lost several months after her sister arrived.

       19. At paragraph 51 the judge concluded the appellant and her sister
           had not told the truth about how the appellant entered the
           United Kingdom. The judge did not find her claim in relation to
           the Home Office minute to be credible and the judge accepted the
           note made by immigration officials. The judge concluded that she
           gained entry using the travel document there had been issued to
           her sister and that they both were of similar appearance and
           age. At paragraph 53 the judge records that the immigration
           officer was able to establish that she had flown from Tbilisi in
           her sister's name. The judge also rejected the claim that she
           did not know Mr MF. The judge referred to the appellant sister's
           birthdate being recorded on the minute as well as the correct
           number for her travel document.

       20. When all these matters are taken into account it is clear the
           judge carefully evaluated the evidence of the immigration
           officer's note and the appellant's account. The judge had also
           heard from the appellant and her sister about their awareness of
           each other. Consequently, it was not a bare assertion by the
           judge at paragraph 56 that he did not find it credible she did
           not know her sister with due to arrive in Glasgow. Rather, it is
           based upon an evaluation of the evidence set out. The judge
           rejected the appellant's claim that the reference to using her
           sister's name was a mistake in interpretation. The reasons given
           at paragraph 57 are more than adequate.

       21. It is also contended by Mr Aslam that the judge did not
           adequately evaluate the underlying claim. He makes the point
           that asylum seekers may enter the country by any means possible
           and that does not detract from the truth of their underlying
           claim. This is only partially correct. For instance, a person
           may claim they left in great haste in fear of their life and yet
           investigations may reveal significant preparations over time for
           the departure which call into question the underlying claim.

       22. The judge found the appellant had been dishonest about how she
           came into the United Kingdom. Regarding the appellant's entry
           the judge had solid evidence upon which to conclude she was
           being untruthful. It was much more difficult to test her
           underlying claim. It does not necessarily follow that her being
           untruthful about the means of entry meant the underlying claim
           was untrue. The evidence about her entry did reflect on her
           general honesty. However, the judge did not simply adopt this as
           a reason for rejecting her.

       23. The decision has to be read as a whole. The judge set out
           accurately at paragraph 18 onwards her claim. The evidence at
           hearing is recorded. The judge records his questioning of her
           about the use of her mobile telephone, which apparently
           contained compromising material. The judge refers at paragraph
           33 to the claim that her husband had friends in the Iranian
           security service. At paragraph 44 onwards the judge summarises
           country information about the penalties for a woman committing
           adultery in Iran. At paragraph 50 he reflects on the gravity of
           the situation and balances this with the claims made. At
           paragraph 59 the judge makes the point that if her husband had
           associations with the security services she would not have
           conducted a relationship in the way she claimed given the risks.
           These were all legitimate comments.

Conclusions

       24.  I do not find any material error of law established. Rather the
           decision indicates the judge carefully considered the issues
           arising and evaluated the evidence. He reached reaching
           conclusions that were open to him.


Decision

No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Gillespie. Consequently, that decision dismissing the
appellant's appeal shall stand




   Francis J Farrelly ..
 Deputy Upper Tribunal                                                Date
21st October 2018




