
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05941/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool Employment Tribunals       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th February 2018                          |On 2nd March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                mohammed [a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Harrison (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ransley, promulgated on 31st May 2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on  20th  April  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  appellant,  whereupon  the   appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on [  ]
    1983.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  21st
    May 2016, refusing his application for a  protection  claim  under  the
    Refugee Convention  and  a  claim  for  humanitarian  protection  under
    paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The  essence  of  the  appellant's  claim  which  is  accepted  by  the
    Respondent Secretary of State, is that he worked as an armoured vehicle
    driver for two companies in the international community in Afghanistan,
    and the Tribunal below properly took this into account (paragraph  46).
    What was not accepted by  the  Respondent,  and  not  accepted  on  the
    evidence by the Tribunal below was that he had received  death  threats
    from the Taliban as a result of his employment with these two companies
    (paragraph 46).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge properly set out the full detail of  the  appellant's  claim.
    It was noted that the Taliban in 2009 sent a letter  to  the  Appellant
    asking him to assist them,  and  this  was  followed  by  more  letters
    thereafter.   He  resigned  in  2010  from  his  job   with   Edinburgh
    International Security Management Company and relocated  within  Kabul.
    He joined the Japanese International Cooperation Agency  (JICA)  as  an
    armoured vehicle driver.  While working with the latter  on  5th  April
    2013 he received a first threatening letter from the Taliban.  On  23rd
    June 2014 he received another letter stating that the  Taliban  Islamic
    Movement had issued orders for the Appellant's execution.  There was  a
    final letter on 18th May 2015.  Thereafter on 22nd May 2015 the Taliban
    approached the Appellant whilst he was in the mosque and showed  him  a
    video of his wife, intimating to him that they knew her whereabouts and
    that she would be targeted by them.  On 24th  May  2015  the  Appellant
    received a telephone call from the Taliban.  The Taliban even  went  to
    his  house  on  25th  June  2015.   The   Appellant   thereafter   made
    arrangements to leave Afghanistan and enter the UK  illegally  on  13th
    July 2015.

 5. The judge did not find the Appellant to be credible in his  claim  that
    he was threatened by the Taliban.   One  example  given  was  that  the
    Taliban in their letters had addressed him as "[A] Khan" which was  not
    his name.  The Appellant explained that the  reference  to  "Khan"  was
    honorific employed to give respect to the Appellant, which is  why  the
    Taliban wanted to recruit him to work for them, but the judge  rejected
    this explanation (paragraph 24).  Another example given  was  that  the
    Appellant did not leave Afghanistan at the earliest  opportunity,  even
    though he was targeted since 2009, but chose to live only in 2015.  His
    explanation was that he loved his country and did  not  wish  to  leave
    even though others who  had  worked  for  international  companies  had
    availed themselves of the US Green Visa and had been able to take their
    entire families away to settle in the United States.  The judge did not
    accept the explanation given by  the  Appellant  (paragraph  26).   The
    judge furthermore did not accept the letter of 23rd June 2014 from  the
    Taliban as being the final letter, and nor was it even a final warning,
    because the Appellant continued to live in Afghanistan,  not  informing
    either his employers or the police of  these  threats  (paragraph  28).
    The letters being sent by the Taliban also did not  make  proper  sense
    (paragraph 29).

 6. Amongst the explanations given by the judge, was also the rejection  of
    the expert report by Dr Giustozzi, who had expressed the  opinion  that
    the Taliban considered  themselves  the  rightful  rulers  rather  than
    insurgents in Afghanistan.  Dr Giustozzi had said, as the judge pointed
    out, "that  it  is  common  for  the  Taliban  to  offer  extension  to
    individuals who might be useful to them ...".  The judge went on to say
    nevertheless that, "the expert country report is of little help to  the
    Appellant because Dr Giustozzi's assessment of risk on return was  made
    on the basis that the Appellant's account regarding  the  threats  from
    the Taliban is credible.  I find that the account regarding the threats
    was not credible for the reasons I have given" (paragraph 36).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  erred  in  the
    consideration and rejection of  the  Appellant's  credibility,  of  the
    threatening letters from the Taliban, expecting them to be logical,  or
    to have a proper bureaucracy behind them, given that the Taliban  is  a
    fanatical terrorist organisation.  Second, that the judge rejected  the
    report of Dr Giustozzi on the basis that the  Appellant's  account  had
    not been believed when he had said that  he  had  received  threatening
    letters, thus making the report irrelevant, whereas in fact the  report
    should have been considered as part and parcel of  the  evidence  as  a
    whole, and had it been so viewed it would have corroborated aspects  of
    the Appellant's case, such as threats to those  seen  as  collaborators
    with the coalition forces.  Thirdly, the grounds stated that the  judge
    failed to look at all the evidence, including that of a [QN] and  [SS],
    who had themselves worked for international companies, and had  availed
    themselves of a US Green Card Visa to relocate with their  families  to
    the United States.  Whereas the judge does make reference to these  two
    individuals, there is no reference at all to supporting evidence from a
    [RD], who was the Appellant's former employer, and he had made it quite
    clear that the Appellant would be at risk if he were to remain,  or  to
    be returned to Afghanistan.  Finally, the judge  had  stated  that  the
    Appellant was inconsistent  in  the  description  of  the  weapons  the
    Taliban used when they fired at him, whereas the Appellant  had  always
    been entirely consistent in saying that they had used small  arms,  but
    without being able to specify these arms.

 9. On 19th September 2017, permission to appeal was granted by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

10. On 4th October 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.

The Hearing

11. At the hearing before me  on  7th  February  2018,  the  Appellant  was
    represented  by  Mr  M  Schwenk  of  Counsel  and  the  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr C Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer.
    In his submissions, Mr Schwenk emphasised two particular points.

12. First, that the evidence of [RD], the Appellant's former employer,  had
    not been mentioned at all, even though it was set out in  great  detail
    at pages 201 to 203.  None  of  the  witnesses,  who  had  put  forward
    witness statements on behalf of the Appellant, had actually attended in
    person to give evidence.  Whereas the evidence of  [QN]  and  [SS]  was
    expressly mentioned, that of [RD] was conspicuous by its absence in the
    determination.   Yet,  it  was  the   most   significant   because   it
    emphatically stated that the Appellant would be executed by the Taliban
    were he to return to  that  country.   Mr  Schwenk  submitted  that  no
    question had ever been raised about the  bona  fides  of  [RD]  as  the
    employer of the Appellant.  Indeed, the Appellant had  his  wage  slips
    and bank statements demonstrating that he  had  been  employed  by  the
    former employer, Mr [RD], and this was accepted both by  the  Secretary
    of State and by the judge below.

13. Second, he laid emphasis on the fact  that  the  expert  report  of  Dr
    Giustozzi was considered separately from  the  rest  of  the  evidence.
    Indeed, the view taken by the judge was that  because  the  Appellant's
    oral evidence was unreliable, and he was lacking  in  credibility,  for
    that reason the report of Dr Giustozzi would be of no value at  all  to
    the Tribunal.  This was the wrong way to look at an expert report,  and
    the judge had fallen into error in this regard.  Mr Schwenk also  dealt
    with other matters, such as the name of the Appellant being referred to
    as "[A] Khan" by the Taliban.  He stated that the Appellant had given a
    perfectly adequate explanation for this, namely, that since the Taliban
    were setting out to recruit him, as a  person  with  particular  skills
    which would be of value to them, they were referring to  him  with  the
    honorific "Khan".  Furthermore, there was no necessary rhyme or  reason
    in the way that the Taliban operated.  This meant that  if  they  wrote
    letters, and the letters were not logical in the way that they  flowed,
    that did not mean to say that the Taliban did  not  pose  a  threat  to
    someone who had been accepted as working for the coalition forces in  a
    military security capacity.

14. For his part, Mr Harrison submitted that he would rely upon the Rule 24
    response.  If the  judge  rejected  the  report  of  Dr  Giustozzi  (at
    paragraphs 36 and 37) the reasons had been given.  If the  judge  found
    the Appellant to be inconsistent about the weapons used by the  Taliban
    to  attack  him,  the  judge  had  provided  reasons   for   why   that
    inconsistency  was  damaging   to   the   Appellant   (paragraph   31).
    Nevertheless, Mr Harrison submitted that Dr Giustozzi's report "has not
    been read in the general mix" and that "there  are  concerns  therefore
    that credibility has been wrongly assessed".  The  Secretary  of  State
    had accepted that the Appellant had worked for two  foreign  companies,
    and this was why the approach of the judge may have mattered.   In  any
    event, however, there was no material error of law.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First, the failure to  refer  to
    the statement of [RD] means that the most  important  evidence,  namely
    that of his former employer, was strongly hinted at fatal  consequences
    for  the  Appellant  were  it  to  return  to  Afghanistan,  had   been
    overlooked.  There  was  no  mention  of  [RD]  in  the  determination.
    Second, the  approach  to  the  expert  report  of  a  person  of  some
    considerable  experience  in  Afghanistan  cases,  namely  Dr   Antonio
    Giustozzi, meant that it was sidelined and rendered unimportant,  quite
    simply because the judge had first made a finding that the  Appellant's
    evidence was not  reliable  and  to  be  trusted,  whereas  the  proper
    approach was to treat the evidence as a composite whole  together  with
    the Appellant's evidence.

Re-Making the Decision

16. I have remade the  decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    Immigration Judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that  I
    have heard today.  I am allowing this appeal for the following reasons.



17. First, this is a case where the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State  "has
    accepted that the Appellant had worked as an  armoured  vehicle  driver
    for two  companies  in  the  international  community  in  Afghanistan"
    (paragraph 46).

18. Second, those who had worked in such a capacity, namely, people such as
    [SS] and [QN], had availed themselves of the Special  Immigration  Visa
    Scheme, and were granted Green Cards to move to the US, because of  the
    severity of threats that was felt by such people from the  Taliban,  as
    they were working for foreigners who  had  come  to  Afghanistan.   The
    judge's rejection of the Appellant's explanation that  he  had  himself
    not chosen to do so because he loved his country and wanted as much  as
    possible to remain there, on the basis that when  he  was  twice  asked
    this question, "on each occasion the Appellant  failed  to  provide  an
    explanation as to why he failed to apply for a special immigration visa
    under the US Scheme like his former colleague [QN]" (paragraph  41)  is
    difficult to  follow.   The  Appellant  had  provided  an  explanation,
    namely, that he wanted to remain in Afghanistan as  much  as  possible.
    There is no reason why such an explanation should have  been  rejected.
    It was altogether easier for the Appellant to simply take the perfectly
    easy and lawful route of applying for a  special  immigration  visa  as
    others were doing, them to have to set out to claim asylum in  the  UK,
    unless he had to.  The Appellant's account is that he had to do so once
    the threatening letters started arriving and he became fearful  of  his
    life.

19. Third, the expert report of Dr Giustozzi is relevant  in  this  respect
    because as the  judge  rightfully  recognises  he  had  "expressed  the
    opinion that the  Taliban  considers  themselves  the  rightful  rulers
    rather than insurgents in Afghanistan", and it was his view that "it is
    common to the Taliban to offer extension to individuals  who  might  be
    useful to them" (paragraph 36).  That  would  have  given  considerable
    credence as to why the Appellant behaved in the manner that he did.  It
    has to be remembered, after all, that the protection claim  has  to  be
    assessed at the lower standard.  Accordingly, it does not  follow  that
    "The Appellant's failure to apply for such a visa and  his  failure  to
    explain why he did not apply for such a visa after  receiving  repeated
    threats from the Taliban - in particular the death  threat  dated  23rd
    June 2014 - has damaged the core of his claim" (paragraph  42),  simply
    does not follow.

20. Finally, and most importantly, there is a statement by "[RD]" (at pages
    201 to 203).  He is a British citizen, born and raised in Scotland.  He
    served eleven years in the Royal Marines Commando Force  from  1977  to
    1988.  He states that he had  "then  served  worldwide  as  a  security
    advisor to numerous countries, governments, and heads  of  state".   He
    goes on to explain that, "[A] was recommended to me  personally".   The
    statement that he gives  is  nuanced  and  sensitive.   It  states  (at
    paragraph 202) that, "my personal opinion was that we were complicit in
    creating a situation where those who would do us harm  were  given  the
    information on the young men and women who are indeed only  wishing  to
    work and gain employment."  With respect to the  risk  specifically  to
    the Appellant, he goes on to say that, "I believe he was threatened and
    given night letters as was the practice of the Taliban ...".

21. But perhaps most strikingly, [RD] is clear that, "I assure you I  as  a
    security subject matter expert have absolutely no doubt that he will be
    executed if he is forced to return to Afghanistan and it will  endanger
    his family also".

22. I find that this evidence, being the evidence of the Appellant's former
    employer, who had taken  on  the  Appellant  for  employment  when  the
    Appellant was personally recommended to  him,  is  credible  and  there
    exists no reason why it  should  not  be  taken  at  face  value.   The
    evidence of [QN] and [SS] was similarly accepted.

23. When the evidence of the Appellant, together with that of  these  three
    witnesses, is read with that of the expert, Dr Giustozzi, it  is  clear
    that, on the lower standard, the Appellant succeeds in making  out  his
    claim.  He has a well-founded fear  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
    reason and is entitled to international surrogate protection.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th February 2018
