
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/05330/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 15 November 2018                        |On 21 November 2018           |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    H A A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Miss J McCallum, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This decision is to be read with:

      i) The  respondent's  decision  dated  10  April  2018,  refusing  the
         appellant's protection claim.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (which
         are only general).

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Kempton, promulgated on 31 May 2018.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed on 8 June 2018.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Scott  Baker,  dated  22  June
         2018.

 2. Mrs O'Brien did not concede that the grounds were all well-founded, but
    she said that they did  disclose  an  absence  of  clear  findings  and
    reasons in relation to significant parts of the evidence, and that  the
    case should be re-heard by another judge.

 3. Miss McCallum sought to persuade me  that  the  medical  evidence,  the
    police documents and the rest of the evidence was such that the outcome
    should be reversed.  I was  unable  to  uphold  that  submission.   The
    medical evidence can go no further than establishing that the appellant
    was shot.  The rest of the evidence requires evaluation in  context  of
    the oral evidence of the appellant  and  his  wife,  their  credibility
    being in issue.  The nature of the case, therefore, is such that it  is
    appropriate under section 12 of the 2002 Act and Practice Statement 7.2
    to remit to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

 4. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.  The  member(s)  of  the  FtT  chosen  to
    consider the case are not to include Judge Kempton.

 5. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The reason does not  appear,  but
    as the matter was not addressed in the UT, anonymity has been preserved
    herein.


            [pic]


            15 November 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




