

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05908/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At: Civil Justice Centre (Remote     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing)                             |                                     |
|On the Papers 14th September 2020    |On 16 September 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     FHI
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. On 7 October 2019 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kemp  ('the  Judge')
        dismissed the appellants protection and human rights appeal.
     2. Permission to appeal was refused by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on 12 December 2019 in an arguably contradictory decision.
        Permission to appeal was, however, granted by a judge of the  Upper
        Tribunal on 25 February 2020. Directions were sent out as a  result
        of the Covid-19 arrangements seeking the views of the parties as to
        whether the question of whether the Judge had made an error of  law
        that was material to the decision to dismiss the  appeal  could  be
        considered on the papers without the need for a further hearing and
        providing the opportunity for further submissions to be made.
     3. No response was  received  from  the  Secretary  of  State,  but  a
        response  has  been   received   from   the   appellant's   current
        representatives in which they do not object to the  question  being
        decided on the papers.
     4. The  Overriding  Objective  is  contained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
        Procedure Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing  with  a  case
         fairly  and  justly  includes:  dealing with  it   in   ways  that
        are  proportionate   to   the   importance   of   the   case,   the
        complexity   of   the    issues,    etc;    avoiding    unnecessary
        formality   and   seeking  flexibility    in    the    proceedings;
        ensuring,  so  far  as  practicable,  that the parties are able  to
        participate fully in the proceedings; using any  special  expertise
        of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay,  so  far  as
        compatible with proper consideration of the issues.
     5. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the Upper Tribunal  to
        further the overriding objective; and to cooperate with  the  Upper
        Tribunal generally.
     6. Rule 34 of The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
        provides:

        34.-


        (1)  Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may make
             any decision without a hearing.


        (2)  The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed by a
             party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider  any
             matter, and the form of any such hearing.


        (3)  In immigration judicial review proceedings, the Upper Tribunal
             must hold a hearing before making a decision which disposes of
             proceedings. (4) Paragraph (3) does not affect  the  power  of
             the Upper Tribunal to-


             (a)  strike out a party's case, pursuant to  rule  8(1)(b)  or
             8(2);


             (b)  consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;


             (c)  determine an application for permission to bring judicial
                  review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or


             (d)  make a consent order disposing of  proceedings,  pursuant
                  to rule 39, without a hearing.

     7. It has not been shown to be inappropriate or unfair to exercise the
        discretion provided in  Rule  34  by  enabling  the  error  of  law
        question to be determined on the papers.  There is nothing  on  the
        facts or in law that makes  consideration  of  the  issues  on  the
        papers not in accordance with overriding objectives at this stage.



Background


     8. The appellant is a female citizen of Iraq who sought asylum in  the
        United Kingdom as  she  claimed  to  be  at  risk  of  honour-based
        violence from her family due  to  her  refusal  to  consent  to  an
        arranged marriage with her paternal  cousin  and  her  having  been
        found by her brother with her boyfriend with  whom  she  claims  to
        have lost her virginity and of whom her family did not approve.
     9. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [15] of the decision under
        challenge stating at [26]:

        "Overall, upon consideration of all the evidence in the round, I
        find that I am not satisfied, even to the lower standard, that the
        appellant is at risk of honour-based violence from her family upon
        her return to Iraq either due to her refusal to marry her cousin or
        due to her alleged relationship with [D]. Therefore, I find that
        the appellant would not be at risk of persecution upon her return
        to Iraq on the basis of her and that consequently she does not
        require protection under the Convention. I also find that her claim
        under articles 2 and 3 on this basis also falls with her asylum
        claim".

    10. At [28] the Judge writes:

        "The final issue to consider is whether the appellant would be able
        to return to her home area due to her lack of a valid CSID card and
        passport or other identity documentation. The appellant as male
        relatives in Iraq, namely her bothers, who could either send her
        original CSID card or help to secure her a replacement CSID if
        necessary; family members could also provide her with her passport
        or the necessary identity information to obtain a replacement
        passport. Therefore I find that I am in agreement with the
        respondent's position that she could return to Baghdad on either
        her own passport or a laissez-passer if necessary, and that her
        family could then meet her at the airport and accompany her back to
        her home area ((AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 and AAH (Iraqi
        Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 both
        considered and applied). Therefore, I am satisfied that her return
        to Iraq is both feasible and reasonable and that she cannot qualify
        for international humanitarian protection on this basis."

    11. The original grounds of appeal  asserted  the  credibility  of  the
        appellant had been considered in isolation without any reference to
        the background material; with specific reference to  that  relating
        to the return of a single woman to Iraq.
    12. In her further submissions the appellant asserts  that  basing  the
        decision upon her credibility is an error of law as  any  perceived
        credibility issues arising from her own evidence should  have  been
        looked at holistically and that the inconsistencies in her evidence
        should not have had  the  effect  of  being  used  against  her  in
        contradiction of other evidence.
    13. The appellant asserts the Judge failed to consider  any  background
        material relating to the return of a single woman to Iraq which was
        information that had  been  made  available  to  the  Judge,  which
        renders the decision unsounds as a result  of  a  lack  of  anxious
        scrutiny. It is argued the Judge has not considered adequately  the
        inability of the appellant to return to Iraq  as  a  single  female
        without a CSID and without taking into account wider aspects of her
        case such as sex out of wedlock and threats to individuals in Iraqi
        society. It also argued the Judge failed to properly  consider  the
        decision in SMO [2019] UKUT 400  and  difficulties  highlighted  in
        that case for appellants who have no identity documents; as without
        the same the appellant could not be repatriated to  Iraq  as  there
        will be no way of identifying who  she  is,  meaning  she  will  be
        unable to find employment or accommodation.



Error of law


    14. When deciding upon the credibility of a claim it is necessary for a
        decision-maker to consider all relevant  aspects  of  the  evidence
        made available  in  relation  to  both  an  appellant's  subjective
        claims, relevant background material, and that relied upon  by  the
        respondent.
    15. The decision may not require findings to be  made  in  relation  to
        each aspect of the claim provided the evidence  has  been  properly
        considered as part of the evaluation process.
    16. In this case it is not made out  the  Judge  failed  to  apply  the
        required degree of anxious scrutiny to the evidence available which
        is set out at [8]  of  the  decision  under  challenge.  The  Judge
        correctly noted the issue in the appeal  and  had  the  benefit  of
        seeing and hearing oral evidence being given by both the  appellant
        and her witness.
    17. The Judge considered what weight could be given to the  appellant's
        claim which included an assessment of  the  weight  that  could  be
        given to the oral and written evidence. Having done so neither  the
        appellant nor her witness was found to have  told  the  truth.  The
        Judge gives adequate  reasons  for  such  a  finding,  specifically
        concluding at [25] that  the  witness  had  been  produced  by  the
        appellant to substantiate her asylum claim and to bolster her  weak
        evidential position.
    18. The assertion the Judge failed to adopt a holistic approach is  not
        made out.
    19. The appellant accepts there were inconsistencies  in  her  evidence
        but argues they should not have been given the weight they were  by
        the Judge despite the issue of weight being a matter for the Judge.
        The grounds fail to establish anything arguably irrational  in  the
        weight the Judge gave to the evidence.
    20.  In  relation  to  the  assertion  the  Judge  failed  to  consider
        background material relating to the return of  a  single  woman  to
        Iraq, the finding of the Judge is that the appellant is able to  be
        returned to Baghdad and that she has male family  members  in  Iraq
        who will be able to assist her in the required documentation and be
        able to meet her at the airport and accompany her back to her  home
        area. There is no specific challenge to the Judge's finding to this
        effect which means the appellant will not have to live in Iraq as a
        single woman with the difficulties set out in the country  material
        for such a person.
    21. The Judge finds the appellant's claim relating to the  reasons  why
        she had to leave Iraq to be a sham based upon a lack of  truth.  It
        was not made out the appellant could not return to her home in Iraq
        where  she  had  lived  previously  without  credible  evidence  of
        experiencing any difficulties.
    22. In relation to the assertion the Judge failed to properly  consider
        SMO, the Upper  Tribunal in SMO, KSP & IM (Iraq) confirm  that,  as
        the INID programme continues to expand, more and more  CSA  offices
        will have an INID terminal making obtaining a CSID  by  proxy  more
        difficult: "The likelihood  of  obtaining  a  replacement  identity
        document by the use of a proxy,  whether  from   the   UK   or   on
        return  to  Iraq,  has  reduced  due  to  the introduction  of  the
        INID system. In order to obtain an INID, an individual must  attend
        their local  CSA  office  in  person  to  enrol  their  biometrics,
        including fingerprints and iris scans. The  CSA  offices  in  which
        INID terminals have been installed are unlikely -as a result of the
        phased replacement of the CSID system -to issue a CSID, whether  to
        an individual in person or to a proxy."
    23. It is accepted the new form of Iraqi identity card (INID) can  only
        be obtained in Iraq, but the country information provided does  not
        support a finding that  no  other  form  of  identity  document  is
        available to an Iraqi national  at  this  time.  Whilst  for  Iraqi
        nationals outside Iraq there is no facility for a INID to be issued
        the appellant has not established on the evidence that  this  means
        those outside Iraq have no means of obtaining  any  other  form  of
        identity document to confirm they are who they claim to be  and  an
        entitlement to be recognised as a national of Iraqi.
    24. A country report 'Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI) Report on issuance
        of the new Iraqi ID card' by the Danish Immigration Services, dated
        November 2018 in relation to possibility for  issuance  of  new  ID
        cards to Iraqis living abroad, record that when  asked  what  Iraqi
        citizens abroad can do to either renew an old ID-card or to replace
        an ID-card that is lost, Director Azaz replied that Iraqi citizens,
        who live abroad, need to go to Iraq to obtain  a  new  national  ID
        card. When asked if it was possible for issuance of old ID cards to
        Iraqis living abroad he responded that an Iraqi citizen abroad, who
        wants to apply for an old ID card, an ID document that is still  in
        use in Iraq, must go to an Iraqi embassy to have their fingerprints
        taken. In addition, an applicant must bring a  power  of  attorney,
        and the  three  main  documents:  the  old/expiring  ID  card,  the
        nationality certificate, and the residency card (only held  by  the
        head of household). The way  to  prove  Iraqi  nationality  to  the
        embassy is by a power of attorney. The  embassy  will  forward  the
        application to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry  of
        the Interior in Baghdad. The process is very long  and  can  easily
        take from six months to a year. The source  added  that  there  are
        many problems in the procedure, and that the  applicant  must  give
        proof of life. When the application is approved, the applicant will
        be issued an old ID card - not the new national ID card.
    25. In relation to obtaining a replacement CSID in the  UK,  the  Upper
        Tribunal in SMO, KSP  &  IM   (Iraq)  at   paragraph   383  endorse
        paragraph  26  of AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds -internal   relocation)   Iraq
        CG  [2018] UKUT 00212  (IAC)  which   details   the   numerous  and
        varied documents  that are required in order to obtain a CSID  from
        the Iraqi Embassy in the UK.   Paragraph  26  of  AAH  states:  "If
        applying through a consulate abroad the requirements are different.
        Having contacted the  consulate  in  London,  and  checked  on  the
        website of the Iraqi embassy in Sweden, Dr Fatah  states  that  the
        authorities will require the applicant to first  make  a  statement
        explaining why he needs a CSID and attach this to  his  application
        form,   which   must   countersigned   by   the   head    of    the
        applicant's family  and  stamped  by  the  consulate  or   embassy;
        he  must  then  produce  his Iraqi passport and proof of status  in
        the country where he is applying,  the  name  of  a  representative
        (proxy) in Iraq, an additional form completed by the  head  of  the
        applicant's family verifying that the contents of  his  application
        form were true,  four  colour   copies   of   his   INC,   and   10
        colour  photographs.  Crucially  the  applicant  must  be  able  to
        produce something which can establish the location of his  family's
        details in the civil register.  This should be a CSID,  an  INC  or
        birth certificate. If none of these are available to the  applicant
        he must  supply  the  identity  documents  of  his  parents.   This
        evidence again accords with that of Landinfo  (December  2017)  who
        conclude  that  it  can  be  difficult  to  obtain  replacement  ID
        documents from an embassy abroad for the individual who  is  unable
        to verify his or her identity." If the appellant is claiming it  is
        reasonably  likely  that  she  will  not  be  able  to   obtain   a
        replacement  CSID  in  the  UK  as  she  does   not   have   access
        to  the  required documents, this was not made out on the  evidence
        before the Judge who found that her CSID and other  document  could
        be sent to her by her family, hence not needed  a  replacement  and
        being able to furnish official proof of her identity.
    26. The respondent's latest Country Policy & Information Note dated  30
        June 2020 contains information at Appendix I from the  Respondent's
        Returns Logistics Department. This states the following:

        "CSID cards are being phased out and replaced by INID (Iraq
        National Identification) cards. It is not currently possible to
        apply for an INID card outside of Iraq. As  a result, the Iraqi
        embassy in London are advising their nationals in the UK to apply
        instead for a 'Registration Document(1957)' which they can use to
        apply for other documents such as passports or an INID card once
        they have returned to Iraq." Thus, it appears that the Iraqi
        Embassy in London will not issue a CSID but instead will issue a
        'Registration Document (1957)' which can be used to apply for an
        INID in Iraq.   SMO, KSP & IM (Iraq) is very clear that to safely
        pass through checkpoints in Iraq it is necessary to show a CSID or
        an INID and other forms  of  identity document (even a passport) is
        not acceptable. It is submitted that the appellant would be unable
        to travel safely across Iraq even if he were able to be issued with
        a 'Registration Document (1957)' by the Iraqi Embassy in London. A
        copy of this document appears at Annex A to this judgment.

    27. The Registration Document is an official  document  issued  by  the
        authorities in Iraq as confirmation of an individual's status as an
        Iraqi national. It is also clear that the stated intention  of  the
        Iraqi authorities is that possession of such a document is a  means
        to enable  an  individual  to  obtain  further  identity  documents
        required which, in light of  the  up-to-date  country  information,
        must refer to the new Identity Document when they do not  have  the
        means to obtain the same for themselves in Iraq.
    28. The appellant made several claims in her  appeal  which  have  been
        shown not to be true. It was found the appellant  can  contact  her
        male relatives and obtain her  documents.  The  appellant  has  not
        established such a finding is unsafe or that she cannot obtain  the
        required documents. The brothers own entry in the family book  will
        enable the appellants family details to be traced.
    29. The appellant also attended school in Iraq,  according  to  replies
        given by her in her asylum interview, where there  should  also  be
        required  details  concerning  her   CSID   number   and/or   other
        information confirming her official  identification  in  accordance
        with normal procedures. It is known that a valid CSID  is  required
        to enable an Iraqi national to obtain access to education.
    30. As the appellant has not made out that she cannot  be  returned  to
        Iraq with an identity document  issued  by  the  Iraqi  authorities
        and/or a valid passport she has not made out she will not  be  able
        to  be  returned  to  Baghdad  and,  in  light  of  the  return  of
        availability of internal flights within Iraq,  travel  further.  If
        land travel was required, the appellant fails to establish that the
        documentation that she will possess, which will not be removed from
        her possession on arrival at the airport, will not be sufficient to
        enable her to travel internally especially with a male relative who
        can vouch for her identity if required.
    31. It is not disputed that the appellant could not remain  in  Baghdad
        as she has no family or other connections in Baghdad.
    32. This  is  an  appeal  in  which  all  the  claims  adverse  to  the
        appellant's case made before the First-tier Tribunal were found  to
        lack credibility. It is also a case in which the  appellant  relies
        upon case law and country evidence  to  support  her  claim  to  be
        unable to return to Iraq or obtain the necessary  documentation  to
        enable her to live reasonably in Iraq; but the ability or otherwise
        to do so is fact specific. The appellant has not helped her case by
        relying on what the First-tier Tribunal effectively found are lies.
        The factual matrix as found does not support the appellant's  claim
        that when applying  the  guidance  contained  in  SMO  and  country
        information she is entitled to a grant of international protection.
        The appellant is no more than a failed asylum seeker  who  has  not
        established even to the lower standards  applicable  in  an  asylum
        appeal that she  cannot  obtain  her  passport,  officially  issued
        identity document, does not have a support network available to her
        on return to Iraq,  or  has  lost  contact  with  her  family.  The
        evidence clearly supports a finding that it is the opposite of what
        the appellant is claiming that is the true position.
    33. I do not find the appellant has made out her case  that  the  Judge
        has erred in a manner material  to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal. Clear findings within the range of those reasonable open to
        the Judge have been made supported by adequate reasons.  The  Judge
        confirms consideration of the relevant country  guidance  case  law
        and no material error is  made  out  in  relation  to  the  current
        position that warrants the Upper Tribunal interfering  any  further
        in this matter.


Decision

    34. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    35. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 14 September 2020

