
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
pa/05807/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On September 26, 2018                   |On October 8, 2018                 |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                  MR A M G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Saqib, Counsel, instructed by UK Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008  (the  UT  Procedure  Rules)  I  make  an  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure  or  publication  of  specified  documents  or   information
    relating to the proceedings or of any matter likely to lead members  of
    the public to identify any person whom  the  Upper  Tribunal  considers
    should not be identified. The effect of such an "anonymity  order"  may
    therefore be to prohibit anyone (not merely the parties  in  the  case)
    from disclosing relevant  information.  Breach  of  the  order  may  be
    punishable as a contempt of court.

 2. The appellant is a national of Ethiopia.  He claimed to have arrived in
    the United Kingdom on October 26, 2016 and he claimed asylum on October
    25, 2017.

 3. The respondent refused his application in a decision  dated  April  19,
    2018 under paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on under Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  on  May  3,  2018.   His
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Roots  (hereinafter
    called "the Judge") on June 6, 2018 and in a  decision  promulgated  on
    June 29, 2018 the Judge dismissed his appeal.

 5. The appellant appealed this decision on July 13,  2018.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingsworth on
    August 13, 2018.

 6. No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.

    SUBMISSIONS


 7. Mr Saqib adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted the Judge had to
    decide whether the appellant was an Oromo and whether he was involved
    with the OLF. The appellant had provided identification documents and
    had not been cross-examined about them and whilst he accepted he had
    given incorrect answers in his screening interview Mr Saqib submitted
    that although the appellant's father was Oromo his stepmother was not
    which was why he was not fully informed. The appellant had undertaken
    several activities with the OLF and had answered questions in his
    interview. Mr Saqib submitted that the evidence from Dr Berri had not
    been properly considered and too much weight had been placed on his
    screening interview that took place the same day that he claimed
    asylum.


 8. Mr Tufan submitted that the Judge had considered all the evidence. The
    Judge noted the appellant's inability to speak Oromo even though he
    lived in an area where Oromo was predominantly spoken. The Judge was
    entitled to place weight on the appellant's inability to answer
    questions about his culture. Whilst the screening interview was not
    meant to be an in-depth interview it was significant that he failed to
    mention in the screening interview, either at Q3.1 or Q4.1, his
    involvement with the OLF. The only problems he mentioned related to his
    father's role. At the beginning of his substantive interview he was
    asked to confirm if he was happy with his screening interview and he
    confirmed he was. During his substantive interview he was asked whether
    he was a member of the OLF (Q63) and he stated he was simply a
    supporter. With regard to the letter from Dr Berri he submitted that
    this was simply a letter from a member of the OLF and had been
    considered.

 9. Mr Saqab conceded that the Judge had looked at the letter at paragraph
    88 of the decision but had failed to place sufficient weight on it.

    FINDINGS

10. The appellant had claimed asylum based on his ethnicity and involvement
    with the OLF.

11. Mr Saqab confirmed at the beginning of  the  hearing  the  issues  that
    faced the First-tier Tribunal and submitted that the Judge had erred in
    his  approach  to  the  evidence  and  in  particular  the  appellant's
    involvement with the OLF. He argued  that  too  much  weight  had  been
    placed on the appellant's screening interview.

12. In YL (2004) UKIAT 00145 the Tribunal noted that,  whilst  the  answers
    given at a screening interview are expected to be true and  may  fairly
    be compared to answers given later, it is not appropriate at this stage
    to expect a detailed  account  of  the  applicant's  asylum  claim  and
    account should be taken of the fact that the interviewee  may  well  be
    tired after a long journey. These matters have to be borne in mind when
    considering inconsistencies between the  screening  interview  and  the
    later evidence.

13. In considering the appellant's application for  asylum  the  respondent
    pointed out in the decision  letter  that  there  were  inconsistencies
    between the appellant's screening interview and  substantive  interview
    with regard to his OLF activity and reference was made to Q3.1 and  4.1
    of the screening interview.

14. The grounds of appeal challenged the approach taken by the Judge to the
    inconsistencies between the screening and substantive interviews but it
    is clear from reading the Judge's decision that the Judge was aware  of
    the case law appertaining to the weight to be attached to  a  screening
    interview. Quite often  decisions  are  challenged  when  an  appellant
    failed to  provide  sufficient  information  about  his  claim  in  his
    screening interview but in this case the Judge made adverse credibility
    findings against the appellant because he failed to mention significant
    aspects of  his  claim  both  in  respect  of  his  ethnicity  and  his
    involvement with the OLF. At paragraph 70 the Judge noted that  he  had
    failed to mention he was a  supporter  of  the  OLF  in  his  screening
    interview and confirmed at the beginning of his  substantive  interview
    that the  answers  given  in  his  screening  interview  were  correct.
    Moreover, the appellant failed to address this failure in  his  witness
    statement and simply claimed he was involved  with  the  OLF.  He  also
    blamed the interviewing officer in his screening interview and  claimed
    it was difficult to give detailed answers in his  screening  interview.
    The Judge considered the evidence at paragraph  76  and  made  findings
    that were open to him. The Judge was entitled to place weight on  these
    omissions as they went to the heart of the appellant's  claim.  It  was
    reasonable for the appellant to mention his support of the OLF  in  his
    screening interview.

15. The grounds criticised the Judge over the approach to the  letter  from
    Dr Berri. It was conceded in submissions that the Judge had  considered
    the letter at paragraph 88  of  the  decision  and  I  find  the  Judge
    highlighted inconsistencies between the letter and the  evidence  given
    by the appellant. The findings reached at paragraph 89 of the  decision
    were open to the Judge.

16. The grounds of appeal also took issue with the Judge's approach to  his
    ethnicity. It was accepted that the appellant  had  answered  questions
    incorrectly and the Judge  considered  his  explanation  why  he  spoke
    Amharic rather than Oromo at paragraph 67 of the decision.  The  letter
    from Dr Berri highlighted the influence that  the  appellant's  parents
    had on the appellant and in rejecting his claim to be Oromo  the  Judge
    had regard not only to this letter but also to the evidence as a whole.
    The Judge concluded the  evidence  that  the  appellant  was  of  Oromo
    ethnicity was weak and importantly, he had failed to answer a number of
    questions about his ethnicity and culture in his interview  and  whilst
    he had put forward an explanation at the hearing the  Judge  ultimately
    concluded he was not Oromo.

17. Having reached these findings, it follows  his  claim  to  be  at  risk
    through ethnicity and involvement with the OLF must fail and the  final
    ground of appeal (paragraphs 23 of the grounds) has no merit.

    DECISION

18. There is no error in law I uphold the original decision.

Signed                              Date     30/09/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

Signed                              Date     30/09/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

