
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05575/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 11th June 2019                |On the 08th July 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Sesay, Solicitor Advocate


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission against the decision of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "FtTJ")
    promulgated on the 20th March 2019, in which the Tribunal  allowed  the
    appeal of DO against the decision of the Secretary of State  to  refuse
    his protection and his human rights claim and in  the  context  of  the
    respondent having made a deportation order against  him  under  Section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2. We make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008 as the  proceedings  relate
    to the circumstances of minor children. Unless and until a Tribunal  or
    court directs otherwise the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report
    of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him  or
    members of his family.  This direction applies both  to  the  appellant
    and to the respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before  the  Tribunal,
    we will for ease of reference refer to him as the respondent as he  was
    the respondent in the FtTJ.  Similarly, we will  refer  to  DO  as  the
    appellant as he was the appellant before the FtTJ.

 The Background:

 4. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Nigeria.   He  appealed  against  the
    decision of the respondent who, on the 13th  April  2018,  refused  his
    protection and human rights claim in  the  context  of  the  respondent
    having made a deportation order against him under Section 32(5) of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007.

 5. The appellant's immigration history and relationship with  his  partner
    is set out in the decision of the  respondent  and  summarised  in  the
    decision of the FtTJ at paragraph 6 and an earlier decision of the  FtT
    (Judge Greasley) in 2016.

 6. The appellant claims to have arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2002
    however there is no evidence to substantiate that  claim.  He  made  an
    application for an EEA residence card on the 24th November 2009 as  the
    spouse of an EEA national and his application was granted, and  he  was
    issued with a residence card valid until 4 December 2014.

 7. In 19th January 2015 he was convicted after a trial of three counts  of
    concealing/ removal of criminal property (money laundering).

 8. On 23 February 2015 he was sentenced for those offences to a period  of
    12 months imprisonment on each count to run concurrently  and  for  the
    authorities to seize �21,962 as representing the proceeds of the crimes
    committed.

 9. The sentencing remarks are set out in the respondent's  bundle  at  B1.
    The appellant was involved in a criminal enterprise which was  intended
    to obtain large sums of money by sending bogus  invoices  to  companies
    purporting to come from genuine suppliers. His role was to  permit  his
    account used as a conduit for those fraudulently obtained funds and  to
    go to the bank and draw out sums of money as soon as they  had  arrived
    in cash. The sentencing judge  found  the  criminal  enterprise  to  be
    "plainly deliberate, organised and  international  fraud".  Whilst  the
    judge accepted that the appellant was not part of the  main  organising
    group, he was satisfied that he  had  been  plainly  entrusted  with  a
    significant role of taking custody of those credits and passing on  the
    funds. In his sentencing remarks, the judge  recorded  that  the  claim
    made that he had been placed under duress by  organised  criminals  had
    been rejected by the jury and that he  had  been  convicted  of  money-
    laundering of a total sum of around �27,000.

10. Following his conviction at the Crown Court he was served with a notice
    of liability to deportation on the 22nd April 2015 and was served  with
    his deportation order and decision on the 13th July 2015.  He lodged an
    appeal against the refusal of his residence card on the 24th July  2015
    and removal directions were set for the 21st August 2015.  His  removal
    was deferred until the 18th September 2015. An application for  a  stay
    on removal was refused and removal directions were  maintained  however
    on route he made an asylum claim and in his  later  interview  asserted
    that he was a potential victim of trafficking (VOT).

11. His appeal against the refusal of a residence card was dismissed by the
    FtTJ on the 25th August 2016 and he became appeal rights  exhausted  on
    the 27th January 2017 (we  refer  to  the  decision  of  FtTJ  Greasley
    exhibited in the respondent's bundle).

12. FtTJ Greasley did not accept that the appellant had  provided  credible
    and reliable evidence that his former wife, during a  five-year  period
    between 2009 and 2014, had exercised  EEA  treaty  rights  as  both  an
    employed and self-employed worker (see paragraph 23).  The  judge  also
    concluded that the respondent's  decision  in  relation  to  Regulation
    20(1)  was  justified,  lawful  and  proportionate   (public   security
    grounds). The judge found that the three counts of money-laundering  to
    which the appellant pleaded not guilty, but was convicted of, were very
    serious matters justifying a custodial sentence. The judge  found  this
    to not be an isolated incident and also  took  into  account  that  the
    appellant had initially claimed that his identity had been stolen,  but
    they later claimed that he been the subject of duress, but the jury had
    rejected these claims. At paragraph 28, the  judge  took  into  account
    that the offences were committed for purposes of  financial  gain,  and
    there was no credible evidence to suggest that the appellant  would  be
    likely to secure employment in future in the United Kingdom. The  judge
    also found that he  had  "tenuous  links  to  the  UK",  there  was  no
    supporting evidence adduced on his behalf referred to by the parties or
    any general letters of support nor had  he  demonstrated  that  he  had
    severed links with Nigeria. His appeal was  therefore  dismissed  under
    the Immigration EEA Regulations 2016 (the "EEA Regulations").

13. On the 21st April 2017 it  was  accepted  that  there  were  reasonable
    grounds to suspect he was a VOT, but his claim was subsequently refused
    within a conclusive decision made on the 29th September 2017.

14. A decision was made to revoke his signed deportation order  made  under
    the EEA regulations as his EEA  residence  card  had  expired  and  his
    application for a residence card  had  been  refused.  The  deportation
    order was revoked on the 21st December 2017 and a decision was made  to
    pursue automatic deportation inn accordance with  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007.

15. On the 9th March 2018 he was served with a decision  to  deport  notice
    and  was  given   the   opportunity   for   a   response.   His   legal
    representatives' submitted  representations  on  the  14th  March  2018
    asserting breaches of Article 8.

16. On the 13th April 2018 a decision was made to refuse his protection and
    human rights claim. The basis of his protection claim was based on  his
    fear that if returned to Nigeria he would face mistreatment due to  his
    religion, his fear of traffickers and his membership  of  a  particular
    social  group,  as  a  bisexual  man  in  Nigeria.  Those  claims  were
    considered within the decision letter at paragraphs 8 - 57.  His  claim
    on medical grounds (Article 3) was considered at paragraphs 63 - 69.

17. As to Article 8, the Secretary of State took into account the nature of
    his claim that he had established a family life  in  the  UK  with  two
    children and a partner and that he had established a private  life.  In
    support of the claim, the  appellant  had  submitted  two  letters  and
    copies of birth certificates and British  passports  for  each  of  the
    children. In respect of his family life with the children, aged  8  and
    10, it was accepted that children were under 18 years of age  and  that
    they were British citizens  and  that  they  had  never  left  the  UK.
    However, it was not accepted that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship the  children  in  the  light  of  the
    material that had been provided. It  was  accepted  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the children to live in Nigeria as  the  children  had
    obtained British citizenship and were not subject to removal  from  the
    UK. The respondent considered that the best interests of  children  lay
    in the retention of their current family unit, that is,  to  remain  in
    the care of their mother in the UK in  the  event  of  the  appellant's
    deportation.  It  was  not  accepted  that  the   appellant   met   the
    requirements of the exception to deportation on  the  basis  of  family
    life with the children.

18. For similar reasons, it was not accepted that he had established family
    life the UK with a partner. It was accepted that Mr  S  was  a  British
    citizen and was in the UK, but it  was  not  accepted  that  he  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with Mr S.

19. As to private life, it was not  accepted  that  he  had  been  lawfully
    resident in the UK for most of his life.  Whilst  he  claimed  to  have
    entered the UK in 2002 he had not provided evidence to substantiate the
    claim and his first contact with the authorities in the UK  was  on  24
    November 2008 when he applied for an EEA residence card. Therefore,  it
    was considered that  he  had  entered  the  UK  in  2008  when  he  was
    approximately 33 years of age. His residence card expired on 4 December
    2014 and therefore his lawful residence in the UK was a  total  of  six
    years. It was not accepted that he could meet the requirements  of  the
    private life exception to deportation.

20.  As  the  exceptions  to  deportation  did  not  apply  in  his   case,
    consideration  was  given  to  whether  there  were  "very   compelling
    circumstances" such that he should not be deported, the respondent  set
    out that there was a significant public  interest  in  his  deportation
    because he had been convicted of a serious offence which resulted in  a
    custodial sentence of 12 months imprisonment, he had no basis to remain
    in the UK, and his residence card expired  in  December  2014  and  has
    since overstayed illegally. In order to outweigh the  very  significant
    public interest in deportation, he would need to provide evidence of  a
    very strong Article 8 claim over and above the circumstances  described
    in the exceptions to deportation. The respondent concluded that he  had
    provided no information that  would  outweigh  the  significant  public
    interest in his deportation.

21. The Appellant appealed against  that  decision  to  the  FtTJ.  It  was
    asserted in the Grounds of  Appeal  that  he  was  the  father  of  two
    children and that it would be unduly harsh on his children for  him  to
    be separated from them. It was stated that they were  British  citizens
    and were present and settled in the UK and it would be unduly harsh for
    them to be deprived of the  love  and  support  from  the  father.  The
    grounds maintained that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship
    between the appellant and his children.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

22. The appeal came before the FtTJ on the 15th March 2019.

23. In a decision promulgated on the 20th March  of  that  year,  the  FtTJ
    allowed the appeal.

24. At paragraph 3 of the decision, the FtTJ recorded that the  appeal  was
    based mainly on the presence of his two British citizen children T aged
    11 and TO, aged 9 and that he had a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with them. The appellant did not proceed with  his  asylum
    and humanitarian protection claims. The FtTJ set out that  "the  appeal
    before me was therefore limited to Article 8 of the ECHR and the  issue
    of the best interest of the children as against the public interest  in
    this matter taking into account the deportation order made against  the
    appellant following his conviction and 12  month  sentence  for  money-
    laundering in 2015."

25. At paragraph 29  the  FtTJ  recorded  "it  was  quite  clear  that  the
    appellant's only thrust in the appeal before  me  was  in  reality  his
    relationship with the children. That was what was pursued before me and
    nothing else."

26. The FtTJ heard oral evidence from the appellant but not  from  his  ex-
    partner who had provided a witness statement. The  judge  recorded  the
    contents of that statement at paragraphs 9 - 11.  It  stated  that  the
    appellant was a "good hands-on father" and supported the  children.  At
    paragraph 10, it was stated  that  the  appellant  regularly  took  the
    children to school and collected them and that they would  struggle  to
    cope without him if he were to be deported from the UK.  It  said  that
    the appellant had always been there for the children and was a  man  of
    good character and good role model. It was further so that the presence
    of the appellant in their lives was vital as they  reached  a  critical
    milestone in  their  lives  and  in  their  development.  It  said  the
    appellant and the children were extremely close.

27. In addition, the FtTJ made reference to a letter from a teacher written
    about the eldest child T and a letter in relation to the youngest child
    TO. There was also a further letter confirming that the  appellant  had
    been bringing both children to Saturday lessons from 1  September  2018
    until 8 December 2018 (see paragraphs 13 - 15).

28. The FtTJ's analysis of the evidence is set out at paragraphs 35  -  51.
    It can be summarised as follows: -

      i) the appellant had a close relationship with his two children  based
         on the witness statement of  his  former  partner,  and  the  three
         letters  from  the  teachers.  He  described  this  as  "compelling
         evidence on school headed notepaper signed by them" (at [35]).

     ii) He found that the appellant  took  part  in  their  activities  and
         attended parent's meetings, brought the children to school and that
         their teachers stated how important he is in  their  life  at  home
         (see [36]).

    iii) The  FtTJ  observed  that  the  respondent  had  not  made  further
         enquiries as to the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  the
         children before a decision was  made  and  that  in  his  view  the
         respondent should have taken  further  measures  to  ascertain  the
         relationship between the appellant and the children before making a
         decision (see [39]).

     iv) In any event, at the date of  the  hearing,  the  appellant  had  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his children.  He
         took an  active  presence  in  their  lives  as  explained  by  the
         appellant's former partner and by the evidence from  the  teachers.
         Whilst he did not reside with the children, he saw them  daily  and
         enjoyed  an  affectionate  and  subsisting  relationship  with  the
         children (see [42]).

      v) It would be unduly harsh  for  the  children  to  live  in  Nigeria
         because they are British, live  in  the  UK  and  live  with  their
         mother, are doing well at school and attend  school.  Such  a  move
         would be hugely disruptive the children (see [43] and [50]).

     vi) It would be unduly harsh for the  children  to  remain  in  the  UK
         without their father as he had "a huge positive presence  in  their
         lives". The FtTJ found that the best interests of the children  lay
         in their retaining a good  relationship  with  both  their  parents
         which they could not do if their father was deported (see [44]  and
         [46]).

    vii) In respect of the previous decision of  Judge  Greasley,  the  FtTJ
         considered that there were sufficient reasons to  depart  from  his
         analysis of the appellant's  criminality.  Those  reasons  were  as
         follows:

          a)  he  had  taken  "an  elevated  approach  to  the  appellant's
             convictions".

          b) the appellant had not reoffended.

          c) the sentencing judge was bound by statute and could not impose
             a suspended sentence in any event. (see [48]).

   viii)  In summary, it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in
         the UK without their father because

          a) he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with them,

          b) he was actively involved in their lives,

          c) he is a participative father,

          d) the children's mother is supportive of him as a good father,

          e) the school letters speak volumes as to the  good  relationship
             has the children,

          f) the children struggle without him - see [48]).

The Appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

29. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted on the 10th April 2019  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Robertson for the following reasons: -

         "It is arguable, as submitted in the grounds of  application,  that
         the judge has found that it would be unduly harsh for the  children
         to remain the UK without their father on the basis that  it  is  in
         their best interests for him to remain in the  UK.  There  did  not
         appear to be any evidence before the judge to  establish  that  the
         children had suffered whilst he had been  in  prison  and  had  not
         managed   without   him,   or   that    there    had    been    any
         behavioural/developmental issues as a result of his absence to  tip
         the findings into being unduly harsh to remain in  the  UK  without
         him.

         Permission to appeal is granted."

30. The appellant was represented before the Upper Tribunal  by  Mr  Sesay,
    Solicitor Advocate. The  Secretary  of  State  was  represented  by  Mr
    Lindsay.

31. We therefore heard submissions from both parties which are set  out  in
    the Record of Proceedings.  The points raised in the grounds and relied
    upon by the Secretary of State relate to the  FtTJ's  consideration  of
    the issue of undue harshness.

32. Mr Lindsay, on behalf of the respondent relied  upon  the  grounds.  He
    submitted that the evidence referred to in the decision failed to reach
    the high threshold of unduly harsh consequences  as  confirmed  in  the
    decision of KO (Nigeria) (appellant)v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department (respondent) [2018] UK 53, relying on paragraph 23.  "Unduly
    harsh"  does  not  mean  uncomfortable  or  inconveniently  or   merely
    difficult and thus a more elevated threshold was necessary in order  to
    meet that test. He submitted that the central problem with the decision
    was that there was no evidence  capable  of  taking  the  circumstances
    above the normal effects of deportation and that there was no  evidence
    capable of supporting the conclusion that the  circumstances  would  be
    unduly harsh for these children and as the FtTJ made no  clear  finding
    on the elevated threshold, he misdirected himself in law.

33. In addition, he submitted that the FtTJ did not make any self-direction
    to the elevated threshold set out in the decision of KO (as cited)  nor
    to the other core principles of law that something more than the  usual
    effects of deportation would be required.  In  this  context,  he  made
    reference to the decision of AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016]  EWCA  Civ  1012  and
    that it will be rare for the best interests of the children to outweigh
    the strong public interest in  deporting  foreign  criminals  and  that
    something more than a lengthy separation from  a  parent  is  required,
    even  though  such  separation  is  detrimental  to  the  child's  best
    interests. He submitted that the decisions stated that  such  an  event
    was  "commonplace  and  not  a  compelling  circumstance".   Thus,   he
    submitted, there was nothing in the  evidence  before  the  FtTJ  which
    would take the relationship "out of  the  ordinary"  and  none  of  the
    findings of fact made were capable of establishing this.

34. He directed the Tribunal to paragraph 39 and submitted  that  the  FtTJ
    had made a significant error of fact. This  was  said  to  be  material
    because it was  not  clear  if  the  judge  had  added  weight  to  the
    appellant's case on the basis of a misunderstanding of  the  chronology
    of the decisions made by the respondent and  the  evidence  upon  which
    those decisions was based.

35. Mr Lindsay submitted that when a careful analysis was undertaken of the
    core reasons given by the FtTJ at paragraphs 42 - 44, it was  based  on
    no more than the appellant had played an active  role,  is  a  positive
    presence and saw the children daily.

36. He further submitted that the FtTJ had conflated  the  children's  best
    interests test with the unduly harsh test. At paragraph [44]  the  FtTJ
    made a finding as to the children's best interests and that  they  were
    to retain a good relationship with both their parents which they  could
    not do if their father was  deported  but  that  finding  followed  the
    compendium finding based on undue harshness at paragraphs 42-43.

37. In summary he submitted, the judge failed to apply the correct approach
    when considering the issue of undue  harshness  and  that  this  was  a
    material error of law. He submitted on the evidence, the appeal  should
    have been dismissed.

38. Mr Sesay provided a Rule 24 response and a  skeleton  argument  and  in
    addition made oral submissions.  He submitted that the reliance  placed
    on paragraph 23 of KO (Nigeria) was misplaced for two reasons; firstly,
    there was nothing in KO which was inconsistent  with  paragraph  46  of
    Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 on the Tribunal's task  of  conducting
    independently a proportionality assessment in  deportation  cases,  and
    secondly,   where   children   are   involved,   in   conducting    the
    proportionality assessment, the  Supreme  Court  preferred  the  narrow
    approach which focuses on the child. Therefore, he submitted  that  the
    FtTJ directed himself as required by the Supreme  Court  regarding  the
    hypothetical question at paragraph 18 which is "where are  the  parents
    are expected to be?". The FtTJ implicitly concluded  that  the  parents
    are both to be in the UK, particularly with the appellant's active  and
    positive involvement with the children. It was not simply as argued  by
    the respondent that it concerned separation instead. It was  about  the
    impact of the deportation of the appellant on his children.

39. He further submitted that the FtTJ correctly directed himself in law on
    the application of the "unduly harsh" test at paragraph 45.  The  judge
    made reference to section 117C and identified a balancing act,  and  at
    paragraph 47 applied the principles in KO  (Nigeria).  Thus,  the  FtTJ
    carried  out  a  judicial  assessment  focusing  on  the  children.  He
    submitted that it was not necessary for the FtTJ to make  reference  to
    every paragraph in the  decision  of  KO  (Nigeria)  and  that  he  had
    properly directed himself to paragraph 47 and the  evaluative  exercise
    that should be undertaken.

40. Mr Sesay submitted that the respondent was not entitled  to  limit  the
    scope of judicial discretion and that the decision reached by the  FtTJ
    was an evaluative judgement that he was entitled to take.

41. He referred us to the decision of MK (section 55  -  Tribunal  options)
    Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT at paragraph 42 (v) which  made  reference  to
    the children in that decision as being at a  critical  stage  of  their
    development, the appellant being a father figure in  the  life  of  his
    daughter and that the appellant's role had been present since her birth
    and that "children do not have the resilience, maturity or fortitude of
    adults." Thus, he submitted this was the case here.

42. Mr Sesay submitted that the judge was entitled to take into account the
    evidence before him and the letters from the school. At paragraph 33 he
    set out the nature of the appellant's  Article  8  claim  that  he  had
    established a family life in the UK with his two children, at paragraph
    35 he made reference  to  the  appellant's  evidence  and  the  witness
    statement from his estranged partner and reached  the  conclusion  that
    the evidence was "compelling". He submitted that it was not an error of
    law to come to the conclusion that he did, and it was  not  irrational.
    The judge had more evidence than had been put before the  Secretary  of
    State and at paragraph 36 acknowledged this as independent evidence and
    the judge focused on the children.

43. He submitted that the respondent's reliance upon  the  decision  in  AJ
    (Zimbabwe) was misplaced and that the test of undue harshness whilst an
    elevated threshold did not have to be "compelling". Mr Sesay  submitted
    there was no error of law in the decision of the FtTJ.

Discussion:

44. We remind ourselves that we can only interfere with the decision  of  a
    judge if it has been demonstrated that there was an  error  of  law  in
    reaching that decision.

45. The effect of the provisions relating to  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals is that by Section 32(4)  Parliament  had  decided  that  the
    deportation of foreign criminals is conducive to the public  good.   By
    Section 32(5), the Secretary of State is obliged to make a  deportation
    order subject to  Section  33.   Section  33  identifies  a  number  of
    exceptions, which if applicable, have the consequences that sub-Section
    32(4) and (5) will not apply.

46. Whilst the appellant had raised protection claims based on  his  sexual
    orientation, and as a victim of trafficking, as the judge  recorded  at
    [3] he did not seek to rely  on  or  advance  those  grounds.   On  the
    present facts, the only exception relevant  is  whether  removal  would
    breach his rights and those of his family members under the ECHR.

47. The Immigration  Rules  reflect  the  statutory  obligation  to  deport
    foreign criminals whilst recognising that there may be cases where  the
    making of a deportation order would be incompatible with Article 8 (see
    Rules 398, 399 or 399A).

48. The correct approach, where an appeal on human rights grounds has  been
    brought in seeking to resist deportation, is to  consider  whether  the
    appellant is a foreign criminal as defined by Section  117D(2)(a),  (b)
    or (c).  If so, does he fall within  paragraphs  399  or  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules and if not, are there compelling  circumstances  over
    and beyond those falling within paragraphs 399  or  399A  relied  upon,
    such  identification  to  be  informed  by  the  seriousness   of   the
    criminality and taking into account the factors in Section 117 and C.

49. On the facts of the case there is no dispute that the appellant  was  a
    foreign criminal; he was not a British citizen and  by  reason  of  his
    offending history was properly characterised as someone  who  had  been
    convicted of an offence of at least 12  months  imprisonment  that  and
    therefore in accordance with paragraph 398 of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    the public interest required his deportation  unless  an  exception  to
    deportation applies. Thus, the issue before the  FtTJ  was  whether  he
    could fall within paragraphs 399 or 399A.  Paragraphs 399 and  399A  of
    the Immigration Rules are reflected within section 117C(5) of the  2002
    Act, which provides as follows: -

         "Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."


50.  The question in s.  117C  (5)  as  to  whether  "the  effect"  of  C's
    deportation would be "unduly harsh" is broken down into  two  parts  in
    paragraph 399, so that it applies where:

         "(a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the country
         to which the person is to be deported; and


         (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
         without the person who is to be deported."


51. It was common ground before  the  FtTJ  that  he  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 399A (relating to private life) or  Exception
    1. It was also common ground that the Secretary of State conceded  that
    in the light of the children's residence with their mother, it would be
    unduly harsh for the children to  live  in  Nigeria.  Thus,  the  issue
    turned on paragraph 399(a) and Exception  2.   That  section  reads  as
    follows: -

52. Thus, the issue turned on  paragraph  399(a)  and  Exception  2.   That
    section reads as follows: -

         "(5) Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

53.  The decision letter set out the material that  had  been  sent  to  the
    respondent to demonstrate that he had an established family  life  with
    his two children and his partner (see paragraph 77) which consisted  of
    2 letters and copies  of  birth  certificates  and  passports  for  the
    children with whom he claimed to have a family life with. At paragraphs
    79-88 of the decision letter, the issue of family life  was  considered
    on the material provided and whilst it was accepted  that  he  was  the
    father of two British Citizen children, it was not accepted that he had
    demonstrated that he had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
    given the limited material he had provided (see paragraphs 84-88).

54.  Mr Lindsay on behalf of the respondent made reference to  paragraph  39
    of the decision where the FtTJ made reference to  the  children's  best
    interests and made an observation  that  the  respondent  had  made  no
    further enquiries as to the relationship between the appellant and  the
    children before a decision was made and that the respondent should have
    taken further measures to ascertain the relationship  before  making  a
    decision. In this context, Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  had
    misunderstood the decision letter and had  made  a  material  error  of
    fact. He went further to suggest  that  it  could  be  seen  as  having
    influenced the FtTJ's later assessment of whether it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the children to be separated from their father.

55.  We have considered that submission in the light of the material and  in
    the context of the appellant's history. The chronology sets out that he
    was notified of the decision to make a  deportation  order  and  on  14
    March 2018 provided his response. He claimed to have established family
    life with his partner and family life with his children.  Paragraph  77
    of the decision letter sets out the evidence sent  in  support  of  the
    family life with his children.  In  our  judgement,  the  evidence  was
    extremely limited and  consisted  of  copies  of  passports  and  birth
    certificates relating to the two children, and letters from his partner
    Mr S and his former partner. The decision letter therefore proceeded on
    an analysis based on the evidence he  had  provided  at  paragraphs  81
    onwards. As he did not live with children and despite the claim made as
    to the existence of family life,  he  had  not  provided  any  evidence
    beyond that of a biological relationship and did not  demonstrate  that
    there was a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship.  In  our
    judgement that was an entirely legitimate criticism in the light of the
    limited  evidence  provided.  Whilst  the  FtTJ  was  critical  of  the
    respondent, stating that the Home  Office  had  not  made  any  further
    enquiries and that that should have taken place, we are satisfied  that
    the respondent undertook  an  entirely  legitimate  assessment  of  the
    appellant's family life in the light of the limited evidence  had  been
    provided. The burden lay on the appellant as to the evidence he  wished
    to advance in respect of his family life.

56.  We also note that the FtTJ stated at [49] that  whilst  the  respondent
    conceded that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's children  to
    live in Nigeria, the respondent ignored that "the appellant's father is
    a very significant parent in their lives." This is unarguably wrong  as
    the appellant at that time of the decision had not demonstrated that by
    way of any evidence.

57.   Whilst  we  considered  the  FtTJ  had  made  some  criticism  of  the
    respondent which was not objectively well-founded, we are not satisfied
    that this had any effect on his reasoning as  Mr  Lindsay  submits.  At
    [42] the FtTJ made it plain that he had to consider the position as  at
    the date of the hearing and on the evidence before him.

58.  In the decision reached, the Secretary of State conceded  that  in  the
    light of the children's residence with their mother, it would be unduly
    harsh for the children to live in Nigeria, as it was not accepted  that
    the relationship was genuine and subsisting, the respondent  considered
    that the children's best interests lay in the retention of the  current
    family unit, that is, to remain with their mother.

59.  At the hearing before the  FtTJ,  a  greater  amount  of  evidence  was
    provided on behalf of the appellant to evidence his  relationship  with
    his two  children.  It  consisted  of  a  witness  statement  from  the
    appellant, a witness statement from the appellant's  ex-partner,  three
    letters from the children's respective schools and photographs  of  the
    appellant and the children together.

60.  Therefore, the judge  was  required  to  consider  what  was  meant  by
    "unduly harsh" in the context of the law and in the context of specific
    factual circumstances of the Appellant and the relevant children.

61.  We have carefully considered the parties submissions in  the  light  of
    the decision of the FtTJ. In our judgment, the FtTJ  did  not  properly
    apply the relevant legal principles when determining the issues in this
    appeal relating to whether or not it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    children to remain in the United Kingdom without the Appellant.

62.  Whilst Mr Sesay submitted that the FtTJ lawfully applied  the  decision
    of KO (Nigeria) at paragraph 47 when reaching his decision, we  do  not
    accept that is the case. At [47] the judge set out  his  self-direction
    on the law as follows:

         "47. Reference is also made to section 33 of the Borders  Act  2007
         and the exceptions. Exception one is where  removal  of  a  foreign
         criminal in  pursuance  of  a  deportation  order  would  breach  a
         person's inter-alia, Convention rights (Article 8 of the  ECHR  for
         example). In the case of Hisham Ali v  SSHD  [2006]  UKSCE  60  the
         Supreme Court held paragraph 46 that whilst the  respondent's  view
         is relevant it is for the Tribunal to assess the proportionality of
         deportation. In KO Nigeria v SSHD [2018] UKSCE 53, at page 32,  the
         Supreme Court held that in assessing the undue harshness  scope  of
         reasonableness, in deportation decisions  affecting  children,  the
         focus is on the impact on the child and  their  best  interests  as
         opposed to the conduct of their parent (s).  In  a  matter  of  the
         Supreme Court in ZH Tanzanian the SSHD the primary focus is on  the
         best interests of children particularly when the  children,  as  in
         the case before me are British citizens."

63.  We would accept that the  FtTJ  correctly  identified  that  the  focus
    should be on the impact upon the  relevant  children.  However,  it  is
    clear from the self-direction set out above that the judge appeared  to
    conflate the issue of undue harshness with that of  reasonableness  and
    thus applied the wrong test. This misdirection in law is applied  again
    at paragraph 48 where the judge stated:

         "48. ... In respect of the reasonableness and undue harshness  (our
         emphasis) of  the  appellant's  deportation  on  the  children  the
         following factors are relevant, that the appellant  has  a  genuine
         and subsisting relationship  with  the  children,  he  is  actively
         involved in the children's lives and enjoys an active familial  and
         social relationship with his children. He is a participative father
         and the children's mother is supportive of him as a good father for
         their children. The school letters also speak  volumes  as  to  the
         good relationship has with the children. His children will struggle
         having regard to the totality of the evidence listed  and,  in  the
         round, without him. The Upper Tribunal has held in the case  of  JG
         [2019) UK UTC to 2,  that  it  is  simple  not  enough  that  young
         children may readily adapt to life in another country or as in  the
         case before me, stay in the UK without their father."

64. We are further satisfied that having conflated  the  two  distinct  and
    separate tests; the judge failed to apply the necessary threshold.

65. The decision of KO considered what was the correct approach relating to
    what is meant by "unduly harsh" within the context of the  legislation.
    It gave particular consideration to paragraphs  from  the  judgment  of
    Laws LJ, with whom Vos and Hamblen LJ agreed, in  MM  (Uganda)  v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 450 and the Upper Tribunal decision in MAB (USA) v SSHD
    [2015] UKUT 435.

66. The decision of the Supreme Court which reaffirmed  the  definition  of
    "unduly harsh" from the earlier decisions of MK and  MAB  at  paragraph
    [33], stated as follows: -

         "Whether the consequences of deportation will be 'unduly harsh' for
         an individual  involves  more  than  'uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
         undesirable,  unwelcome  or  merely  difficult   and   challenging'
         consequences and imposes a considerably  more  elevated  or  higher
         threshold.

         The consequences for an individual will  be  'harsh'  if  they  are
         'severe' or 'bleak' and they  will  be  'unduly'  so  if  they  are
         'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh taking into  account  all  of
         the circumstances of the individual."  Although  I  would  add,  of
         course, that  'all  of  the  circumstances'  include  the  criminal
         history of the person facing deportation."

67. As the Supreme Court stated at paragraph  23,  the  expression  "unduly
    harsh"  is  intended  to  introduce  a  higher  hurdle  than  that   of
    "reasonableness" under section 117B (6), taking account of  the  public
    interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.

68. The Supreme Court further stated at paragraph 23 as follows: -

         "Further the word "unduly" implies an  element  of  comparison.  It
         assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is a level
         which may be acceptable or justifiable  in  the  relevant  context.
         "Unduly" implies something going beyond that  level.  The  relevant
         context is that set  by  Section  117C  (1),  that  is  the  public
         interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.  One  is  looking
         for a degree of harshness going beyond what  would  necessarily  be
         involved for any child faced with the deportation of a parent. What
         it does not require in my view (and subject to  the  discussion  of
         the cases in the next section) is a balancing of relative levels of
         severity of the parent's offence other  than  is  inherent  in  the
         distinction drawn by the section itself by reference to  length  of
         sentence."

69. As set out in the decision of  The  Secretary  of  State  v  RA  (S117C
    "unduly harsh", offence; seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT  123  (IAC)  the
    President of the Upper Tribunal, Lane J (sitting in a panel  with  UTJs
    Gill and Coker) considered the correct approach to s. 117C(5)  with the
    benefit of the guidance provided in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC  53
    and NA (Pakistan). At paragraph 17, the following was stated:

         "17. As can be seen from paragraph 27 of KO (Nigeria), the test  of
         "unduly harsh" has a dual aspect. It is not enough of  the  outcome
         to be "severe" or "bleak". Proper  effect  must  be  given  to  the
         adverb "unduly". The  position  is,  therefore,  significantly  far
         removed from the test of "reasonableness", as found in section 117B
         (6) (b)."

70. We are satisfied from a careful reading of the decision that  the  FtTJ
    made no reference  to  the  elevated  threshold  within  the  decision.
    Importantly, it is also missing from the analysis of the evidence  that
    was before the FtTJ.

71. The analysis undertaken by the FtTJ concerning the nature of the family
    life between the appellant and the two children is principally set  out
    at paragraphs 35 and 36  and  paragraphs  42-44  of  his  decision.  At
    paragraph 35, the judge made  reference  to  the  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal which consisted of the oral evidence  of  the  appellant,  the
    written evidence from his former partner,  who  had  not  attended  the
    hearing, and three letters from the children's schools.

72. The FtTJ described the content of the letters at paragraph  35  in  the
    following terms:

         "I have seen how close the appellant is to his children  even  from
         the form teachers who provided compelling evidence on school headed
         notepaper signed by them. This is independent evidence."

73. At paragraph [36] the FtTJ again referred to the  letters  as  evidence
    "confirming the fact that he  takes  part  in  activities  and  attends
    parents meetings, brings the children to  school  and  take  them  from
    school, and the children speak about him to their  teachers  and  state
    how important he is in their life both at home and as  regards  to  the
    education their stability."

74. At paragraphs 42 - 43, the FtTJ set out his findings of fact. He  found
    the appellant to have a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with the  children  and  that  "he  took  an  active  presence  in  the
    children's lives". Whilst he did not reside with the children,  he  saw
    them daily and enjoyed "an affectionate  subsisting  relationship  with
    them". At paragraph 43, he gave reasons as to why it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the children to live in Nigeria.  It  had  been  accepted  on
    behalf of the respondent that it would not be in  the  children's  best
    interests to leave the UK and that they could remain with their  mother
    in Nigeria.

75. This led to his conclusion at paragraph 44  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the children to remain in the UK without  their  father.  The
    judge stated "their father has a huge positive presence in their lives.
    The best interests of the children rest in my view with them  retaining
    a good relationship with both their parents. They cannot do so  if  the
    father was  deported."  The  reasons  were  then  summarised  again  at
    paragraph 48  where  the  judge  made  reference  to  the  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship, that he was actively involved  the  children's
    lives, the children's mother was supportive of him as a good father and
    that the "school letters also speak volumes as to the good relationship
    has with the children. His children will struggle having regard to  the
    totality of the evidence holistically, and in the round, without him."

76. When looking at those findings in the context of the evidence, we would
    accept that the  evidence  from  the  school  was  independent  of  the
    appellant but whether it could be described  as  "compelling"  is  less
    clear. The evidence from the schools consisted of three short  letters.
    The letter exhibited at page  15  relating  to  the  eldest  child,  T,
    confirmed that  the  appellant  attended  school  functions,  including
    parents' evenings, and collected him from  school.  It  stated  that  T
    regularly spoke about his father indicating that he was a  regular  and
    significant part of his home and school  life.  A  similar  letter  was
    exhibited at page 16 relating to TO  which  was  equally  short,  again
    stating that  the  appellant  was  involved  in  school  life  and  was
    "supportive towards his son". It referred to the collection from school
    and attending parents' evenings and "working in partnership"  with  the
    teaching staff. The  letter  at  page  17  referred  to  the  appellant
    bringing both children to school on a Saturday  between  September  and
    December 2018.

77. We accept the submission made by Mr Lindsay that none of that  evidence
    provided any detail or examples given of the support beyond that  of  a
    normal parent/child relationship. Nor were any examples given as to his
    involvement in school beyond that of attending  parent's  evenings  and
    collecting the children from school.

78. The appellant's partner's evidence was similarly lacking in detail.  It
    stated that the appellant provided support for the children  which  was
    identified as taking the children to school; no other type  of  support
    was identified. Whilst the FtTJ appeared to place weight  and  reliance
    on a witness statement in his conclusions at  paragraph  48,  where  he
    refers the children  struggling  to  cope  without  the  appellant,  no
    details were given  in  the  witness  statements  in  support  of  this
    assertion.

79. Mr Sesay submitted that on the facts of  this  particular  appeal,  the
    focus was on the  nature  of  the  appellant's  relationship  with  the
    children and  the  consequences  for  them  as  they  lack  resilience,
    maturity or fortitude of adults as set out at paragraph 47 MK and  that
    was consistent with the FtTJ's decision.

80. However, whilst we accept that the FtTJ was required  to  undertake  an
    evaluative exercise of what was "unduly harsh", this would have to take
    place in the context of the test should be applied (see paragraphs  13-
    17 of The Secretary of State v RA (as cited)).

81. As Mr Lindsay submitted, there was no objective evidence or independent
    evidence that the appellant's presence was required  to  safeguard  the
    children's welfare.

82. We have been referred to the decision in AJ (Zimbabwe) by  Mr  Lindsay.
    In that decision the Court of Appeal had made reference to the case law
    relevant to the best interests of children and at paragraph  17  stated
    that "these cases show that it would be rare for the best  interest  of
    the children to  outweigh  the  strong  public  interest  in  deporting
    foreign criminals. Something more than  a  lengthy  separation  from  a
    parent is required, even though such separation is detrimental  to  the
    child's best interests."

83. We take into account the submission made by Mr Sesay  in  his  skeleton
    argument that the  decision  of  AJ  (Zimbabwe)  was  made  before  the
    decision in KO in the Supreme Court. However, we  do  not  accept  that
    what was said by the Court in AJ to be inconsistent with  the  decision
    in KO and unarguably supports the elevated threshold of  the  test  set
    out at paragraph 33.

84.  There is no dispute between the  parties  that  the  appellant  has  a
    genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  the   children.
    However, even taking the evidence at its highest, it demonstrates  that
    the appellant has been taking an active role in the  children's  lives,
    that he sees them daily, has been involved in the school activities and
    has a close and significant relationship with them.

85. In our judgment the analysis of the evidence before the  FtTJ  did  not
    identify anything other than that which normally would be the  position
    of children who would be separated from a father with whom they  had  a
    close relationship.  This is underlined by the  fact  that  the  phrase
    "unduly harsh" anticipates an evaluation being undertaken as it is  not
    just the nature and  quality  of  the  relationship  because  paragraph
    339(a) requires there to  be  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    before considering whether it would be "unduly harsh".

86. We do not accept the submission made by Mr Sesay that even if the judge
    applied a generous approach, it was not an  error  of  law.  We  remind
    ourselves that we should be cautious in reaching a contrary decision to
    that of a judge who had the benefit of hearing oral evidence (see  SSHD
    v AH (Sudan) and others [2007] UKHL 49). However, for  the  reasons  we
    have set out above, the judge made a material misdirection  in  law  by
    conflating the issues of undue  harshness  and  reasonableness  and  by
    failing to apply the necessary threshold test set out in  KO  (Nigeria)
    in his analysis of the evidence.

87. We have therefore reached the conclusion that the decision of the  FtTJ
    does involve the making of an error on a point of law for those reasons
    and therefore the decision is set aside.

The re-making of the decision:

88. As to the re-making of the decision, Mr Sesay stated that there was  no
    evidence that there had been a material change of  circumstances  since
    the hearing in March 2019 in relation to the  children's  circumstances
    or that of the appellant. No further evidence had been filed and served
    in accordance with the directions. As Mr Lindsay submitted,  there  had
    been no challenge to the factual circumstances of the appellant or  the
    children and in those circumstances, we invited the parties to make any
    further submissions that they wished to rely on.

89. Mr Lindsay on behalf of the respondent submitted that the appellant had
    only pursued his appeal on the  basis  of  his  relationship  with  the
    children as set out in the decision of the FtTJ  at  paragraph  29  and
    therefore his submissions addressed that issue.

90. Whilst there was no dispute on the evidence that the  appellant  has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  the  children,  the
    evidence fell far short of establishing effects that could be described
    as "unduly harsh" in the context of the test set out  in  KO  (Nigeria)
    and that something more than the normal effects of deportation  on  the
    children was required. The evidence before the FtTJ  demonstrated  that
    he did not live with the children and even taking  it  its  highest  it
    would be difficult to see how he could succeed  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence because if he did it would effectively mean that  all  fathers
    who have an ongoing, close relationship with their children would never
    be deported. He submitted that the appeal should be dismissed.

91. Mr Sesay submitted that we should consider the impact on  the  children
    in accordance with paragraph 47 of MK (Sierra  Leone)  and  that  Judge
    Robertson when granting permission, had made reference to the  children
    not suffering from any difficulties but that the issue  was  about  the
    quality and the impact on the children. In the light  of  the  evidence
    before the FtTJ  which  was  corroborated  by  the  evidence  from  the
    schoolteachers, it could properly be  said  that  any  separation  from
    their father would be unduly harsh upon the children.

92.   Mr Sesay did not seek to rely upon s.117C(6) which, even in  the case
    of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to less than  four  years'
    imprisonment but more than twelve months, that, even where Exception  2
    does not apply an individual may resist  deportation  where  there  are
    "very compelling circumstances, over  and  above  those  described"  in
    Exception 2 (see NA (Pakistan) and another v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  662
    and RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019]  UKUT
    123 (IAC)). Mr Sesay confirmed  to  us  in  his  submissions  that  the
    appellant 's case was put solely on the basis of Exception  2  and  the
    issue of undue harshness.

93. We have carefully considered the competing submissions made by each  of
    the advocates, but we do so in the light of our earlier  evaluation  of
    the evidence and the relevant legal principles.

94. The issue remains whether the  separation  of  the  children  from  the
    appellant is "unduly harsh".

95. We accept, as did the FtTJ  that  it  would  plainly  be  in  the  best
    interests of the children for  their  current  stable  environment,  in
    which both parents are presently playing  their  respective  parts,  to
    continue. We take their  best  interests  into  account  as  a  primary
    consideration.  We have no doubt that it would  be  in  the  children's
    best interests to have both parents in  the  UK.  However,  we  do  not
    accept that the evidence demonstrates that for both children to  remain
    in the UK without the appellant  is  unduly  harsh.   Even  taking  the
    evidence at its highest, it demonstrates that the  appellant  has  been
    taking an active role in the children's lives, that he sees them daily,
    has been involved  in  the  school  activities  and  has  a  close  and
    significant relationship with them.

96.  Whilst the appellant's partner has set out  in  her  written  evidence
    that his presence is vital for them to meet their critical  milestones,
    there is no evidence in support of this and stands as  bare  assertion.
    Their health and wellbeing are being catered for by  the  presence  and
    care of his ex-partner. Neither the FtT nor the Upper Tribunal have any
    cogent evidence that the children's separation from their  father  will
    have any significant impact on their wellbeing.  We  would  accept  the
    references made in the evidence that the appellant  has  a  very  close
    relationship with the children and that he has been involved in  school
    activities  such  as  attending  parents'  evenings  and  is  regularly
    involved in the collection of the children from school.   Nevertheless,
    the evidence simply does not demonstrate that the circumstances of  the
    children in the UK without the appellant are "severe" or  "bleak"  such
    as to  be  "harsh"  let  alone  "unduly  harsh".  Looking  at  all  the
    circumstances, we are not satisfied that the effect of the  deportation
    order against the appellant has an "unduly harsh" impact upon either of
    the children.

97. For these reasons, we are not satisfied that Exception 2  in  s.117C(5)
    of the NIA Act 2002 applies.

98. As we have set out Mr Sesay did not rely upon s.117C(6),  namely  that,
    even though Exception 2 did not apply, there  were  nevertheless  "very
    compelling circumstances, over and above those described in  "Exception
    2" (our emphasis). That test could not be met in this appeal since  all
    the relevant circumstances have already  been  taken  into  account  in
    reaching our decision that Exception 2 does not apply.

99. In summary, as we have concluded that the impact of the the deportation
    order against the appellant is not unduly harsh upon either child,  the
    public interest requires the deportation of the appellant.   Therefore,
    his appeal based upon Art 8 of the ECHR does not succeed and his appeal
    is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

100. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and is therefore set  aside.   We  re-make  the
    appeal as follows; the appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
     Date 3/7/2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

