
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05029/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28 September 2017                      |On 03 October 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                             Khalid Doaih Alenzi
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brooks, instructed by Aman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Khalid Doaih Alenzi, was born on 2 August 1991 and is  a
    male citizen of Kuwait.  The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  in
    November 2015 and claimed asylum.  By a decision dated 22  April  2016,
    the respondent refused the appellant asylum.  The appellant appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Alis) which, in a  decision  promulgated
    on 29 March 2017, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the parties and the judge  were  agreed
    [20] that, if the judge found the appellant was an undocumented  Bidoon
    then he should win his protection appeal.  The judge heard  an  account
    of past events from the appellant  which  are  also  described  in  his
    written evidence.  The account includes a claim that the appellant  was
    arrested on two occasions in January and in February 2014 respectively.
     The appellant claimed that he had been detained for 30 days  following
    his arrest at the demonstration and earlier than that in January  2014,
    had been detained for seven days following "a  fight".   At  [63],  the
    judge wrote:

         "Whilst [the appellant] explained why he  had  no  paperwork  or  a
         security card I have to consider that  claim  against  the  adverse
         findings I have made.  His explanation for  not  having  registered
         must also be considered likewise."

 3.  The  judge  considered  the  appellant  had  provided   "no   credible
    explanation" for having exited Kuwait on a false passport  and  through
    an international airport.  It is clear from [63]  that  the  judge  had
    regard to the  adverse  credibility  findings  which  he  had  made  in
    concluding that the appellant had  failed  to  prove  that  he  was  an
    undocumented Bidoon.

 4. I have considered the  judge's  credibility  findings  carefully.   The
    judge refers  at  [45]  to  the  appellant's  "initial  disclosure"  or
    screening interview.  He records that "the appellant made no  reference
    [in his screening interview] to his detention at the  demonstration  or
    the fact that he had been in  hiding  for  eighteen  months.   He  only
    mentioned a seven day detention.  This detention is  not  the  same  as
    that which followed the demonstration".  The parties  are  agreed  that
    the judge has made an error.  At 5.3 of the  screening  interview,  the
    judge does not refer to the seven day detention but states that, "I was
    arrested in a demonstration.  I was in  prison  for  one  month".   The
    judge notes  that,  in  his  substantive  asylum  interview,  [89]  the
    appellant referred to both  detentions.   At  [47],  the  judge  wrote,
    "whilst it is important not to place too much  weight  on  the  initial
    contact interview I am entitled to have regard to that interview  where
    there is a significant omission".  It is agreed,  however,  that  there
    was no such omission or, if there had been an omission, it was that the
    appellant had failed to refer to the shorter seven day detention in the
    screening interview rather than the 30 day detention  which  the  judge
    believed he had omitted to refer to.

 5. The question for the Upper Tribunal is whether  the  judge's  error  of
    fact materially affects the legal integrity of the decision.   I  fully
    acknowledge  that  the  judge  has  made  other  "adverse  credibility"
    findings against the appellant which arise from matters  not  connected
    with the screening interview.  However, as Mr Brooks pointed  out,  the
    judge refers on several occasions to the need to take  account  of  all
    the evidence in reaching his findings on  credibility.   At  [53],  the
    judge refers again to what he considered  the  appellant's  failure  to
    "mention [the longer detention] in his initial contact interview or the
    corrective email provided by his solicitor ..."  The  judge  considered
    that what he considered an omission in the  appellant's  evidence  when
    set against the background material "undermines his claim that  he  was
    present at the demonstration or arrested".  As far as the judge  relied
    upon an omission which the appellant did not make,  then  it  is  clear
    that the judge's analysis at this point  of  the  decision  is  flawed.
    Again, at [60], the judge considered the evidence given by a witness in
    support of the appellant's appeal.  He identified discrepancies between
    the witness's evidence and that of the appellant.   He  wrote,  "whilst
    these discrepancies on their own may be not undermine [the appellant's]
    claim to have been arrested/detained they must be looked  at  alongside
    other inconsistencies or omissions".  It seems certain that  the  judge
    is referring here to the problems which he believed he  had  identified
    in the screening interview.

 6. I find that the factual error has fed into the  judge's  analysis  more
    generally.  Whilst the judge has identified other seemingly unconnected
    reasons for not believing the appellant, his repeated references to the
    perceived 'discrepancy' indicates that it figured significantly in  his
    assessment of the evidence.  In consequence, there are  no  credibility
    findings which stand apart from and are  not  tainted  by  the  judge's
    error of fact.  In the circumstances, I set aside the decision.   There
    will need to be a completely new fact-finding exercise which I consider
    is better undertaken by the First-tier Tribunal to which this appeal is
    now returned.

Notice of Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  29
    March 2017 is set aside.  None of the findings  of  fact  shall  stand.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Alis)  for
    that Tribunal to remake the decision.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 29 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane









