
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05093/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 2nd August 2017                  |On 14th August 2017                     |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Haroon Kadir Rahimi
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Oyemike of Samuel & Co Solicitors (Barking
Office)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
    decision to refuse him international protection as a Kurdish Iraqi from
    Kirkuk.

 2. The preserved findings of fact in the decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal
    Judge Eshun are that the claimant's home area is Kirkuk, that  that  is
    no longer within the contested areas of  Iraq  but  that  the  claimant
    cannot get there by road or air, that he has no CSID or passport and no
    family members in Baghdad and that without a CSID he would face a  very
    real risk of destitution in Baghdad entailing a breach  by  the  United
    Kingdom of Article 3 ECHR.

 3. At paragraph 37 of the contested decision First-tier Tribunal Judge C H
    Bennett said:

         "I accept  that  if  [the  claimant]  could  be  returned  to  Iraq
         (Baghdad), there is a reasonable likelihood that he  would  not  be
         able  to  obtain  a  CSID  there,  either  at  all  or   within   a
         comparatively short period of time after his arrival and  that  the
         chance that he would not be able to obtain a CSID  there  within  a
         comparatively  short  period  of  time  cannot  be  categorised  as
         fanciful or a mere possibility.  I reach those conclusions for  the
         following reasons.

         (a)  I accept that [the claimant] is not in possession  of  current
             or expired passport.  There is no reason to believe and  I  am
             not satisfied, that he knows the book and page number  of  his
             family registration details or that he has  a  note  of  those
             details.  What I have said in paragraph 29 applies.

         (b)  In the light of what I have said in  paragraph  23  and  25  I
             accept  that  there  is  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  [the
             claimant's] home governorate, the  governorate  where  he  was
             born, is that of Kirkuk.  ...  I am not satisfied that  it  is
             feasible for [the claimant] to travel to  Kirkuk  by  road  or
             air."

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  any  risk  of
    serious harm  engaging  international  protection  had  been  shown  in
    Kirkuk, the IKR or Baghdad and he dismissed the protection claims.  The
    Judge considered that there were  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    reintegration into Iraq on return, because there  were  no  friends  or
    relatives who could  assist  him  in  resettling  in  Baghdad,  and  no
    available employment, housing or medical assistance for him there.  The
    Judge found that the applicant had no CSID and would  not  be  able  to
    obtain one within a reasonably short time by applying in  Baghdad.  The
    Judge allowed the claimant's appeal on the sole ground that his removal
    would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998,  as  he
    qualified for leave to remain pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended), because  the  claimant  would  be
    destitute on return to Iraq.

    Error of law

 5. The Secretary of State appealed.  She argued that there was a  material
    error of law in the decision, and that the ability to  form  a  private
    life in Iraq (the Article 8 'foreign' private life test), not the  risk
    of destitution (which would engage Article 3 ECHR), was  the  test  for
    paragraph 276ADE(vi).  Designated Judge Murray  granted  permission  on
    that basis. There was no cross-appeal and no rule 24 notice  on  behalf
    of the claimant.

 6. On 12 June 2017, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun found  an  error  of
    law in the First-tier Tribunal decision.  She held  that  the  question
    which the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  should  have  asked  himself  was
    whether the claimant would be able to relocate to  Baghdad  or  Kirkuk,
    and whether the effect of his having no csid would lead to a breach  of
    Article 3 ECHR.  The core of Judge Eshun's reasoning is at [9]-[13]  in
    her decision:

         "9.  Mr Tufan [for the Home Office] submitted, and I accepted, that
             the question the judge should have asked himself  was  whether
             the [claimant] would be able to relocate to Baghdad or  Kirkuk
             and whether the lack of a CSID would breach Article 3  of  the
             ECHR.  Mr Tufan submitted that the Court  of  Appeal  remitted
             the case of AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 779 back  to  the
             other Tribunal for a decision on this very issue.

         10.  Mr Oshunrinade for the  [claimant]  agreed  that  the  reasons
             given in the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal  disclosed
             the judge erred in law.  He, however, sought to argue that the
             judge's findings that a lack of CSID would lead to destitution
             coupled with the [claimant's] inability to travel from Baghdad
             to Kirkuk were  enough  reasons  to  allow  the  appeal  under
             Article 3 of the ECHR.

         11.  I was not persuaded by Mr Oshunrinade's argument.   The  judge
             had specifically found that the  [claimant]  did  not  satisfy
             Article 3 of the ECHR.  That is why he  sought  to  allow  the
             appeal under 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

         12.  Mr Oshunrinade also sought to re-open the judge's findings  in
             respect of the asylum and Article 3 appeals.  He had  not  put
             in a Rule 24 response nor had he put in  a  cross-appeal.   In
             the absence of a cross-appeal, I came to the  conclusion  that
             the judge's adverse credibility findings should stand.

         13.  Having found that the judge erred in  law  in  the  manner  in
             which he allowed the [claimant's] appeal, namely on the  basis
             that a lack of a CSID constituted a very serious  obstacle  to
             the respondent's integration into Iraq, the  judge's  decision
             cannot stand.  It is set aside in order  to  be  re-made.   In
             view of the issues raised in this appeal I am of the view that
             this appeal should be heard in the Upper Tribunal."

 7. That was the basis on which this appeal came before me for remaking.

    Remaking the decision

 8. At the beginning of the hearing, I clarified with  the  representatives
    what findings of fact in the First-tier Tribunal  decision  would  form
    the basis of my decision.  The following facts and matters  were  found
    by the First-tier Tribunal and are not in dispute:  the claimant is  an
    Iraqi Kurd, whose home area is in Kirkuk, which is no longer within the
    contested areas of Iraq.  However, he cannot get there by road or  air,
    and he has no CSID or passport.   When  the  claimant  left  Iraq,  his
    mother and sister were in the Kurdish Regional Governorate.

 9. The respondent does not dispute the First-tier Tribunal's finding  that
    the claimant has been unable to establish any form of contact with  his
    family since coming to the United Kingdom (see [37] of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision).  The claimant has no  family  members  in  Baghdad,
    where he would be returned and the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that
    there was a very real risk of destitution  for  him  on  return  there,
    because of the lack of family support.

    Discussion

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge when making the present decision did  not
    have the benefit of  the  revision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  country
    guidance on Iraq by the Court of Appeal in AA  (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944, set out in  full  at
    Annex A to this decision, which was handed down on  11  July  2017.   I
    apply it to the facts set out above.  The material parts of the revised
    guidance are as follows:


         "...C. The CSID
         9. Regardless  of  the  feasibility  of  P's  return,  it  will  be
         necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be able to obtain
         one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  A  CSID  is  generally
         required in order for an Iraqi to access financial assistance  from
         the  authorities;  employment;  education;  housing;  and   medical
         treatment. If P shows there are no family or other  members  likely
         to be able to provide means of support, P is in general  likely  to
         face a real risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if,  by
         the time any funds provided to P by the Secretary of State  or  her
         agents to assist P's return have been exhausted, it  is  reasonably
         likely that P will still have no CSID.
         10. Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID,  P  should
         as a general matter be able to obtain one  from  the  Civil  Status
         Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using  an  Iraqi  passport
         (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such
         a passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend  on  whether  P
         knows  the  page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  holding   P's
         information (and that of P's family). P's ability to  persuade  the
         officials that P is the person named on the relevant page is likely
         to depend on whether P has family members or other individuals  who
         are prepared to vouch for P.
         11. P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely  hampered
         if P is unable to go to the Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
         Governorate because it is in an area where  Article  15(c)  serious
         harm is occurring. As a result of  the  violence,  alternative  CSA
         Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in
         Baghdad and Kerbala. The evidence does  not  demonstrate  that  the
         "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able  to
         provide CSIDs to those in  need  of  them.  There  is,  however,  a
         National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal
         recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  court  is,
         however, unclear.

         D. INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)

         14. As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly
         harsh for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad
         City or (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.

         15. In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for
         P to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,
         likely to be relevant:

         (a) whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one (see Part C
         above); ...

         (c) whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
         accommodate him;...

         (g) whether there is support available for P bearing in mind there
         is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are provided
         with the support generally given to IDPs. ..."

11. The Secretary of State's  appeal  is  confined  to  the  insurmountable
    obstacles test under  paragraph  276ADE(vi).   The  way  in  which  the
    Secretary of State frames her argument is that the test  in  276ADE(vi)
    is the foreign Article 8  private  life  test  and  is  concerned  with
    whether an appellant could establish a private life upon return and not
    about risk or harm.  The point is further made in  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813:

         "15. The idea of integration calls for a broad evaluative  judgment
             to be made as to whether the individual will be enough  of  an
             insider in terms of understanding how life in the  society  in
             that other country is carried on and a capacity to participate
             in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to  be  accepted
             there, to be able to operate on a  day-to-day  basis  in  that
             society and to build up within a reasonable time a variety  of
             human relationships to  give  substance  to  the  individual's
             private or family life.  It is  the  [claimant's]  ability  to
             form a private life that is in question under  276ADE(vi)  and
             not the question of destitution."

12. On the facts of this application the distinction drawn appears to me to
    be a distinction without a difference.  The finding  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in AA (Iraq) is that a person in the claimant's position in this
    appeal will not be able to obtain a CSID before his money runs  out  in
    Baghdad and will therefore face a real risk  of  destitution.   A  real
    risk of destitution at Article 3 level, albeit not the  subject  of  an
    Article 3 finding in this decision, must by  definition  amount  to  an
    insurmountable obstacle at the Article 8 level in  establishing  a  new
    life in Baghdad, it being accepted for this purpose that  the  claimant
    cannot get back to Kirkuk where all his family  links  and  his  social
    contacts are.

13. Accordingly, and despite the inability to deal directly with Article 8,
    I find that the guidance in AA (Iraq) indicates that there is a risk of
    destitution at the Article  3  level  and  that  that  also  meets  the
    paragraph 276ADE(vi)  test  of  being  an  insurmountable  obstacle  to
    reintegration into Iraq (Baghdad).

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been  set  aside  with  the
    exception of the findings of  fact  identified  above.   I  remake  the
    decision by allowing the claimant's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse him leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE.

15. For the avoidance of doubt, I wish to make it clear  that  had  I  been
    seised of the Article 3 or Article 8 arguments which  are  excluded  by
    the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun, I would also  have  allowed
    the appeal on human rights grounds.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the  decision.  I  re-make
the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Signed:     Judith A J C Gleeson             Date: 10 August 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

                                   ANNEX A

The guidance we give is as follows:

A. INDISCRIMINATE VIOLENCE IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE  15(C)  OF  THE  QUALIFICATION
DIRECTIVE

1. There is at present a state of internal armed conflict in  certain  parts
of Iraq, involving government security forces, militias  of  various  kinds,
and the Islamist group known as ISIL. The intensity of this  armed  conflict
in the so-called "contested areas", comprising the  governorates  of  Anbar,
Diyala, Kirkuk, (aka Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah Al-din, is such that,  as  a
general matter,  there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  any
civilian returned there, solely on account of his  or  her  presence  there,
faces a real risk of being subjected to  indiscriminate  violence  amounting
to serious harm within the scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
Directive.

2. The degree of armed conflict in certain  parts  of  the  "Baghdad  Belts"
(the urban environs around Baghdad City) is also of the intensity  described
in paragraph 1 above, thereby giving rise to  a  generalised  Article  15(c)
risk. The parts of the Baghdad Belts concerned are those forming the  border
between the  Baghdad  Governorate  and  the  contested  areas  described  in
paragraph 1.

3. The degree of armed conflict in the remainder of Iraq (including  Baghdad
City) is not such as to give rise to indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to
such  serious  harm  to  civilians,   irrespective   of   their   individual
characteristics, so as to engage Article 15(c).

4. In accordance with the principles set out in Elgafaji (C-465/07) and QD
(Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA  Civ  620,
decision-makers in Iraqi cases should assess the individual  characteristics
of the person  claiming  humanitarian  protection,  in  order  to  ascertain
whether those characteristics are such as to put that person  at  real  risk
of Article 15(c) harm.

B. DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)

5. Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will  be  to
the IKR and all other Iraqis will be to Baghdad. The Iraqi authorities  will
allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United Kingdom to enter Iraq  only  if  P
is in possession of a current or expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or  a
laissez passer.

6. No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if not in  possession  of
one of these documents.

7. In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq) and Others  v
Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1276,  an
international protection claim made by P cannot succeed by reference to  any
alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of a current or  expired  Iraqi
passport or a laissez passer, if the Tribunal finds that P's return  is  not
currently feasible on account of a lack of any of those documents.

8. Where P is returned to Iraq on a laissez passer or  expired  passport,  P
will be at no risk of serious harm at the point of return by reason  of  not
having a current passport.

C. The CSID

9. Regardless of the feasibility of P's return,  it  will  be  necessary  to
decide whether P has a CSID, or will be able to obtain one, reasonably  soon
after arrival in Iraq. A CSID is generally required in order  for  an  Iraqi
to access financial assistance from the authorities; employment;  education;
housing; and medical treatment. If P shows there  are  no  family  or  other
members likely to be able to provide means  of  support,  P  is  in  general
likely to face a real risk of destitution, amounting to  serious  harm,  if,
by the time any funds provided to P by the Secretary of State or her  agents
to assist P's return have been exhausted, it is  reasonably  likely  that  P
will still have no CSID.

10. Where return is feasible but P does not have  a  CSID,  P  should  as  a
general matter be able to obtain one from the Civil  Status  Affairs  Office
for P's home Governorate,  using  an  Iraqi  passport  (whether  current  or
expired), if P has one. If P does not have such a passport, P's  ability  to
obtain a CSID may depend on whether P knows the page and  volume  number  of
the book holding P's information (and that of P's family).  P's  ability  to
persuade the officials that P is the person named on the  relevant  page  is
likely to depend on whether P has family members or  other  individuals  who
are prepared to vouch for P.

11. P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered if  P  is
unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of P's  Governorate  because
it is in an area where Article 15(c) serious harm is occurring. As a  result
of the violence, alternative CSA Offices for  Mosul,  Anbar  and  Saluhaddin
have been  established  in  Baghdad  and  Kerbala.  The  evidence  does  not
demonstrate that the "Central Archive",  which  exists  in  Baghdad,  is  in
practice able to provide CSIDs to those in need of them. There is,  however,
a National Status Court in Baghdad,  to  which  P  could  apply  for  formal
recognition of identity. The precise operation of this  court  is,  however,
unclear.

D. INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)

14. As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for  a
person from a contested area to relocate to  Baghdad  City  or  (subject  to
paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.

15. In assessing whether it would be  unreasonable/unduly  harsh  for  P  to
relocate to Baghdad, the  following  factors  are,  however,  likely  to  be
relevant:

(a) whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one (see Part C above);

(b) whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are  less  likely  to  find
employment);

(c) whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able  to  accommodate
him;

(d) whether P is a lone female (women face greater difficulties than men  in
finding employment);

(e)  whether  P  can  find  a  sponsor  to  access  a  hotel  room  or  rent
accommodation;

(f) whether P is from a minority community;

(g) whether there is support available for P bearing in mind there  is  some
evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are provided with  the  support
generally given to IDPs.

16. There is not a  real  risk  of  an  ordinary  civilian  travelling  from
Baghdad airport to the southern  governorates,  suffering  serious  harm  en
route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).

E. IRAQI KURDISH REGION

17. The Respondent will only return P to the IKR if P  originates  from  the
IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with the  IKR  authorities.  The
authorities in the IKR do not require  P  to  have  an  expired  or  current
passport, or laissez passer.

18. The IKR is virtually violence free. There is no Article  15(c)  risk  to
an ordinary civilian in the IKR.

19. A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can obtain entry  for  10
days as a visitor and then renew this entry  permission  for  a  further  10
days. If K finds employment, K can remain for longer, although K  will  need
to register with the authorities and provide details of the employer.  There
is no evidence that the IKR authorities pro-actively remove Kurds  from  the
IKR whose permits have come to an end.

20. Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be expected  to  avoid
any potential undue harshness in that city by travelling to  the  IKR,  will
be fact sensitive; and is  likely  to  involve  an  assessment  of  (a)  the
practicality of travel from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to  Irbil  by  air);
(b) the likelihood of K's securing  employment  in  the  IKR;  and  (c)  the
availability of assistance from family and friends in the IKR.

21. As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in a  home  area  in
Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.

F. EXISTING COUNTRY GUIDANCE DECISIONS
22. This decision replaces all existing country guidance on Iraq

