

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05636/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th May 2017                       |On 12th May 2017                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                  mr md d m
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
 ANONYMITY ORDER MADE

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ly (Fadiga & Co)

For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan  (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this matter is Mr MD DM. I shall refer to the  parties
    as "the Respondent" who is Secretary of State and to  the  "Appellant."
    This is an error of  law  hearing.  The  appellant  appeals  against  a
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  PJS  White)    ("FTT")
    promulgated on 6th January 2017 in which  the  appellant's   appeal  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds was dismissed.

Background

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He  applied  for  asylum  on
    the grounds of his sexuality, that he is gay and as a result  he  fears
    persecution on return to Bangladesh where homosexuality is  a  criminal
    act.

3.   The Respondent in the refusal letter did not find  his  account  to  be
    credible and  relied  on  matters  under  section  8  2004  Act  as  to
    credibility including  the  delay  and  timing  of  making  the  asylum
    application.  While  accepting  that  gay  persons  are  members  of  a
    particular social group in Bangladesh, the  refusal  letter  failed  to
    consider the issues of risk  on  return  if  the  appellant  was  found
    credible as to his core account.

FTT decision

4.    The  FTT  in  a  detailed  and  considered  determination  found   the
    appellant's claim to be gay was not credible [19-35].  The FTT set  out
    a variety of reasons in support and in addition found that section 8 of
    the 2004 Act applied as there was a delay  of  some  years  before  the
    appellant applied for asylum and that he did so  following  his  arrest
    [34].  The FTT also considered in the alternative risk  on  return  and
    dismissed that claim because it found no evidence of  a  real  risk  of
    prosecution and further that the appellant could safely live out of his
    home area [36-37].

Grounds of appeal

5.   In renewed grounds of appeal the appellant argued that  the  FTT  erred
    by failing to apply the Respondent's asylum policy guidance  on  sexual
    orientation when assessing the  credibility  of  the  claim.   The  FTT
    placed too much weight on irrelevant matters  such  as  the  format  of
    Growlr messages [29].  The FTT failed to place weight on problems  with
    interpretation and unfairly refused an application for  an  adjournment
    to allow the appellant time to deal with secondary issues as to risk on
    return, not previously raised by the respondent in the  refusal  letter
    but which were raised at the end of the hearing [36].

Permission to appeal

6.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT) was granted on  renewal
    by UTJ   Coker on 29th March 2017 primarily on the grounds that it  was
    arguable that the FTT ought to have granted an adjournment to allow the
    appellant to deal with the secondary issues.   In  granting  permission
    the UTJ observed that in the light of the finding  that  the  appellant
    was not gay, there remained the issue of  materiality.  Permission  was
    granted on all grounds although UJT Coker observed that there  appeared
    to be little in those grounds



Rule 24 Response

7.   The Respondent opposed the appeal.

Submisssions

8.   At the hearing before me Mr Ly sought to rely on an unreported case  of
    the Upper Tribunal.  His application  failed  to  meet  the  procedural
    requirements for reliance on an unreported case and I do  not  consider
    it.

9.   Mr Ly produced a  fresh  bundle  for  the  error  of  law  hearing.  He
    expanded on his grounds of appeal. His primary submission was that  the
    FTT  failed to apply  the  Respondent'  guidance  on  determination  of
    sexual orientation in reaching its findings as to  the  credibility  of
    the appellant's claim to be gay. In particular the FTT failed  to  take
    into account the concerns raise as to the  poor  interpretation  during
    the asylum interview, which informed the reasons for  refusal.  Further
    the appellant had not been  given  an  opportunity  to  adduce  further
    evidence to meet the second argument raised by  the  HOPO  at  the  FTT
    hearing to establish evidence that he faced a real risk on return.  The
    Refusal letter had simply dealt with the  subjective  issue  of  sexual
    orientation and so the appellant had not  prepared  to  deal  with  the
    second point. The FTT had given  opportunity  to  consider  the  matter
    which was raised at the end of the hearing and no  application  for  an
    adjournment could be made.  The objective material  showed  that  there
    was a real risk of persecution in Bangladesh for gay men.

10.  Mr Tufan responded that the FTT  findings  and  reasons  were  entirely
    sustainable on the evidence before the FTT and that the FTT  had  taken
    into  account  the  relevant  guidance  in  assessing  the  appellant's
    credibility as to his sexual orientation.  The appellant was seeking to
    renew arguments that were put at the FTT hearing on the evidence before
    it. There was no procedural irregularity; it was  trite  law  that  the
    appellant would have to show that he faced a real  risk  on  return  of
    persecution not simply that he was gay. Mr Tufan indicated  that  there
    were photographs which the FTT may not have considered which he  viewed
    as graphic and potentially obscene,  and  which  he  thought  could  be
    relevant to the appellant's claim.


Discussion and conclusion

11.  I am satisfied that there is no merit in the grounds  complaining  that
    the Respondent's guidance was not considered. It is clear at  [5]  that
    the FTT had this document and considered it. The findings made  by  the
    FTT are perfectly sustainable on the evidence before the  FTT  and  the
    FTT gave full and proper reasons in support in a decision amounting  to
    14 pages. It was not necessary  for  the  FTT  to  set  out  in  detail
    references  to  the  guidance  as  to  how  the  assessment  of  sexual
    orientation was conducted. The decision and  reasons  referred  to  the
    relevant evidence and reached a conclusion having regard to all of  the
    evidence and which were not unreasonable or irrational. The  FTT  found
    that the appellant's evidence was not credible and it gave reasons  for
    placing  little  weight  on  the  letters,  photographs   and   witness
    statements of Mr Hussein,  Mr Stokes and Growlr evidence re  Mr  Flourn
    [28, 29 30-31], and found them to be unreliable  evidence.  As  to  the
    photographs I reminded Mr Tufan  that  the  appellant  had  not  raised
    concerns as to  the  FTT's  dealing  with  the  photographic  evidence.
    Whether they were graphic or not was not relevant  to the  FTT  finding
    that it placed little weight on the photographs as they could have been
    posed or staged. The FTT found that the evidence was  not  reliable  to
    establish that the appellant is gay and found his claim as a  whole  to
    be implausible.   The findings as to the poor interpretation are in  my
    view fully reasoned and sustainable on the evidence and set out in some
    detail by the FTT at [24-25]. As the FTT did not find the appellant  to
    be credible as to the core of his claim, the arguments as to HJ  (Iran)
    do not arise.  The FTT properly applied section 8 of 2004 Act.   Having
    looked at the decision and reasons as a whole I am fully satisfied that
    the core issue and evidence before the FTT was carefully considered and
    properly reasoned.  The FTT made sufficient findings on the main aspect
    of the claim. The application is in  effect  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings and reasons given by the FTT which are neither irrational  nor
    perverse.

12.  On the issue of the application for  an  adjournment,  I  am  satisfied
    that there was no procedural irregularity that led to any unfairness to
    the appellant. The onus is on the appellant to prove his case  that  he
    is entitled to refugee status. It was not simply a question of  dealing
    with the issue of his sexual orientation which was  the  focus  of  the
    refusal letter. The burden is on the appellant to show that he faces  a
    real risk of persecution for a Convention Reason.  The  fact  that  the
    respondent failed to consider the issue of risk on return in the  event
    of a positive finding that the  appellant  is  gay,  is  not  material.
    Furthermore the FTT did in any event go on to  consider  the  risks  on
    return in the alternative, with reference to  the  background  material
    [36-37] which was adduced by both parties.  I am not satisfied that any
    unfairness arose for the appellant by failing to provide an opportunity
    to adduce further evidence at the end  of  the  hearing.   Firstly  the
    appellant's legal representative was prepared  to  deal  with  risk  on
    return with reference to background material  included  in  the  appeal
    bundle and further he would appreciate  that  the  appeal  went  beyond
    establishing the credibility of a Convention reason.  Significantly  Mr
    Ly made no reference made to any specific evidence that  the  appellant
    wished to rely on and none was given at the hearing before me. The  FTT
    stated that Mr Ly did not raise any argument that the point should  not
    be taken or seek an adjournment [36].  Mr Ly disputes this arguing that
    an adjournment application was precluded because the hearing  had  come
    to an end and in any event it was unfair given that the issue  was  not
    raised in the refusal letter.  I take the view that the FTT  fully  and
    fairly considered all the relevant evidence  and  issues  and  that  no
    unfairness has been shown towards the appellant.

13.  As to the arguments that the FTT failed to consider HJ  (Iran)  I  find
    no merit in this argument given that the FTT found that  the  appellant
    was not gay. Accordingly it was not necessary for the FTT to go  on  to
    consider whether or not he would be able to live openly in  Bangladesh.
     Mr Ly raised the issue of the further evidence of  an  email  from  Mr
    Stokes and confirmed that his solicitors had forwarded the same to  the
    Tribunal.  This was not a matter raise in the grounds of appeal and  it
    was clear that at the time of determining the decision and reason there
    was no confirmation of that evidence and in any event I do not consider
    that this would be a material error of law.


Decision

14.  There is no material error of  law  disclosed  in  the  decision  which
    shall stand. The appeal is dismissed.


                               Signed                     Date 11.5.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal







Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                               NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed                     Date 11.5.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


