
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05913/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Newport                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 January 2019                            |On 14 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     V D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:       Mr A Joseph of Counsel instructed by NLS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision of Judge G Wilson (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 5 October 2018.

 2. The appellant is a female national of Albania who arrived in the UK  in
    October 2017 and claimed asylum. The claim for international protection
    was made on the basis that she had been the victim of human trafficking
    in Albania. She claimed that she had been abducted, sexually abused and
    forced to work in a brothel before she managed to escape.

 3. The application was refused on 23 April 2018. The respondent noted that
    the appellant had been referred to the National Referral Mechanism  and
    the Competent Authority had decided that she  was  not  the  victim  of
    human  trafficking  or  slavery.   In   considering   the   claim   for
    international protection the respondent accepted that the appellant  is
    Albanian but did not accept that she had been abducted, or forced  into
    prostitution. In addition the respondent did not accept the appellant's
    claim to have suffered violence from her husband.

 4. The appeal was heard  on  26  September  2018.  The  judge  heard  oral
    evidence from the appellant. With reference to the Competent  Authority
    decision the judge followed the guidance in SSHD v MS (Pakistan) [2018]
    EWCA Civ 594 which is that an appellant can only invite the FTT  to  go
    behind the trafficking decision made by the Competent Authority and re-
    determine the factual issues as  to  whether  or  not  trafficking  had
    occurred if the decision was shown to be perverse or irrational or  was
    a decision not open to the Competent Authority to make.

 5. The judge found that the decision was neither perverse,  irrational  or
    otherwise unlawful. The judge found that  the  appellant's  account  of
    trafficking had not been established to the lower standard of proof and
    found that she had not been abducted and forced into prostitution.  The
    judge found that the appellant had not been beaten by her husband.  The
    appellant's claim was that she had been beaten by her  husband  because
    he was told that she had worked as a prostitute.

 6. The judge found that the appellant could return to her  home  area  and
    her family in Albania and therefore it was not  necessary  to  consider
    sufficiency of protection or internal relocation. The judge found  that
    the appellant's removal from the UK would not breach any of  her  human
    rights protected by  the  1950  European  Convention.  The  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.

 7. The appellant thereafter applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal. The grounds noted that the crucial issue in the appeal before
    the FTT related to  credibility  and  it  was  submitted  that  if  the
    appellant's account was accepted as credible she would be  entitled  to
    refugee status or humanitarian protection. It was  contended  that  the
    judge had erred in law in assessing the appellant's credibility.

 8. It was submitted that the judge had made adverse  credibility  findings
    based on speculation and without adequate reasoning and had  failed  to
    give  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  appellant  had  provided  an
    inconsistent account regarding events that had occurred in Albania.

 9. It was submitted that the judge had failed to consider the  appellant's
    evidence and had not considered background evidence  concerning  single
    parents returning to Albania without the support of their families.

10. With reference to the trafficking decision it was  submitted  that  the
    judge had erred in law by failing to explain and give  reasons  why  it
    was accepted that the correct test had been applied. It  was  submitted
    that when considering whether a person who claims to  be  a  victim  of
    trafficking is entitled to asylum, the evidence must be  considered  in
    the round, at the date of  hearing,  applying  the  lower  standard  of
    proof.

11. Reference was made to Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223  in  which  it  was
    found that in regarding an account as incredible a decision maker  must
    take care not to do so merely because it would not be plausible in  the
    UK.

12. It was submitted that the judge had failed  to  properly  consider  the
    appellant's account and found it  to  be  implausible  based  upon  his
    experiences gained in a different culture and country.  The  judge  had
    not  considered  objective  material  which  suggested  Albanian  gangs
    traffic women for the purposes of sexual exploitation.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Shaerf  who  found
    it arguable that the judge had erred in law by  failing  to  apply  the
    guidance in ES Albania [2018] UKUT 00335  (IAC)  and  this  could  have
    infected the judge's approach to  the  assessment  of  credibility  and
    plausibility. It was noted that the grounds had omitted  any  reference
    to ES, but nevertheless it was found  that  the  grounds  disclosed  an
    arguable error of law.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

14. Mr Joseph relied and expanded upon the  grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal. It was submitted that  the  judge
    had materially erred in three issues. Firstly it was a  material  error
    of law to fail to apply the guidance in ES when considering  an  asylum
    appeal which involves a trafficking  decision  made  by  the  Competent
    Authority. It was submitted that this incorrect approach  had  infected
    the credibility findings made by the judge.

15. Secondly it was submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  in  considering
    credibility and was wrong in law to find  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    account implausible. It was submitted that  the  judge  had  considered
    plausibility  from  his  personal  viewpoint,  and  had  not   provided
    satisfactory reasons for his findings.

16. Thirdly it was submitted that the judge had materially erred in law  by
    failing to consider and follow country guidance case law in relation to
    internal relocation.

17. Mr Howells accepted that the judge had  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
    follow the approach in ES but submitted that this was  not  a  material
    error because the judge had considered  the  asylum  and  human  rights
    claim by applying the appropriate lower standard of proof.

18. It was submitted that the failure  to  consider  ES  had  not  infected
    credibility findings, and the judge had made  findings  on  credibility
    which were open to him to make, and had provided adequate  reasons  for
    those findings.

19. The judge had not erred in failing  to  consider  country  guidance  on
    sufficiency of protection or internal relocation because the judge  had
    found that the appellant was not a  victim  of  trafficking  and  could
    return to her home area without risk.

20. In response Mr Joseph argued  that  the  judge  had  not  engaged  with
    objective evidence and the failure to  consider  ES  had  infected  the
    credibility findings and made the decision unsafe. I was asked  to  set
    aside the decision and remit the appeal back to the  FTT  to  be  heard
    afresh.

My Conclusions and Reasons

21. The respondent rightly concedes that the judge erred in law in  failing
    to follow the guidance in ES. It was accepted that the  representatives
    in the FTT had failed to mention ES and failed to draw the attention of
    the judge to that decision. That was unfortunate. ES had been  reported
    on 6 September 2018 and the FTT hearing  took  place  on  26  September
    2018.

22. ES makes it clear that following the amendment to  section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 effective from 20  October
    2014 a previous decision made by the  Competent  Authority  within  the
    National Referral Mechanism (made on the balance of  probabilities)  is
    not of primary relevance to  the  determination  of  an  asylum  appeal
    despite the decision of the Court of Appeal in SSHD  v  MS  (Pakistan).
    The correct approach to determining whether a person claiming to  be  a
    victim of trafficking is entitled to asylum  is  to  consider  all  the
    evidence in the round as at the date of  hearing,  applying  the  lower
    standard of proof.

23. However I do not find the error to be material. This is because  having
    considered whether the Competent Authority's decision was  perverse  or
    irrational, which was the wrong approach, the judge  demonstrated  that
    in relation to the asylum  claim  he  had  considered  the  appellant's
    account to the lower standard of proof which is in  fact  the  approach
    advocated in ES.

24. The judge at paragraph 12 sets out the correct burden and  standard  of
    proof, specifically commenting that the 'standard of proof is  a  lower
    one.' The judge at  paragraph  31  records  that  he  finds  'that  the
    appellant's account of trafficking has  not  been  established  to  the
    lower standard of proof.' At paragraph 34 the  judge  records  'I  also
    find that the  appellant  has  not  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof
    demonstrated that she was abducted and forced into prostitution in  the
    manner that she claims or at all.'

25. I am satisfied that the credibility findings made by the judge were not
    infected by his reliance upon SSHD V MS (Pakistan) rather  than  ES  as
    the judge  has  considered  the  asylum  claim  using  the  appropriate
    standard of proof.

26. Turning to the second issue raised by Mr Joseph which  relates  to  the
    findings made by the judge on credibility, it is  appropriate  to  note
    that the judge  treated  the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness  as
    demonstrated by paragraphs 14-15.

27.  Caution  must  be   exercised   when   considering   credibility   and
    plausibility. Guidance on this point is contained in HK [2006] EWCA Civ
    1037  in  particular  in  paragraphs  28-30.  It  is  stated  that   an
    appellant's story may  seem  inherently  unlikely  but  that  does  not
    necessarily mean that it  is  untrue.  The  story  must  be  considered
    against any available country evidence or  expert  evidence  and  other
    factors such as consistency. Plausibility must be considered within the
    context of the social and cultural background of the appellant.

28. In my view the judge was aware of the guidance summarised above  as  in
    paragraph 30 he makes reference to Y v SSHD which is a decision  relied
    upon in the grounds of appeal. The judge  in  referring  to  Y  v  SSHD
    summarises the guidance to the  effect  that  the  decision  maker  was
    entitled to regard an account as  incredible  by  drawing  on  his  own
    common sense and his ability as a  practical  and  informed  person  to
    identify what was and what was not plausible, albeit care must be taken
    not to reject an account as  implausible  because  it  would  not  seem
    reasonable if it happened in the UK.  In  essence  the  decision  maker
    'must look through the spectacles provided by the  information  he  has
    about conditions in the country in question.'

29. I do not accept  that  the  judge  has  failed  to  take  into  account
    background evidence. There is reference at paragraph  26  to  objective
    evidence confirming that modern slavery is prevalent in  Albania  which
    is a country where women are subject to exploitation.

30. The judge does not disregard the appellant's evidence and considers her
    account  at  paragraph   29   noting   relevant   inconsistencies   and
    discrepancies,  and  finds  that  the  appellant  has  not  provided  a
    reasonable explanation for  those  inconsistencies  and  discrepancies.
    This paragraph demonstrates that the judge has carefully considered the
    appellant's account and found internal inconsistencies for which  there
    is no reasonable explanation, and the judge was entitled, in  my  view,
    to  find  the  material  inconsistencies  undermined  the   appellant's
    credibility.  The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had   given   an
    inconsistent account as to whether  she  did  or  did  not  work  as  a
    prostitute and was entitled  to  conclude  that  this  was  a  material
    inconsistency which undermined her account.

31. There is further consideration of the appellant's account and  findings
    made at paragraphs 32 and 33. The judge has not followed  an  incorrect
    approach when considering  credibility,  and  a  fair  reading  of  the
    decision indicates that he has not  applied  his  personal  views  when
    considering credibility, but has followed the approach which he set out
    in paragraph 30 of his decision.

32. I do not find that the judge has made findings which are irrational  or
    perverse. The judge has provided adequate reasons to explain why he did
    not believe the appellant's account. It is apparent  from  reading  the
    decision why the judge did not believe that account.

33. Turning to the third issue raised by Mr Joseph, it is correct that  the
    judge did not consider sufficiency of protection or internal relocation
    and this is made clear at paragraph 37. This is not a material error of
    law because the judge has found that the appellant is not a  victim  of
    trafficking, that her account is not credible and is not accepted,  and
    therefore she can return to her home area without risk.

34. The grounds upon  which  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  disclose
    disagreements with the conclusions reached by  the  judge  but  do  not
    disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does not disclose  a  material  error  of  law.  The
appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed  [pic]                           Date 9 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD
I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed  [pic]                           Date 9 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
