
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/05224/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 October 2018                        |On 18 October 2018                   |
|                                          |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                     SM
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr S Ell, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Durance promulgated 31.5.18, dismissing on  all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    6.4.18, to refuse his claim for international protection.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird granted permission to appeal on 21.6.18.





Error of Law

 3. For the reasons set out below, I found no material error of law in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to require it
    to be set aside and remade.

 4. The appellant's claim was based on discrimination against  him  due  to
    his condition of Oculocutaneous Albinism,  which  led  to  two  suicide
    attempts. In addition, he relies on a sur place claim of  risk  on  the
    basis of political opinion in posting anti-regime and pro PJAK material
    on his Facebook account.

 5. In summary, the grounds assert that the (1) judge failed to have proper
    regard to a material consideration, namely his and his uncle's  Kurdish
    ethnicity; (2) erred in the assessment of the  sur  place  activity  on
    Facebook; and (3) failed to make findings as  to  the  appellant's  two
    alleged suicide attempts when rejecting the claim of risk of suicide on
    return.

 6. The wording of the grant of permission is somewhat confused  but  Judge
    Bird considered it arguable that  the  judge  failed  to  see  how  the
    Facebook activity would be seen by the Iranian authorities and that the
    judge had failed to apply relevant case  law,  including  YB  (Eritrea)
    [2008] EWCA Civ 360 and AB (internet activity- state of evidence)  Iran
    [2015] UKUT 0257.

 7. I am not satisfied that there is any error of law in relation to taking
    account of the appellant's ethnicity. At [44] the  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's claim to be a genuine supporter of the pro-Kurdish PJAK. In
    reaching  that  conclusion,  the  judge  noted  the  alleged   horrific
    treatment the appellant had received in Kurdistan due to his  albinism,
    stating that no-one had  been  nice  to  him.  In  the  light  of  that
    evidence, the judge found that it was  not  clear  why  he  had  become
    involved  with  a  pro-Kurdish  group  given   his   "wholly   negative
    experiences with Kurdish people for the  entirety  of  his  life."  The
    grounds complain that the judge failed to take into  account  that  the
    appellant and his paternal uncle, who helped him escape Iran, are  both
    of Kurdish ethnicity. I reject  the  criticism.  It  is  clear  from  a
    reading of the decision that the judge was fully aware of and took into
    account the appellant's Kurdish ethnicity and  specifically  made  that
    finding at [35(a)]. It was open to the judge to reach the conclusion he
    did and for the reasons given notwithstanding the appellant's ethnicity
    and his explanations noted at [19] of the  decision.  The  judge  noted
    that  by  his  own  admission  the  appellant  had  had  no   political
    involvement in Iran and concluded  that  the  sur  place  activity  was
    entirely self-serving to bolster a weak asylum claim. There is  nothing
    illogical or irrational about the conclusion and no  error  of  law  is
    disclosed on this ground.

 8. At [31] the judge accepted from the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    AB that there is a risk on return of social media content coming to the
    attention of the authorities, referred to as a pinch point.  The  judge
    also noted from the decision that  it  was  not  relevant  whether  the
    Internet had been used in an  opportunistic  way.  At  [32]  the  judge
    stated, "It does not matter whether an appellant has  cynically  sought
    to enhance his asylum prospects by creating the very risk he then seeks
    to rely  on,  although  bad  faith  is  relevant  when  evaluating  the
    merits/credibility of the claim." The judge went on  to  note  from  YB
    that even if his motives are disbelieve, the consequent risk on  return
    from his sur place activity was essentially an objective one.  At  [44-
    45] the judge concluded that the appellant's Facebook activity had been
    contrived to manufacture and bolster a weak Convention claim.

 9. The complaint of the grounds is that in rejecting  that  the  appellant
    will be at risk on return of being questioned about his anti-regime and
    pro PJAK Facebook postings, the judge ignored  the  principles  he  had
    summarised at [31-32] that even a  cynical  creation  of  risk  by  the
    appellant's sur place activity has to be considered objectively.

10. I am not satisfied that any error of law is disclosed  in  relation  to
    this ground. On a reading of the decision as a whole it is  clear  that
    the judge kept the relevant principles and case law very much in  mind.
    The rejection of risk in relation to Facebook postings  was  not  based
    solely or even mainly the finding  that  it  was  used  cynically.  For
    reasons set out  in  the  decision,  the  judge  rejected  the  claimed
    existence of an earlier Facebook account. In relation to the  so-called
    second account, the judge accepted that the appellant had uploaded some
    content critical of the Iranian  regime  but  was  concerned  that  the
    appellant had failed to disclose the entirety of the  account  and  had
    presented a selective rather  a  "holistic  record"  covering  a  short
    period of time, which lack of candour limited the weight that could  be
    given to the evidence and  made  it  impossible  for  the  tribunal  to
    evaluate the pinch point risk (see [40] and [35(e)]. At [27] the  judge
    noted  the  admission  of  the  appellant's  representative  that   the
    authorities would have to trawl through the entirety  of  his  Facebook
    account, which may be more than 10,000 pages, before  encountering  the
    relatively few elements which might be of concern. At  [41]  the  judge
    noted evidence of the authorities  closing  7  million  web  addresses,
    including Facebook, and concluded that it was  unlikely  to  the  lower
    standard of proof that Facebook would be accessible on the  appellant's
    returns to Iraq. Given the finding that the appellant had no  political
    profile before coming to the UK and that the account  could  simply  be
    closed down, the risk of the account having been monitored  is  remote,
    even if he had 95 Facebook friends.

11. The judge indicated that he had to take the evidence in the  round,  in
    the context of  the  evidence  as  a  whole  and  the  other  findings,
    including as to the appellant's credibility. Further, although  it  was
    asserted  in  submissions  that  the  appellant  would  answer  in  the
    affirmative if asked about incriminating material on Facebook,  as  the
    tribunal concluded that none of the political  postings  reflected  his
    genuine political opinion, the  appellant  has  no  entitlement  to  be
    protected in a lie; he would not be hiding his true opinions by failing
    to disclose such cynical postings and there is no HJ (Iran) point here.
    At [27] the judge  noted  the  representative's  concession  that  this
    element of the appellant's claim was  "predicated  on  the  appellant's
    account of his political conversion as being credible  and  authentic."
    He can simply delete the account and there is nothing to  be  seen.  It
    follows that I find  that  the  judge  has  provided  cogent  reasoning
    entirely open to him for rejecting the risk on return  in  relation  to
    the Facebook account postings and that no  material  error  of  law  is
    disclosed in this regard.

12. In relation to the risk of suicide on return, rejected at [49]  of  the
    decision, it is complained that the judge failed to take  into  account
    the appellant's evidence that he has twice attempted suicide and failed
    to make a finding as to whether these had taken place. However, reading
    the decision as a whole it is clear  that  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had overstated his difficulties arising  from  discriminatory
    treatment arising  from  his  albinism.  Furthermore,  the  appellant's
    representative had conceded in closing submissions that  the  appellant
    was not at risk on return as a result  of  events  which  preceded  his
    departure from Iran and that his case arose entirely  out  of  his  sur
    place activities. Even if the previous suicide attempts had been  taken
    into consideration, the case authority of J  v  SSHD  indicate  that  a
    question of importance is whether the fear of  ill-treatment  is  well-
    founded. However, Y also held that even if without objective foundation
    whether the fear was  genuine  and  sufficient  to  create  a  risk  of
    suicide. On the findings of the  judge,  the  fear  was  not  only  not
    objectively well-founded but not genuinely held. There was insufficient
    medical evidence to even justify this as  a  consideration,  given  the
    standard treatment the  appellant  had  received.  At  [49]  the  judge
    properly assessed the risk. Whilst there is not a specific finding that
    there were  previous  suicide  attempts,  the  judge  appears  to  have
    proceeded on the same basis followed by the respondent in  the  refusal
    decision. Given the lack of evidence in support it was not incumbent on
    the judge to consider the risk any further or to make specific findings
    about past suicide attempts. On the  evidence  there  was  insufficient
    before the tribunal for the high threshold  to  be  made  out.  In  the
    circumstances, no error of law is disclosed in relation to this ground.



Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

                       I do not set aside the decision.

                       The decision of the tribunal stands

                       The appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup






Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did make an order pursuant to rule 13(1) of the Tribunal  Procedure
Rules 2014. In the circumstances, I continue the anonymity order.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



