
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/05037/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 February 2018                            |On 3 April 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     Ar
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Magennis instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  we  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was  born  on  1  January
    2002.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on  17  October  2016.   On  17
    November 2016 he claimed asylum.

 3. On 12 May 2017, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the  ECHR.   However,  as
    the appellant was  an  unaccompanied  minor,  the  Secretary  of  State
    granted him discretionary leave until 1 July 2019.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  refusal
    of his asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights claim.

 5. In a decision sent on 7 July  2017,  Judge  I  D  Boyes  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.  First, he rejected the  appellant's
    account that he had converted to Christianity since being in the UK and
    would, as a result, be at risk on return to Afghanistan.  Secondly, the
    judge found that, in considering any risk to the appellant on return to
    Afghanistan, the appellant's case should be  considered  on  the  basis
    that he would not be returned until  he  was  an  adult  and,  on  that
    premise, he was not  at  real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm
    contrary to Art 15(c) of the Qualification Directive (Council Directive
    2004/83/EC).

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds set out at para 2(a) - (u) of the Grounds.

 7. On 11 October 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Brunnen) granted the
    appellant permission to appeal.

 8. On 17 November 2017, the Secretary of State  filed  a  rule  24  notice
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

Discussion

 9. Before us, we invited the representatives to focus  upon  two  specific
    grounds in paras 2(a) and 2(c).  In the light of the view  we  take  in
    respect of these two grounds, and that the judge's decision is  legally
    flawed and as a result cannot stand, it is unnecessary to consider  the
    merit of the remaining grounds.

10. The ground in para 2(a) is as follows:

         "The Judge made his decision on the basis that the Appellant  would
         not be  returned  to  Afghanistan  until  he  reaches  the  age  of
         majority.  The correct test is for the Judge to decide whether  the
         Appellant has made out an asylum, protection or human rights  claim
         at the date of the hearing, not at some date in  the  future.   The
         Judge erred in stating 'I do not have to  consider  the  risk  upon
         return now as the appellant will not be returned  until  he  is  an
         adult';...."

11. Ms Pettersen, who represented the Secretary of State accepted that  the
    judge had fallen into error in seeking to assess any risk on return  to
    the appellant on the basis that he would not be returned  as  a  child.
    She accepted that any risk to the appellant whether in relation to  his
    asylum claim or under Art 15(c) of the Qualification Directive  had  to
    be assessed as at the date of the hearing and, therefore, on the  basis
    that he would be a child.  Ms Pettersen did  not  seek  to  uphold  the
    judge's decision as a result.

12. We agree.  The proper assessment of risk on return in assessing a claim
    under the Refugee Convention or on humanitarian protection grounds  has
    to be made as at the date of hearing (see, e.g. EU(Afghanistan) v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 32 at [34] per Sir Stanley Burnton).  In failing to  do
    so, and thereby assessing any risk to the appellant on the  basis  that
    he would be an adult on return, the  judge  fell  into  error  and  his
    decision cannot stand.

13. Para 2(c) of the Grounds relates to the judge's assessment of a  number
    of witnesses attesting  to,  in  particular,  the  appellant's  claimed
    conversion to Christianity.  The Ground is as follows:

         "The judge refused the Appellant's request to call  five  witnesses
         to give evidence.  Having so-refused, the Judge then sought  to  go
         behind  the  written  testimony   of   those   witnesses   in   his
         determination.  The Judge erred in failing to allow  the  witnesses
         to be called so that any issue he might have wished  to  take  with
         their evidence could be put to them by the  Respondent  or  by  the
         Judge himself.  Having prevented  them  from  giving  evidence,  he
         erred in seeking to go behind the factual contents of their written
         testimony;"

14. At para 24, the judge took an adverse  view  of  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses:

         "I have considered the evidence of those whom assert they know  the
         appellant's faith.  I reject them all ...."

15. Further, at para 26 of his determination, the judge said this:

         "It is a judicial function, not anyone else's in this instance,  to
         ascertain where the truth of the matter lies.   I  have  considered
         the appellant's sub-rudimentary knowledge of Christianity and  have
         reached  the  conclusion  that  the  letters  of  support  are  not
         reliable.  I wondered at one stage whether  they  were  written  in
         support  of  someone  else  as  they  talk  of  understanding   and
         development in the Christian faith.  The appellant, as  it  stands,
         is a million miles away from understanding.  The notion and idea of
         a purported conversion has not served this appellant well."

16. Mr Magennis informed us that at the outset of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing, the judge had indicated that he would not allow him to call  a
    number of witnesses who were present to give evidence on behalf of  the
    appellant.  He submitted that it was wrong in law for the judge  to  do
    so and then to reject as "not reliable" their written evidence.

17. Ms Pettersen confirmed that the note of the Presenting Officer  at  the
    hearing recorded that as a preliminary issue the judge decided that the
    witnesses would not be allowed to give evidence at the  hearing  as  no
    notice had been given to the Tribunal and that their letters  would  be
    taken as evidence.

18. Ms Pettersen did not concede that the judge had fallen into error  but,
    accepting  that  the  issue  of  the  genuineness  of  the  appellant's
    conversion was in issue, the witnesses' evidence had to be assessed and
    she did not actively seek to defend the judge's decision not  to  allow
    them to give oral evidence  in  order  that  their  evidence  could  be
    assessed.

19. We are in no doubt that the judge erred in law by failing to allow  the
    witnesses to give oral evidence, given that they were present at  court
    and the appellant wished to call to them to give oral evidence and that
    the subject-matter  of  their  evidence  was  in  dispute  between  the
    parties.  Their evidence went to  the  central  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant had genuinely converted to Christianity.   The  judge  denied
    the appellant (through his counsel) to explore  any  difficulties  with
    their evidence before rejecting their evidence as  "unreliable".   This
    was unfair.  It will only be in the  rarest  and  most  exceptional  of
    circumstances that it would be just for a judge to  prevent  a  witness
    being called to give oral evidence on  a  relevant  issue  which  is  a
    matter of dispute between the parties.  In  such  cases,  the  forensic
    process of examination-in-chief and cross-examination is  an  essential
    component of fairness to both parties.

20. Consequently, we also accept that the judge erred in  this  respect  as
    set out in para 2(c) of the Grounds.

Decision

21. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in  law  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal.  That decision is set aside.

22. The proper disposal of this appeal is that it should be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing by a judge other than Judge
    I D Boyes.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                              28, March 2018
