
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05297/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 September 2017                     |On 15 September 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN

                                   Between

                                    [A A]

                                                                   appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Althea Radford, counsel instructed by Lupins
For the respondent:    Mr Ian Jarvis





                            DECISION AND REASONS


    This is an appeal by a citizen  of  Pakistan,  born  in  1986,  from  a
    decision or Judge Ruth Sullivan sitting at  Harmondsworth  on  23  June
    2017 dismissing his asylum and human  rights  appeal.   Permission  was
    granted on two grounds out  of  the  six  relied  on,  and  I  am  only
    concerned with the fourth, granted in these terms

         The fourth ground of appeal asserts the judge erred by raising  the
         issue of paternity of the child of the appellant's ex-partner which
         had not been placed in issue by the respondent.  It is  clear  from
         the reasons for decision letter  that  the  appellant's  biological
         relationship  with  the  child  was  not  in  issue.   This  ground
         discloses an arguable error of law.

    That ground in its own terms appears to have been  made  out:  clearly,
    although it was for the judge to decide all issues of fact, she  needed
    at least to raise this issue with the parties  at  the  hearing  before
    reaching a negative decision on it.

 2. The point on which Miss Radford relies on that ground in  applying  for
    permission on the other  grounds  is  this.   The  judge's  credibility
    decision on the appellant's asylum claim (paragraphs 26 to 38) was very
    much based on his relationship with the mother  of  the  child,  called
    [UW]. Although there were certainly other points to be taken, and which
    the judge did take, in particular on the appellant's  delay  in  making
    any claim, that relationship  was  very  much  at  the  centre  of  her
    credibility decision in the  asylum  case,  and  it  follows  that  the
    credibility decision as a whole will have to be  remade.  There  is  no
    need for that to take place in the Upper Tribunal.

 3. [UW] also had an application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal; but that was refused on 1 September, and there is  no  record
    of it being renewed.  It may  well  be  that  these  two  cases  should
    proceed  together;  but  that  will  be  the  responsibility  of  those
    representing [UW], if her case does come back for a fresh hearing.  For
    the present this case will  go  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    Harmondsworth for a fresh hearing before another judge.

Appeal
Fresh hearing in First-tier Tribunal, not before Judge Sullivan
                               [pic]                       (a judge of the
                                   Upper Tribunal)

