
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05660/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 May 2019                        |On 13 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     IN
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Southey QC, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is a remade decision of an  appeal  against  the  respondent's
         decision dated 31 May 2017 refusing the appellant's Article 8 human
         rights claim. In a decision promulgated on 23 May 2018 Judge of the
         First-tier Tribunal J Bartlett (the FtJ) dismissed the  appellant's
         appeal. In an 'error of law' decision  promulgated  on  5  December
         2018 I found that the FtJ's decision contained errors on points  of
         law that required it to be set aside. A copy of the 'error of  law'
         decision is included in an appendix to this decision.

      2. The identified errors of law related  to  the  application  of  the
         'very  compelling  circumstances'  threshold  in  s117C(6)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (the  2002  Act).  I
         briefly summarise the errors of law.

          a) Although the FtJ was entitled to conclude that the  individual
             periods of delay by the respondent in the deportation  process
             did not reflect a lack of interest in deporting the appellant,
             and although the FtJ was entitled to conclude that the  public
             interest was not thereby diminished, she  failed  to  consider
             whether the cumulative effect of the delays  was  such  as  to
             contribute   to   the   establishment   of   very   compelling
             circumstances.

          b) The FtJ misdirected herself in holding that the appellant  was
             not financially independent because he  was  supported  by  LN
             (his wife) and actively holding  this  against  him  (Rhuppiah
             [2018] UKSC 58).

          c)  When  determining  whether  there  existed  'very  compelling
             circumstances' it was not apparent  that  the  FtJ  took  into
             account the circumstances in which the appellant came  to  the
             UK as a 13  year  old,  or  her  finding  that  the  appellant
             experienced a "traumatic time at the  hands  of  his  supposed
             guardian" and that it was in this context  that  he  committed
             crimes and got involved in a gang.

          d)  When  determining  whether  there  existed  'very  compelling
             circumstances' the FtJ failed to take express account  of  the
             significant efforts undertaken by the appellant  to  turn  his
             life around or his length of residence in the UK.

      3. The factual findings of the FtJ were unaffected by  the  errors  of
         law and were retained. As  a  consequence  the  central  issue  for
         resolution is whether there  are  'very  compelling  circumstances'
         rendering  the  appellant's  deportation   disproportionate   under
         Article  8,  by  reference  to  s.117C(6)   of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

Summary of chronological and  procedural  background  and  retained  factual
findings

      4. The appellant, a national of Nigeria, was born in  1990.  He  lived
         with his family in Nigeria until he was 13 years old.  For  reasons
         unclear his parents arranged for the appellant to go to the UK with
         a relative stranger in 2003. Although he claims to have entered the
         UK pursuant to an entry clearance issued to him as the dependent of
         a "guardian" there is no official record of his entry to the UK. He
         has never had lawful leave to enter or remain.

      5. The appellant maintained contact with  his  family  in  Nigeria  to
         varying degree  throughout  the  years.  The  FtJ  found  that  the
         appellant had retained family and cultural connections  to  Nigeria
         and that his Nigerian family could assist him and his family in the
         UK if they relocated to Nigeria.

      6. The appellant was physically and verbally abused and  neglected  by
         his supposedly 'guardian' in the UK. In his statement he  explained
         that he would avoid her as much as possible and that she  made  him
         feel as if there was something wrong with him. The  appellant  only
         began to attend school in 2005 and obtained some GCSEs. As a result
         of the neglect and abuse to which he was subjected, and his lack of
         family support, the  appellant  became  embroiled  with  gangs  and
         criminality. He described in detail in his statement how he  became
         associated with individuals in a "smoking house" and how  he  began
         to consider these people as his "new family" and began living  with
         them. He began to smoke a  lot  of  cannabis  and  would  steal  to
         purchase the drug.

      7. The appellant received a six-month Supervision Order for  having  a
         blade with a sharp point in a public place in February 2008. On  11
         March 2011 he  was  convicted  of  2  counts  of  possession  of  a
         controlled drug with intent  to  supply  and  received  a  30-month
         sentence of imprisonment. He made an asylum claim in May  2011  but
         accepts that this claim was without foundation.  The  asylum  claim
         was withdrawn in a letter written by the appellant's solicitors  in
         February 2014. When lodging his asylum  claim  the  appellant  also
         claimed to be  a  victim  of  human  trafficking.  This  claim  was
         ultimately rejected by the Competent Authority in a decision  dated
         12 September 2012. There was no legal challenge to  this  decision.
         In my 'error of law' decision I rejected  Mr  Southey's  submission
         that the FtJ erred in  law  by  failing  to  consider  whether  the
         appellant was a victim of trafficking  (see  paragraph  36  of  the
         'error of law' decision).

      8. The appellant met LN, a British citizen, in 2007 and  they  entered
         into a relationship in September 2009. They have a son, NN, born on
         8 May 2013. The appellant and LN married  on  12  October  2013.  A
         further child, LON, was born on 13 October 2018. The appellant told
         LN about his immigration status  about  halfway  through  his  2011
         prison sentence.

      9.  The  appellant  was  released  on  licence  on  25  June  2012.  A
         deportation order was served on him on 11 September  2013  but  was
         withdrawn on 14 October 2014 at an appeal hearing  as  it  had  not
         been signed. The  case  remitted  to  the  respondent  for  further
         consideration. On 23 January 2016 the appellant was served  with  a
         lawful notice of decision to deport him and, on 22  February  2016,
         his representatives made further submissions in  response  to  this
         decision. The respondent treated these further representations as a
         human rights claim and refused the human rights  claim  on  31  May
         2017. The appeal of this decision was heard on 30 April 2018.

     10. The FtJ found that the appellant did not represent a danger to  the
         community and did not consequently uphold  a  certification  issued
         under section 72 of the 2002 Act. In reaching this  conclusion  the
         FtJ noted that the appellant had not engaged  in  criminal  conduct
         since his sentencing in 2011 and that he had changed his life  such
         that he posed  a  low  risk  of  reoffending.  The  FtJ  found  the
         appellant to be "a different person to the individual who committed
         the crimes in 2008 and 2011." The FtJ found the evidence about  the
         appellant's personal growth due to the support provided by  LN  and
         her family to be "compelling".  The FtJ accepted that the appellant
         spent his time in  prison  busy  working  and  studying  to  obtain
         qualifications. The FtJ noted the appellant's evidence that, during
         his prison term, he carried out  numerous  courses  which  included
         drugs and alcohol awareness,  obtained  hygiene  certificates,  and
         undertook A-level maths. The  FtJ  noted  that  the  appellant  was
         studying  for  an  accounting  qualification  (which  he  has   now
         obtained), that if he had permission to work in the UK he would  do
         so, that he was ambitious for a better life and wished to be a role
         model for his son, that he was the primary carer for his son and  a
         committed father, and that he drank  limited  alcohol  infrequently
         and did not have an alcohol problem. It was for these reasons  that
         the appellant was found to be at low risk of offending.

     11. The FtJ noted that NN was 4 years old at the date of the First-tier
         Tribunal hearing (at the date of the hearing to remake the decision
         NN was a few days shy of his 6th birthday) and had spent his entire
         life in the care  of  his  mother  and  father.  Although  the  FtJ
         accepted that LN was the breadwinner in  the  family  she  did  not
         accept that LN worked for 12 hours a day, 6 days a  week.  The  FtJ
         found that the appellant was genuinely a loving father and that his
         son would be distraught if separated from him.  The  FtJ  concluded
         that it would be in NN's best interests to remain living  with  his
         mother and father as a family unit in  the  UK  to  enable  him  to
         benefit from his rights as a British citizen. In my 'error of  law'
         decision I rejected Mr Southey's submission that the FtJ failed  to
         undertake an adequate assessment of NN's best interests  and  found
         that she lawfully engaged with and took into account reports by  an
         Independent Social Worker (ISW).

     12. The FtJ did not find that the effect of deportation on NN would  be
         unduly harsh and,  at  the  'error  of  law'  hearing,  Mr  Southey
         abandoned a ground that argued that the FtJ erred in  her  approach
         to the harshness of the situation faced by NN. In finding  that  it
         would not be unduly harsh for NN to live in Nigeria  the  FtJ  took
         into account LN's evidence that she did not want NN to live  there,
         and her concerns regarding safety and  sanitation,  and  took  into
         account the ISW's reports. The FtJ summarised the ISW's description
         of the appellant's relationships with his wife and  son  and  noted
         that the ISW's identified concerns "... would be applicable to  all
         healthy for-year-olds." The FtJ commented that  the  ISW's  reports
         contained very few specific findings relating to NN's relocation to
         Nigeria and that it made general observations  about  how  children
         seen as different would have difficulties. The FtJ found  that,  at
         least initially, NN would be able to live with his grandparents and
         extended family, that he had some familiarity with his  grandmother
         and aunt, and that there was  an  education  system  and  a  health
         system in Nigeria. The FtJ additionally  noted  NN's  age  and  the
         stage of his education, and that his focus  was  on  his  immediate
         family rather than the  wider  community.  The  FtJ  accepted  that
         Nigeria was not a developed country, that not all of Nigeria had  a
         reliable  electricity  supply  or  running  water,  and  that   the
         lifestyle in Nigeria  would  be  of  a  lower  standard  than  that
         available in the UK. The FtJ also accepted that NN would  suffer  a
         culture shock if he were to move to Nigeria but that he  was  still
         relatively young and would have the assistance of  his  father  and
         extended family. Whilst accepting that any notional move to Nigeria
         would be "... undesirable,  uncomfortable,  difficult,  challenging
         and unwanted", the FtJ did not find  this  would  amount  to  undue
         harshness.

     13. In finding that it would not be unduly harsh for NN  to  remain  in
         the UK without the appellant the FtJ referred to  the  evidence  of
         the distress this would cause NN and LN and, with reference to  the
         ISW's report, that this would have a damaging effect on  both.  The
         FtJ accepted that if the appellant were deported and NN remained in
         the UK in the care of his mother it would have a damaging effect on
         both NN and LN and that they would suffer emotionally. The FtJ also
         accepted that LN was suffering from stress and anxiety and that she
         had some mental ill-health concerns arising from the threat of  the
         appellant's deportation. There  was  however  limited  evidence  to
         suggest that this was so serious as to require specialist treatment
         and/or counselling. The  FtJ  found  that,  if  the  appellant  was
         deported, NN would be in the care of his mother who was a committed
         and loving parent  and  would  also  receive  assistance  from  her
         family. The FtJ additionally  noted  that  communication  with  the
         appellant would not be severed.

     14. The FtJ found that the appellant could not satisfy the requirements
         of paragraph 399A of the immigration rules, and the requirements of
         paragraph 399(b) of the immigration rules could not be satisfied as
         the appellant was unlawfully present in the UK when he  formed  his
         relationship with LN. The FtJ found that the  appellant  could  not
         satisfy Exception 1 in s.117C(4) of the 2002 Act because he had not
         been lawfully resident in the UK for most  of  his  life.  The  FtJ
         found,  with  reference  to   s.117C(5),   that   the   appellant's
         deportation would not  have  an  unduly  harsh  impact  on  LN  and
         supported this conclusion with reasons that  included  the  support
         that LN would receive from the appellant and his family if she went
         to Nigeria and her own resourcefulness, and the support  she  would
         receive in the UK from her own family if she decided to  remain  in
         this country.

Documents that have been considered

     15. The appellant continues to rely on the 3 core bundles (Bundles A to
         C) that were filed with the First-tier Tribunal,  and  the  further
         documents served on the day of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing.  I
         have considered  these  documents  in  reaching  my  decision.  The
         documents included,  inter  alia,  a  68-page  statement  from  the
         appellant running to 147 paragraphs and dated 12 September 2014,  a
         further statement dated 14 April 2018, a 29-page statement from  LN
         dated 15 August 2014, and a further statement  from  her  dated  18
         April 2018.  The  bundles  additionally  included  statements  from
         members of LN's family, an ISW report authored  by  Peter  Horrocks
         dated 15 September 2014 and an updating report  dated  28  December
         2017, a Pre-Sentence Report dated 8 March 2011, an OASys Assessment
         dated  12  August  2014,  copies  of   various   certificates   and
         qualifications obtained by the appellant, and various  evidence  of
         the nature and quality of the appellant's relationship with his son
         and partner. The bundles also contained background  information  on
         Nigeria, documents relating to a cleaning  company  established  by
         LN, and a letter from NN's  primary  school.  I  have  additionally
         considered further evidence  adduced  by  the  appellant  including
         records  relating  to  LN's  treatment  with   Talking   Therapies,
         confirmation of the birth and nationality of  the  appellant's  2nd
         child, an ATT  Foundation  Certificate  in  Accounting  -  Level  2
         awarded to the appellant on 17 October 2018,  a  letter  from  Juan
         Pimienta,  Chair  of   the   Metropolitan   Police   Ibero-American
         Association dated 29 April 2019, and photographs of  the  appellant
         attending a book launch  discussion  in  April  2019,  and  of  his
         attendance at a Community Council Question Time in the  same  month
         to discuss knife crime.  There  was  no  new  documentary  evidence
         relating to NN.

     16. At the hearing to remake the decision Mr Southey indicated that  he
         would not be calling the appellant or any witnesses  to  give  oral
         evidence. I maintained a record of the  submissions  made  by  both
         representatives and have carefully  considered  those  submissions.
         The proceedings in the Upper Tribunal and the submissions made are,
         in any event, a matter of record. Mr Southey's essential submission
         was that a holistic  assessment  of  all  relevant  factors,  which
         included the impact of the deportation  on  the  family  unit,  the
         circumstances by which the appellant came to be in the UK as a  13-
         year-old, the abuse to which he was subjected and which led to  his
         criminality, the powerful steps he took to rehabilitate himself and
         his 'pro-social' conduct, and the consequences of the  respondent's
         delays, reached the 'very compelling circumstances' threshold  such
         that  the  refusal   of   his   human   rights   claim   would   be
         disproportionate under Article 8.

Legal Framework

     17. Section 117A of the 2002 Act requires a Tribunal, when  considering
         the public interest question, to have regard, in particular, to the
         factors listed in  section  117B,  and,  in  cases  concerning  the
         deportation of foreign criminals, to the considerations  listed  in
         section 117C.

     18. Section 117B reads,

             117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in
             all cases

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
             the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)  Little weight should be given to-

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                  that is established by a person at a time when the  person
                  is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)   Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom.

     19. Section 117C lists additional  public  interest  considerations  in
         cases involving foreign criminals.

             (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

             (2)  The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                  for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

             (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

             (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
             taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted.

     20. Although s.117C(3) does not make any provision for medium offenders
         who fall outside Exceptions 1 and 2  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  NA
         (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA
         Civ 662 confirmed that Parliament intended medium offenders to have
         the same fall back protection as serious offenders.

     21. In Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2016]
         EWCA Civ 803, Sales LJ stated, at [45],  (a  point  undisturbed  on
         appeal to the Supreme Court)

             "It is common ground that the starting point for consideration
             of the proper construction of Part 5A of the 2002 Act is  that
             sections 117A-117D, taken together, are  intended  to  provide
             for a structured approach to  the  application  of  Article  8
             which produces in all cases a final result which is compatible
             with, and not in violation of, Article 8. In that regard, both
             sides affirmed the approach to interpretation of  Part  5A  to
             ensure compliance with Article 8 as explained by this court in
             NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2016] EWCA Civ 662, in particular at [26] and [31]."

     22. Then at [49] and [50] Sales LJ held,

             "... Section 117A(2)  does  not  have  the  effect  that,  for
             example, a court or tribunal has a discretion to say that  the
             maintenance of effective immigration control  is  not  in  the
             public interest, in direct contradiction of the  statement  of
             public  policy  by  Parliament  in  section   117B(1).   Where
             Parliament has itself declared that something is in the public
             interest - see sections 117B(1), (2), (3) and section  117C(1)
             - that is definitive as to that aspect of the public interest.
             But  it  should  be  noted  that   having   regard   to   such
             considerations does not mandate any particular outcome  in  an
             article 8 balancing exercise: a court or tribunal has to  take
             these considerations into account and give  them  considerable
             weight, as  is  appropriate  for  a  definitive  statement  by
             Parliament about a particular aspect of the  public  interest,
             but they are in principle capable of being outweighed by other
             relevant considerations which  may  make  it  disproportionate
             under article 8 for an individual to be removed from the UK.

             Another type of consideration identified in Part 5A  to  which
             regard must be had under section 117A(2) is the  statement  in
             section 117C(6) that 'the public interest requires deportation
             unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and above
             those described in Exceptions 1 and 2' (my emphasis). There is
             a similar  requirement  in  section  117C(3),  on  its  proper
             construction: see NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department at [23]-[27]. In these provisions,  Parliament
             has actually  specified  what  the  outcome  should  be  of  a
             structured consideration of Article 8 in relation  to  foreign
             criminals as set out in section 117C, namely  that  under  the
             conditions  identified  there  the  public  interest  requires
             deportation.  The  'very  compelling  circumstances'  test  in
             section 117C(3) and (6)  provides  a  safety  valve,  with  an
             appropriately  high  threshold  of  application,   for   those
             exceptional cases involving foreign  criminals  in  which  the
             private and family life considerations are so strong  that  it
             would be disproportionate and in violation  of  Article  8  to
             remove them. If, after  working  through  the  decision-making
             framework in section 117C, a court or tribunal concludes  that
             it is a case in which section 117C(3) or  (6)  says  that  the
             public interest 'requires' deportation, it is not open to  the
             court or tribunal to deny this and to  hold  that  the  public
             interest does not require deportation."

     23. In NE-A (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2017] EWCA Civ 239, considered after Hesham Ali  [2016]  UKSC  60,
         Sir Stephen Richards, stated, at [14] and [15]

             "... I see no reason  to  doubt  what  was  common  ground  in
             Rhuppiah and was drawn from NA (Pakistan), that sections 117A-
             117D, taken together, are intended to provide for a structured
             approach to the application of Article 8 which produces in all
             cases a final result which is compatible with  Article  8.  In
             particular, if in working through the structured approach  one
             gets to  section  117C(6),  the  proper  application  of  that
             provision produces a final result compatible with Article 8 in
             all cases to which it applies.  The  provision  contains  more
             than a statement of policy to which regard must be  had  as  a
             relevant  consideration.  Parliament's  assessment  that  "the
             public interest requires deportation  unless  there  are  very
             compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2" is one to which the tribunal is  bound  by
             law to give effect.

             None of this is problematic  for  the  proper  application  of
             Article  8.   That   a   requirement   of   "very   compelling
             circumstances" in order to outweigh the public interest in the
             deportation of foreign criminals sentenced to  at  least  four
             years' imprisonment is compatible with Article 8 was  accepted
             in MF (Nigeria) and in  Hesham  Ali  itself.  Of  course,  the
             provision to that  effect  in  section  117C(6)  must  not  be
             applied as if it contained some  abstract  statutory  formula.
             The context is that of the balancing exercise under Article 8,
             and  the  "very   compelling   circumstances"   required   are
             circumstances  sufficient  to  outweigh  the   strong   public
             interest  in  the  deportation  of   the   foreign   criminals
             concerned. Provided that a tribunal has that context in  mind,
             however, a finding that "very compelling circumstances" do not
             exist in a case to which section 117C(6) applies will  produce
             a final result, compatible with Article  8,  that  the  public
             interest requires  deportation.  There  is  no  room  for  any
             additional element in the proportionality  balancing  exercise
             under Article 8."

     24. When determining the existence of 'very  compelling  circumstances'
         the appellant  is  entitled  to  rely   on  matters  identified  in
         Exception 1 and 2 in s.117C, but he needs to point to  features  of
         his case of a kind mentioned in Exceptions 1  and  2,  or  features
         falling outside the circumstances  described  in  those  Exceptions
         which makes his claim based on  Article  8  especially  strong  (NA
         (Pakistan), at [25] to [29]; RA (s.117C: "unduly  harsh";  offence:
         seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC), at [20]).

     25. In the Court of Appeal decision in  Rhuppiah  [2018]  UKSC  58  (as
         quoted above at paragraph 21 of this decision) Sales LJ referred to
         the "appropriately high threshold of  application"  for  the  'very
         compelling circumstances' test. This chimes with what was  said  in
         Hesham  Ali  [2016]  UKSC  60  (at  [38])  that  'very   compelling
         circumstances' means "a very strong claim indeed." In NA (Pakistan)
         Jackson LJ held, at [33] and [34]

             "Although  there  is  no  'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient.

             The best interests of children certainly carry  great  weight,
             as identified by Lord Kerr in HH v Deputy  Prosecutor  of  the
             Italian Republic [2013] 1 AC 338 at [145]. Nevertheless, it is
             a consequence  of  criminal  conduct  that  offenders  may  be
             separated from their children for many years, contrary to  the
             best interests of those children. The desirability of children
             being with both parents is a commonplace of family life.  That
             is not  usually  a  sufficiently  compelling  circumstance  to
             outweigh  the  high  public  interest  in  deporting   foreign
             criminals."

     26. In RA (Iraq), a decision of the President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
         (IAC), the test in s.117C(6) was described as "very demanding."

             "... The fact that, at this point, a tribunal is  required  to
             engage in a wide-ranging proportionality  exercise,  balancing
             the weight that appropriately falls to be given to factors  on
             the proposed deportee's side of the balance against the weight
             of the public interest, does  not  in  any  sense  permit  the
             tribunal to engage in the  sort  of  exercise  that  would  be
             appropriate in the case of someone who is not within the ambit
             of section 117C. Not only must regard be had  to  the  factors
             set out in section 117B, such as giving  little  weight  to  a
             relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner   that   is
             established when the  proposed  deportee  was  in  the  United
             Kingdom unlawfully, the public interest in the deportation  of
             a foreign criminal is high;  and  even  higher  for  a  person
             sentenced to imprisonment of at least four years."

     27. In RA (Iraq) and MS (s.117C(6):  "very  compelling  circumstances")
         Philippines [2019] UKUT 00122 (IAC),  both  of  which  analysed  KO
         (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, it was held that, in determining  whether
         there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2,  a  Tribunal  will  need  to  have
         regard to the seriousness of the offence and will need to engage in
         a wide-ranging evaluative exercise.

     28. In assessing the existence of very compelling circumstances I  have
         applied the legal principles outlined above. I  will  now  consider
         whether,  holistically  assessed,  there  exist  'very   compelling
         circumstances'.

Assessment

     29. The index offence leading to the making of  the  deportation  order
         involved 2 counts of possession with intent to  supply  heroin  and
         crack cocaine. According to the Sentencing  Remarks  the  appellant
         was arrested with a significant amount of money on his  person  and
         in possession of mobile phones. The Sentencing Judge found that the
         appellant was fully involved in the supply of drugs to  others  and
         was "an important link in the chain, whatever  the  position."  The
         Sentencing Judge made brief reference to  the  appellant's  offence
         relating to possession of a bladed article in 2008 as this showed a
         willingness for the appellant to arm himself with a weapon  with  a
         for his defence not. The Sentencing  Judge  found  that  the  index
         offences represented a significant escalation  in  the  appellant's
         offending. The Sentencing judge accepted  that  the  appellant  had
         pleaded guilty and this reduced the  sentence  he  would  otherwise
         have received by a third. By way of mitigation the Sentencing Judge
         referred to the appellant's personal circumstances, noting that  he
         had "...not had the best of starts in life"  and  that  it  was  "a
         tragedy" in the appellant's case particularly because  he  had  the
         intelligence to do well. Having taken account  of  the  appellant's
         age and what he had accomplished on remand,  the  Sentencing  Judge
         considered it appropriate to sentence the appellant to 2 years  and
         6 months detention in a young offender institution.

     30. While the sentence of 30 months detention is approximately  mid-way
         in the intermediate level  (between  12  months  and  4  years),  a
         conviction for the supply of class A drugs  is  a  serious  matter,
         capable of affecting many individuals and society in general.

     31. In assessing the weight of the  public  interest  I  take  addition
         account of the principle of general deterrence (see MS  (s.117C(6):
         "very compelling  circumstances")  Philippines  [2019]  UKUT  00122
         (IAC), at [49] to [52]). I do not hold against  the  appellant  the
         public interest factors in s.117B(2) & (3). In the appellant's case
         these are neutral factors. I  also  attach  weight  to  the  public
         interest in the maintenance of immigration control, noting  however
         that, while the appellant has never  had  any  leave  to  enter  or
         remain, he entered as a minor and cannot be blamed for his lack  of
         lawful leave. The appellant's relationship with LS  commenced  when
         he was 20 years old and, applying  s.117B(4),  I  must  accordingly
         attach little weight to their relationship.

     32. The appellant is at low risk of reoffending. I remind  myself  that
         the FtJ found the appellant  to  be  "a  different  person  to  the
         individual who committed the crimes in 2008 and 2011", that he  was
         ambitious for a better life and wished to be a role model  for  his
         son.

     33. I have specifically considered the documentary evidence relating to
         the appellant's rehabilitation including, but not limited  to,  the
         Offender Manager letters from  September  and  November  2013,  the
         various certificates and qualifications obtained by  the  appellant
         both in prison and outside prison, and the appellant's  involvement
         with  Kids  Company  which  provided  him  with  outreach  support,
         guidance and therapy.

     34. I take into  account  the  letter  written  by  the  Chair  of  the
         Metropolitan Police Ibero-American Association dated 29 April  2019
         and the May 2019 newsletter issued by the same organisation. I note
         the support provided by the appellant to the organisation  and  the
         Chair's view that the appellant "... has proven himself to  be  one
         of the most talented and innovative young adults working to educate
         young people I have ever supervised. He has been  an  indispensable
         part of our team throughout the planning and preparation for our on-
         time release of the  project."  I  additionally  note  the  Chair's
         opinion that the appellant would be an  invaluable  contributor  to
         the fight against knife crime in London. I additionally  take  into
         account the  letter  from  the  Refugee  Therapy  Centre  dated  28
         February  2018  confirming  the  frequency   of   the   appellant's
         psychotherapy sessions and that he was making gradual  progress.  I
         accept  that  the  appellant  has  undertaken  genuine  efforts  to
         rehabilitate himself, and that he is a reformed  person,  and  that
         his present conduct suggests he is, in Mr  Southey's  words,  'pro-
         social'.

     35. In RA (Iraq) the President of the Upper Tribunal  (IAC)  considered
         arguments relating to the issue of rehabilitation. At [32] and [33]
         he had this to say.

             "As the Court of Appeal pointed out in Danso  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA  Civ  596,  courses
             aimed at rehabilitation,  undertaken  whilst  in  prison,  are
             often unlikely to bear material weight, for the simple  reason
             that they are a  commonplace;  particularly  in  the  case  of
             sexual offenders.

             As a more general point, the fact that an individual  has  not
             committed further offences,  since  release  from  prison,  is
             highly  unlikely  to  have  a  material  bearing,  given  that
             everyone is expected not to commit crime. Rehabilitation  will
             therefore normally do no more than show  that  the  individual
             has returned to the  place  where  society  expects  him  (and
             everyone else) to be. There is, in other  words,  no  material
             weight which ordinarily falls to be given to rehabilitation in
             the proportionality balance (see SE (Zimbabwe) v Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 256,  paragraphs
             48 to 56). Nevertheless, as so often in  the  field  of  human
             rights, one cannot categorically say that rehabilitation  will
             never be  capable  of  playing  a  significant  role  (see  LG
             (Colombia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]
             EWCA Civ 1225). Any judicial departure from  the  norm  would,
             however, need to be fully reasoned."

     36. Mr Southey submitted  that  SE  (Zimbabwe)  was  concerned  with  a
         situation where someone was  still  undergoing  rehabilitation  and
         whether  the  prospect  of  rehabilitation  was  relevant  in   the
         proportionality  assessment.  I  accept  that  SE  (Zimbabwe)   was
         primarily concerned with  someone  who  was  undergoing  continuing
         rehabilitation (see, in particular, [44] to [50]). Mr Southey  also
         submitted that the  Upper  Tribunal's  approach  to  rehabilitation
         focused on the absence of any further  offences  by  an  individual
         after their release from prison and did  not  specifically  address
         other indicators of rehabilitation. I do not however consider  that
         the Upper Tribunal  focused  only  on  the  commission  of  further
         offences  when  considering  rehabilitation.  In   observing   that
         rehabilitation will "... normally do no more  than  show  that  the
         individual has returned to the place where society expects him (and
         everyone else) to be" the Tribunal can only realistically have  had
         in mind a situation where a person's  attitude  and  behaviour  has
         changed such that there was  no  or  little  risk  of  any  further
         offending. Although Danso was specifically  concerned  with  a  sex
         offender who had undertaken courses while in prison and  who  posed
         only a low risk of  further  violent  re-offending,  the  Court  of
         Appeal, in concluding that  the  Upper  Tribunal  did  not  err  in
         attaching limited weight to the issue of rehabilitation, noted that
         there was nothing unusual in undergoing rehabilitative  courses  in
         prison that did significantly reduce the risk of re-offending.

     37. On balance I do accept that the appellant has shown that  he  is  a
         genuinely rehabilitated person, that he has  demonstrated  positive
         engagement in  turning  his  life  around  (such  as  obtaining  an
         accountancy qualification) and in making positive contributions  to
         society (such as his role in the Metropolitan Police Ibero-American
         Association), and that he has rebuilt  his  life.  I  consider  his
         rehabilitation against the circumstances in which he was brought to
         the UK and the traumatic experiences he underwent that led  to  his
         criminality in the first place. I note that he  was  released  from
         immigration detention in July 2012 and that in a period approaching
         7  years  he  has  lived  a  law-abiding  life.  I  find  in  these
         circumstances that rehabilitation does reduce the strength  of  the
         public interest and I attach appropriate weight to it.

     38. Mr Southey accepted that he might be in difficulty  in  seeking  to
         persuade me that that  'very  compelling  circumstances'  exist  in
         reliance only on the impact of the deportation on  the  appellant's
         family life, but he submitted  that  such  impact  was  a  relevant
         factor when considered together with the other  factors  in  issue.
         The appellant has established a strong family life  with  his  wife
         and two children, and it is in the best interest  of  his  children
         that he remains in the UK. the FtJ did not however  find  that  his
         deportation would have an unduly harsh impact on his family in  the
         UK. I have taken account of the evidence  unavailable  to  the  FtJ
         relating to LN's treatment with  Talking  Therapies.  She  attended
         what was generally a group  guided  self-help  programme  based  on
         cognitive behavioural therapy techniques that  was  to  run  for  6
         weeks from March 2018. The records suggest LN was being treated for
         depression. There did not appear to be any  risk  of  self-harm  or
         harm to others, a  protective  factor  included  her  son  and  her
         support system included her mother and the appellant.  The  records
         included a reference to LN's scores having improved, but  her  file
         was closed because she had missed or cancelled appointments.  I  do
         not find the new evidence materially alters the factual conclusions
         of the FtJ relating to the impact of the appellant's deportation on
         LN. I attach appropriate weight to the  impact  on  the  Article  8
         rights of the appellant and his family  in  holistically  assessing
         whether there are 'very compelling circumstances'.

     39. I note that the appellant has acted as the primary  carer  for  NN,
         that the appellant is seen as a 'secure attachment figure'  by  NN,
         and that the appellant is  supported  by  his  wife.  I  take  into
         account that LN relies on the  appellant  for  childcare,  and  the
         FtJ's findings that NN would be distraught if  the  appellant  were
         not part  of  the  family  unit.  I  accept  that  the  appellant's
         immediate family is a close-knit one. I note that LN has  indicated
         that she would  not  relocate  to  Nigeria.  Given  the  background
         materials drawn to my attention  at  the  remaking  hearing  (which
         included extracts from the 2016 US State Department Report relating
         to the difficulties faced by women and children in Nigeria and  the
         substandard of education and health services) I accept Mr Southey's
         submission that LN's decision is a  reasonable  one.  In  assessing
         whether there are  'very  compelling  circumstances'  I  take  full
         account of the serious impact  the  appellant's  deportation  would
         have on the family members, including LN's employment  and  health,
         the practical childcare difficulties  that  would  arise,  and  the
         emotional impact on both LN, NN and LON. I additionally accept that
         a dismissal of the appellant's human rights  claim  may  result  in
         separation between a husband and his wife and children.  There  has
         not however been any suggestion  that  contact  would  be  severed,
         either through remote forms of communication  or  through  periodic
         visits.  I  take  into  account  however   that   such   forms   of
         communication can never substitute for close personal interaction.

     40. Mr Southey submits that the circumstances in  which  the  appellant
         came to be in the UK, his  age  at  the  time,  and  the  abuse  he
         suffered, are all relevant factors to be considered 'in the  round'
         when determining the existence of 'very compelling  circumstances'.
         I agree with this submission, and his submission that these  events
         act as mitigation in  respect  of  the  appellant's  offending.  Mr
         Clarke invited me to find that the  Sentencing  Judge  had  already
         considered the  appellant's  background  and  that  this  had  been
         factored into the sentence. I accept that the Sentencing Judge  did
         have  regard  to  the  appellant's  background  when  deciding  the
         appropriate sentence (see paragraph 29 above), but I have available
         to me more information's relating  to  the  appellant's  background
         than was available to the Probation Service and  Sentencing  Judge.
         Moreover, in SSHD v Barry [2018] EWCA Civ 790, a submission that  a
         judge impermissibly took account of  mitigation  was  rejected.  At
         [57] Singh LJ stated,

             "I do not regard the approach of the FTT  in  this  regard  to
             have been impermissible as a matter of law.  I  do  not  agree
             that questions of mitigation are  totally  irrelevant  to  the
             balancing exercise which the FTT had to perform. Ms  Patry  is
             right to say that questions of mitigation  will  already  have
             played their part in arriving at the appropriate sentence  for
             the underlying offence. However, it must be borne in mind that
             the three categories which are  set  out  in  the  Immigration
             Rules are broad categories. In particular,  the  most  serious
             category applies to any offender who has been sentenced  to  a
             sentence of imprisonment of at least 4  years.  However,  that
             can cover a  wide  range  of  cases.  Although  they  are  all
             serious, they can vary in degrees of seriousness. The criminal
             courts in this country come across some examples of  the  most
             heinous kind, which would be towards the top end of the  range
             envisaged by Category 1. However, in an  appropriate  case,  I
             can see no reason in principle why either aggravating  factors
             or mitigating factors might not be taken into account  by  the
             FTT in assessing the seriousness of the  offence  in  question
             and, accordingly, the  strength  of  the  public  interest  in
             deportation. Similarly, in a case such as the  present,  which
             falls into the intermediate category of  seriousness,  because
             the  sentence  passed  was  between  12  months  and  4  years
             imprisonment, I can see no reason in principle why aggravating
             or mitigating factors may not be taken  into  account  by  the
             FTT."

     41. The appellant was a child when he entered the UK and would not have
         had any control over his circumstances. It has not  been  suggested
         by the respondent that the appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom
         with the intention of breaching the immigration rules. I take  this
         into account in my overall assessment. The FtJ  accepted  that  the
         appellant experienced a traumatic time at the hands of his supposed
         guardian and that he found himself in a situation in which  he  did
         not have the skills to deal. I  accept  that  the  appellant  found
         himself in a difficult situation where he had no control  and  that
         it was in this context that his criminality developed. I find  that
         this does mitigate to some extent against his criminality and, as a
         consequence, against the public  interest  considerations  in  this
         particular  case.  It  also  explains  his  strong  motivation  for
         transforming  his  life  through  the  stability  provided  by  his
         immediate family. The appellant was nevertheless an adult  when  he
         committed  his  index  offence  and  would  have  appreciated   the
         seriousness of drug offending and the damage that it can cause. Nor
         does it follow that, because an individual has suffered trauma  and
         abuse in childhood, they will commit criminal  offences.  Whilst  I
         take full account of the  circumstances  that  contributed  to  the
         appellant's criminality it was still something he chose to do, even
         if he felt he had limited options in life.

     42. Mr Southey submits that the cumulative  effect  of  delays  by  the
         respondent are relevant in respect of 2 of the 3 ways identified in
         EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41. These were set out by Lord  Bingham  at
         [14] and [15].

             "14. It does not, however, follow that delay in the  decision-
             making process is necessarily irrelevant to the  decision.  It
             may, depending on the facts, be relevant in any one  of  three
             ways. First, the applicant may during the period of any  delay
             develop closer personal and social ties and  establish  deeper
             roots in the community than he could have shown  earlier.  The
             longer the period of the delay, the likelier  this  is  to  be
             true. To the extent that it is  true,  the  applicant's  claim
             under article  8  will  necessarily  be  strengthened.  It  is
             unnecessary to  elaborate  this  point  since  the  respondent
             accepts it.

             15.  Delay may be relevant in a second, less obvious, way.  An
             immigrant without leave to  enter  or  remain  is  in  a  very
             precarious situation, liable to be removed at  any  time.  Any
             relationship into which such an applicant enters is likely  to
             be, initially, tentative, being entered into under the  shadow
             of severance by administrative order. This is  the  more  true
             where the other party to the  relationship  is  aware  of  the
             applicant's precarious position.  This  has  been  treated  as
             relevant to the quality of the relationship. Thus in R  (Ajoh)
             v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home   Department   [2007]
             Immigration AR 817,  para  11,  it  was  noted  that  "It  was
             reasonable to expect that both [the applicant] and her husband
             would be aware of her  precarious  immigration  status".  This
             reflects the Strasbourg court's listing of factors relevant to
             the proportionality of  removing  an  immigrant  convicted  of
             crime: "whether the spouse knew about the offence at the  time
             when he or she entered into a family relationship" see Boultif
             v Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR 1179, para 48; Mokrani  v  France
             (2003) 40 EHRR 123, para 30. A relationship  so  entered  into
             may well be imbued with a sense of impermanence. But if months
             pass without a decision  to  remove  being  made,  and  months
             become years, and year succeeds year, it  is  to  be  expected
             that this sense of impermanence will fade and the  expectation
             will grow that if the authorities had intended to  remove  the
             applicant they would have taken steps to do  so.  This  result
             depends on no legal doctrine but on an understanding  of  how,
             in  some  cases,  minds  may  work  and  it  may  affect   the
             proportionality of removal."

     43. The appellant was informed on 14 April 2011  of  his  liability  to
         deportation and  he  was  released  on  licence  on  25  June  2012
         (although he remained in immigration detention  until  July  2012).
         The initial decision to deport him and the decision to  refuse  his
         asylum claim (made in May 2011) were not served  on  him  until  11
         September 2013, a delay of one year and 3 months since his  release
         on licence and 2 years and 5 months since he was initially informed
         of his liability to deportation.  Following  the  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal on 14 October 2014 allowing his appeal  on  the
         basis that it was not in  accordance  with  the  law  there  was  a
         further delay of one year and approximately  2  months  before  the
         respondent unlawfully attempted  to  remove  the  appellant  on  21
         December 2015 and then issued the new decision to deport him on  23
         January 2016. The appellant  made  further  representations  on  22
         February 2016, and the respondent responded to the  submissions  by
         refusing his human rights claim on 22 May 2017, a delay of one year
         and 3 months.

     44. In my 'error of law'  decision  I  found  no  error  in  the  FtJ's
         conclusion that the delays did not reflect a lack  of  interest  by
         the respondent deporting the appellant, but that the  delays  were,
         when cumulatively considered, relatively significant in the context
         of a married man with a young child. Mr Southey submits that, as  a
         result of the delays, the appellant is now in a  stronger  position
         to demonstrate that he is a changed man, and that he has  fortified
         the strength of his article  8  relationships  with  his  wife  and
         through the birth of his 2  children.  The  sense  of  impermanence
         following  the  withdrawal  of  the  first  defective   deportation
         decision lifted somewhat during the unaccountable delay in making a
         fresh  deportation  decision.  Mr  Southey  drew  my  attention  to
         paragraphs 57 and 58 of Uner v Netherlands (2007) 45  E.H.R.R.  14,
         which built upon the earlier decision in Boultif (2001) 33 E.H.R.R.
         50,  setting  out  relevant  criteria  when  assessing  whether  an
         expulsion measure was necessary and proportionate under Article  8.
         These included the nature and seriousness of the offence committed,
         and the time elapsed  since  the  offence  was  committed  and  the
         applicant's conduct during that period.

     45. I accept that, through the 3 periods of delay identified above, the
         appellant has strengthened his Article 8 rights by marrying LN  and
         having 2 children with her. The appellant  however  has  never  had
         lawful leave to remain in the UK and LN became aware of his  lawful
         status before she married him.  Whilst  I  do  accept  that  it  is
         necessary to consider the overall period of delay, each constituent
         period of delay was of a length not uncommon in this  jurisdiction.
         The appellant knew he was liable to be  deported  from  April  2011
         and, but for the delay of  approximately  one  year  and  2  months
         before the 2nd signed deportation decision was issued,  he  and  LN
         have always been aware of the respondent's intention to deport him.
         I nevertheless attach some weight to the respondent's overall delay
         which has placed the appellant  in  a  stronger  position  than  he
         otherwise  would  have  occupied,  and  which  has  given  him  the
         opportunity to demonstrate that he is a changed man.

Conclusion

     46. I have not found this an easy decision to make, and  this  reflects
         the  strong   public   interest   considerations   established   by
         Parliament. In reaching my decision I have taken into  account  the
         caselaw of the ECrtHR including Uner and Boultif, and the  relevant
         criteria identified in those cases. I have balanced  the  weight  I
         can positively attribute to the Article 8 rights of  the  appellant
         and his family against the weight that  must  be  accorded  to  the
         public interest. I remind myself that  the  test  in  s.117C(6)  is
         extremely demanding. Despite the deleterious impact on  the  family
         life enjoyed by the appellant and his wife and children, considered
         together with his  impressive  actions  in  rehabilitating  himself
         having suffered neglect  and  abuse  since  entering  the  UK,  and
         considered together with the respondent's delays, I find there  are
         no 'very compelling circumstances' over and above Exceptions 1  and
         2  in  s.117C  such  as  to  render  the  appellant's   deportation
         disproportionate under Article 8.  The  appellant's  index  offence
         remains serious, as reflected in the length of  his  sentence,  and
         the  public  interest  in  deterrence  remains  strong.  I  am  not
         satisfied that the positive weight I have attached to  the  various
         factors weighing in the  appellant's  favour  outweigh  the  strong
         public interest in his deportation. Given the factual  findings  by
         the FtJ LN and her two children will continue to have available  to
         them support from their extended family in the UK, and the  limited
         medical evidence provided suggests that suitable mechanisms are  in
         place to support LN. for the reasons given above in  my  assessment
         from paragraphs 29  to  45,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  high
         threshold for 'very compelling circumstances' has been met.



Notice of Decision

The appellant's human rights appeal is dismissed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]    10 May 2019
Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


     APPENDIX: Upper Tribunal's 'error of law' decision promulgated on 5
                                December 2018

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05660/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 20 November 2018                  |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     IN
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Southey QC, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. Although no Anonymity Order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
         and no application was made by the appellant's  representative  for
         an anonymity order, given that this appeal involves the appellant's
         relationship with a minor, I consider it  appropriate  to  make  an
         Anonymity Order.

      2. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal J Bartlett  (the  judge),  promulgated  on  23  May  2018,
         dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
         dated 31 May 2017 refusing his Article 8 human rights claim.

   Background

      3. The appellant, a national of Nigeria, was born in 1990.  He  claims
         to have entered the UK in  2003  pursuant  to  an  entry  clearance
         issued to him as the dependent of a "Guardian". I have not  however
         seen any  confirmation  of  this  grant  of  entry  clearance.  The
         appellant first came to the attention of the respondent  in  August
         2004 when JT, a Portuguese national, applied for an  EEA  residence
         card with his spouse, FG, and her three children as his dependents.
         The appellant was identified as one of the children and there was a
         birth certificate  purporting  to  confirm  the  relationship.  The
         application was refused in 2005 as it was not accepted that JT  was
         exercising Treaty rights. The SSHD noted the absence  of  an  entry
         stamp in FG's passport and her marriage to JT was considered bogus.

      4. The appellant met LN, a British citizen, in 2007 and  they  entered
         into a relationship in September 2009. They have a son, NN, born on
         8 May 2013. The appellant and LN married on 12 October 2013.

      5. The appellant received a six-month Supervision Order for  having  a
         blade with a sharp point in the public place in February  2008.  On
         11 March 2011 he was convicted of  2  counts  of  possession  of  a
         controlled drug with intent  to  supply  and  received  a  30-month
         sentence of imprisonment. He made an asylum claim in May  2011  but
         accepts that this  claim  was  fraudulent.  The  asylum  claim  was
         withdrawn in a letter written  by  the  appellant's  solicitors  in
         February 2014. When lodging his protection claim the appellant also
         claimed to be  a  victim  of  human  trafficking.  This  claim  was
         ultimately rejected by the Competent Authority in a decision  dated
         12 September 2012. There was no legal challenge to this decision.

      6. A deportation order was served on the  appellant  on  11  September
         2013 but was withdrawn on 14 October 2014 at an appeal  hearing  as
         it had not been signed. The appellant's appeal was allowed  on  the
         basis that the decision was not in accordance with the law and  the
         case remitted to the respondent for further  consideration.  On  23
         January 2016 the appellant was  served  with  a  lawful  notice  of
         decision  to  deport  him   and,   on   22   February   2016,   his
         representatives  made  further  submissions  in  response  to  this
         decision. The respondent treated these further representations as a
         human rights claim and refused the human rights  claim  on  31  May
         2017. The  appellant  appealed  this  decision  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal pursuant to  s.82  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      7. The  judge  had  before  her  a  significant  number  of  documents
         contained in 3  bundles  (Bundles  A  to  C).  There  were  further
         documents served on the day of the hearing. The documents included,
         inter alia, a 68-page statement from the appellant running  to  147
         paragraphs and dated 12 September 2014, a further  statement  dated
         14 April 2018, a 29-page statement from LN dated  15  August  2014,
         and a further statement from her dated 18 April  2018.  There  were
         also statements from members of LN's family, an Independent  Social
         Worker (ISW) report authored by Peter Horrocks dated  15  September
         2014 and an updating report dated 28 December 2017, a  Pre-Sentence
         Report dated 8 March 2011, an  OASys  Assessment  dated  12  August
         2014, copies of various certificates and qualifications obtained by
         the appellant, and various evidence of the nature  and  quality  of
         the appellant's relationship with his son and partner. The  bundles
         also  contained  background  information  on   Nigeria,   documents
         relating to a cleaning company established by LN, and a letter from
         NN's primary school.

      8. The judge indicated that the witness statements provided were  some
         of the most detailed she had seen in this jurisdiction and that she
         gave them "full consideration and read them carefully."  The  judge
         set out  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  which  included  further
         details of the circumstances of his offending, further  details  of
         his relationship with his partner, and details of his contact  with
         his family in Nigeria. The judge also set  out  the  oral  evidence
         from LN (who was pregnant with their 2nd child),  LN's  sister  AB,
         and LN's mother NM. The judge  set  out  extracts  from  the  ISW's
         reports and an extract from  the  Sentencing  Judges  remarks,  and
         summarised the Reasons for Refusal Letter and the submissions  made
         by both representatives.

      9. The judge accurately referred to the burden and standard  of  proof
         and set out  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  immigration  rules
         relating to deportations, and sections 117A to D of the  2002  Act,
         relating to public interest considerations.

     10. In the section headed 'Decision' the judge indicated that  she  had
         considered all of the evidence "in the  round"  in  coming  to  her
         decision even if it was not expressly referred to in her judgement.
         The judge found that the appellant did not represent  a  danger  to
         the community and  did  not  consequently  uphold  a  certification
         issued  under  section  72  of  the  2002  Act.  In  reaching  this
         conclusion the judge noted that the appellant had  not  engaged  in
         criminal conduct since his sentencing  in  2011  and  that  he  had
         changed his life such that he posed a low risk of reoffending.

     11. The judge appreciated that the question whether there was a  breach
         of Article 8 involved a consideration of paragraphs  398,  399  and
         399A of the immigration rules and section 117A-D of the  2002  Act.
         The judge referred to a number of  relevant  authorities  including
         Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 and NE-A (Nigeria) [2017] EWCA Civ 239.

     12. The  judge  proceeded  to  determine  whether  the  effect  of  the
         appellant's deportation would have an unduly harsh  impact  on  his
         wife  and  child  by  reference  to  both  paragraph  399  of   the
         immigration rules and s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act.

     13. The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  family  and  cultural
         connections to Nigeria as  he  was  in  regular  contact  with  his
         mother, father and adult siblings, and that his family would  offer
         accommodation and assistance to the  appellant  and  his  wife  and
         child if they returned to Nigeria.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
         appellant lived with his family until he was 13 years old when  his
         parents, "for reasons best known to them" arranged for him to go to
         the UK with a relative stranger. The judge found that the appellant
         was abused and neglected by his supposed Guardian  in  the  UK  and
         that his parents told the appellant he had to endure it. The  judge
         stated, at [33],

             "The appellant's evidence is that due to this  neglect,  abuse
             and  lack  of  family  he  became  embroiled  with  gangs  and
             criminality with the end result being his convictions in  2008
             and 2011."

     14. At [34] the judge accepted that the appellant  spent  his  time  in
         prison busy working and studying to obtain qualifications, that  he
         was currently studying for an accounting qualification, that if  he
         had permission to work in the UK  he  would  do  so,  that  he  was
         ambitious for a better life and wished to be a role model  for  his
         son, that he was the primary carer for  his  son  and  a  committed
         father, and that he drank limited alcohol infrequently and did  not
         have an  alcohol  problem.  It  was  for  these  reasons  that  the
         appellant was found to be at low risk of offending. The judge noted
         however, by reference to PF (Nigeria) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  251,  that
         rehabilitation in a non-EEA case was of limited significance as  it
         was just one factor relevant to the public interest.

     15. At [36] the judge referred to her duty under s.55 of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the best interests of  NN.
         The judge noted that NN was 4 years old and had  spent  his  entire
         life in the care of his  mother  and  father.  Although  the  judge
         accepted that LN was the breadwinner in  the  family  she  did  not
         accept that LN worked for 12 hours a day, 6 days a week,  and  gave
         reasons in support of this conclusion. The  judge  found  that  the
         appellant was genuinely a loving father and that his son  would  be
         distraught if separated from him. The judge concluded that it would
         be in NN's best interests to remain  living  with  his  mother  and
         father as a family unit in the UK to enable him to benefit from his
         rights as a British citizen. The judge then reminded  herself  that
         the best interests of children are not  a  paramount  consideration
         and referred to the relevant authority of ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC
         4.

     16. At [38] the judge considered whether it would be unduly  harsh  for
         NN to live in Nigeria. The judge repeated LN's  evidence  that  she
         did not want her son to live in Nigeria and indicated that she  had
         due regard to the ISW's reports. The  judge  summarised  the  ISW's
         description of the appellant's relationships with his wife and  son
         and  noted  that  the  ISW's  identified  concerns  "...  would  be
         applicable to all healthy for-year-olds." The judge commented  that
         the ISW reports contained very few specific findings about  NN  and
         made general observations about how many children seen as different
         would have difficulties. At [39] the judge explained why  it  would
         not be unduly harsh for NN to live in Nigeria. She  noted  that  he
         would, at least initially, be able to live  with  his  grandparents
         and  extended  family,  that  he  had  some  familiarity  with  his
         grandmother and aunt, and that there was an education system and  a
         health system in Nigeria. The judge additionally noted NN's age and
         the stage of his education, and that his focus was on his immediate
         family rather than the wider community.  The  judge  accepted  that
         Nigeria was not a developed country, that not all of Nigeria had  a
         reliable  electricity  supply  or  running  water,  and  that   the
         lifestyle in Nigeria  would  be  of  a  lower  standard  than  that
         available in the UK. The judge accepted  that  NN  would  suffer  a
         culture shock if he were to  move  to  Nigeria  but  he  was  still
         relatively young and would have the assistance of  his  father  and
         extended family. Whilst accepting that any notional move to Nigeria
         would be "... undesirable,  uncomfortable,  difficult,  challenging
         and unwanted", the judge did not find this would  amount  to  undue
         harshness.

     17. At [40] to [43] the judge considered whether  it  would  be  unduly
         harsh for NN  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the  appellant.  In
         concluding that it would not be unduly harsh the judge referred  to
         the distress that this would cause NN and LN and, with reference to
         the ISW's report, that this would have a damaging effect  on  them.
         The judge accepted that it was  understandable  that  LN  would  be
         suffering from stress and anxiety and that she had some mental ill-
         health arising from the  threat  of  the  appellant's  deportation.
         There was however no evidence to suggest that this was  so  serious
         that it required specialist treatment and/or counselling. The judge
         accepted that the appellant "... experienced a  traumatic  time  at
         the hands of his supposed Guardian in the United Kingdom", and that
         in this context he committed crimes leading to his two convictions.
         Taking all relevant considerations in the round the judge concluded
         that it would not be unduly harsh  for  NN  to  remain  in  the  UK
         without the appellant as he would be in the care of his mother  who
         was a committed and loving parent and  would  have  the  assistance
         from her family. The judge additionally  noted  that  communication
         with the appellant would not be severed.

     18. At [44] the judge found that the requirements of  paragraph  399(b)
         of the immigration rules could not be satisfied  as  the  appellant
         was unlawfully present in the UK when he  formed  his  relationship
         with LN. The judge then concluded,  with  reference  to  s.117C(5),
         that the appellant's deportation would not  have  an  unduly  harsh
         impact on LN  and  supported  this  conclusion  with  reasons  that
         included the support that LN would receive from the  appellant  and
         his family if she went to Nigeria and her own resourcefulness,  and
         the support she would receive in the UK from her own family if  she
         decided to remain in this country.

     19. Having found that the appellant could not satisfy the  requirements
         of paragraph 399A of  the  immigration  rules  or  Exception  1  in
         s.117C(4) of the 2002 Act, the judge then found,  with  respect  to
         s.117B, that the appellant was not financially  independent  as  he
         had never worked in the UK and was supported by LN (at [50](i)).

     20. At [51] the judge stated,

             "I  must  consider   whether   there   are   very   compelling
             circumstances over and above those I must  give  consideration
             to under paragraph 399 and 399A. I find  that  there  are  not
             such very compelling circumstances. What has  been  identified
             to me it [sic] is the tragic breakup of the  family.  This  is
             very sad but it is a consequence of deportation."

     21. At [52] the judge considered the submissions  made  in  respect  of
         respondent's alleged  delay.  The  judge  indicated  that  she  had
         considered  EB  (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL  41  and  found   that   the
         respondent's actions were not infected with undue delay. She  noted
         that a deportation order was issued in 2014 but was unsigned.  This
         was clearly an administrative error and "extremely regrettable" but
         the judge  did  not  consider  that  this  was  evidence  that  the
         respondent "... had little interest in deportation the appellant or
         that  the  public  interest  in  the  appellant's  deportation   is
         diminished." Having briefly summarised the various  stages  leading
         to this  appeal  the  judge  did  not  think  that  they  could  be
         characterised as amounting to undue delay.

     22. Finally, at [53], the judge said it was made clear by  the  Supreme
         Court that the immigration rules do not represent a  complete  code
         as regards Article 8, but found, "when all factors are considered",
         that the appellant's deportation was proportionate. The appeal  was
         dismissed.

The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision

     23. The challenge to the  judge's  decision  has  evolved  since  first
         lodged. Following the decision in KO (Nigeria) [2018]  UKSC  53  Mr
         Southey disavows reliance on the ground that argued that the  judge
         erred in her approach to the harshness of the  situation  faced  by
         the appellant's son, and in  particular,  that  there  had  been  a
         failure to take account  of  relevant  matters.  In  light  of  the
         decision in Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58 Mr Southey sought to amend  his
         grounds to argue that the  judge  erred  in  her  approach  to  the
         appellant's means. I considered there to be arguable merit in  this
         challenge, it could not have been raised at an  earlier  time,  and
         there was no objection from Mr Whitwell. I  therefore  allowed  the
         amendment.

     24. I summarise the grounds of challenge.

     25. Mr Southey contends that the judge needed to consider  whether  the
         appellant's  deportation  constituted  a  violation  of  Article  8
         separately from any consideration under the immigration rules. This
         is because the immigration rules  were  not  a  complete  code.  In
         concluding,  at  [53],   that   the   respondent's   decision   was
         proportionate "... for all the reasons set out in  this  decision",
         the judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons  because  the  earlier
         reasoning contained in the decision only addressed matters such  as
         the immigration rules. There  had  been  no  consideration  of  the
         balance that needed to be struck outside of the  immigration  rules
         as required by Hesham Ali.

     26. An associated ground contends that the judge failed to take account
         of  relevant  considerations  in  her  assessment  outside  of  the
         immigration rules, such  as  the  traumatic  circumstances  of  the
         appellant having been trafficked into the UK as a child, his active
         rehabilitation and the  low  risk  he  posed  to  the  public,  the
         respondent's delay, the clear best interests of NN and the  support
         network  available  to  the  appellant  in  the  UK.  The   judge's
         assessment at [53] disclosed little reasoning in respect  of  these
         issues outside the  immigration  rules  and  only  focused  on  the
         breakup of the family. It was  further  submitted  that  the  judge
         erred  in  her  approach  to  the   issue   of   'very   compelling
         circumstances' because there was no reason why  the  breakup  of  a
         family could not reach this test,  particularly  when  account  was
         taken of the circumstances in which the appellant  arrived  in  the
         UK.

     27. In reliance on Regina (R) v Chief Constable of  Greater  Manchester
         Police and Another [2018] UKSC 47 Mr Southey contends that, because
         the proportionality of the respondent's decision was in issue,  one
         had to ultimately focus on the cogency of  the  judge's  conclusion
         and that, considering the appellant's circumstances in  the  round,
         it was apparent that there were very compelling  circumstances  and
         that relevant factors were  not  considered  as  a  package,  which
         undermined the cogency of the judge's conclusions.

     28. Mr Southey submits that the judge erred in her approach to the best
         interests of the child.  The  judge  did  not  adopt  a  legitimate
         approach at [37] when she attached limited weight  to  family  life
         because it was established at a time when  the  appellant's  status
         was precarious. NN should not be blamed for the appellant's lack of
         status and precarious status is not relevant to a child (SSHD v  SC
         (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 2112). It was further submitted  that  no
         express  consideration  was  given  to  NN's  best  interests  when
         deciding whether it would be unduly harsh for him to live either in
         the UK without the appellant or in Nigeria, and that no account was
         taken of the submissions that the education and health  systems  in
         Nigeria were significantly inferior to that in the UK. In his  oral
         submissions Mr Southey submitted that the  SWR's  report  disclosed
         the extensive role played by the appellant in caring  for  his  son
         and that the judge failed to undertake a sufficient  assessment  of
         what constituted NN's best interests, including the inferior nature
         of the health and educational system in Nigeria.

     29. It is additionally argued  that  the  judge  unlawfully  failed  to
         assess whether  the  appellant  was  a  victim  of  trafficking  in
         circumstances where there was good reason to believe that  he  was.
         Mr Southey submitted, in reliance on ES  (s82  NIA  2002;  negative
         NRM) Albania [2018] UKUT 00335 (IAC), that the judge  was  entitled
         to make findings regarding trafficking and that  the  circumstances
         in which  the  appellant  arrived  in  the  UK  and  offended  were
         obviously relevant to the issues arising  under  Article  8.  There
         were said to be flaws in the Competent Authority's decision  as  FG
         was subsequently convicted of fraud. It  appeared  that  the  judge
         accepted the factual basis upon which  the  trafficking  claim  was
         made, and that there were important rights accruing to  victims  of
         trafficking including the right to be provided with assistance, and
         that the appellant was unlikely to receive appropriate treatment in
         Nigeria. It was also significant that the  appellant  required  and
         continues to require significant therapy, implying that he is still
         undergoing psychological recovery.  The  support  provided  by  his
         family constituted an essential part of his rehabilitation. It  was
         further submitted that  there  was  some  flexibility  in  deciding
         whether limited weight should be given to a family life  which  had
         been established when one of the parties'  immigration  status  was
         precarious if, as a victim of trafficking,  the  appellant  entered
         the UK as a child and built up a family life with  those  providing
         him with support  following  his  trafficking  experience.  It  was
         further argued that the question whether the appellant was a victim
         of trafficking was potentially a compelling circumstance, one  that
         had not been considered by the judge. This should have formed  part
         of the judge's assessment  of  the  existence  of  very  compelling
         circumstances or of her assessment of proportionality  outside  the
         immigration rules.

     30. The judges approach to the delay argument was  flawed  because  she
         failed to take account of the full period of delay (the deportation
         order was served on 11 September 2013, and, more  importantly,  the
         appellant was released from prison on  22  June  2012).  The  delay
         between the appellant's release from prison and the appeal  hearing
         was a particularly significant factor in assessing  proportionality
         because it implied that the respondent did not regard the appellant
         to be sufficiently high-risk that the public interest required  his
         deportation and detracted from the public interest, and because  it
         allowed the appellant's community ties to strengthen  and  provided
         an opportunity to  test  his  rehabilitation.  Nor  was  there  any
         mention by the judge that LN was pregnant  with  their  2nd  child,
         which occurred during the respondent's delay.

     31. The judge erred in her approach to the issue of means as she  found
         that he was no financially independent because he was supported  by
         his wife. In Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58 the Supreme Court held that  a
         person could be financially independent well dependent upon  a  3rd
         party (at [57]). This error was  material  as  it  appeared  to  be
         accepted that the appellant was supported by his wife.

Discussion

     32. I do not accept Mr Southey's submission that the judge erred in law
         by failing to consider Article 8 outside the immigration  rules.  I
         fully accept that the immigration rules are not a complete code, as
         established in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60.  This  case  however  was
         only concerned with the immigration rules and  not  the  amendments
         that introduced s.117A  to  D  of  the  2002  Act.  In  Rhuppiah  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  803,
         Sales LJ stated, at [45], (a point undisturbed  on  appeal  to  the
         Supreme Court)

             "It is common ground that the starting point for consideration
             of the proper construction of Part 5A of the 2002 Act is  that
             sections 117A-117D, taken together, are  intended  to  provide
             for a structured approach to  the  application  of  Article  8
             which produces in all cases a final result which is compatible
             with, and not in violation of, Article 8. In that regard, both
             sides affirmed the approach to interpretation of  Part  5A  to
             ensure compliance with Article 8 as explained by this court in
             NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2016] EWCA Civ 662, in particular at [26] and [31]."

     33.  Then at [49] and [50] Sales LJ held,

             "... Section 117A(2)  does  not  have  the  effect  that,  for
             example, a court or tribunal has a discretion to say that  the
             maintenance of effective immigration control  is  not  in  the
             public interest, in direct contradiction of the  statement  of
             public  policy  by  Parliament  in  section   117B(1).   Where
             Parliament has itself declared that something is in the public
             interest - see sections 117B(1), (2), (3) and section  117C(1)
             - that is definitive as to that aspect of the public interest.
             But  it  should  be  noted  that   having   regard   to   such
             considerations does not mandate any particular outcome  in  an
             article 8 balancing exercise: a court or tribunal has to  take
             these considerations into account and give  them  considerable
             weight, as  is  appropriate  for  a  definitive  statement  by
             Parliament about a particular aspect of the  public  interest,
             but they are in principle capable of being outweighed by other
             relevant considerations which  may  make  it  disproportionate
             under article 8 for an individual to be removed from the UK.

             Another type of consideration identified in Part 5A  to  which
             regard must be had under section 117A(2) is the  statement  in
             section 117C(6) that 'the public interest requires deportation
             unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and above
             those described in Exceptions 1 and 2' (my emphasis). There is
             a similar  requirement  in  section  117C(3),  on  its  proper
             construction: see NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department at [23]-[27]. In these provisions,  Parliament
             has actually  specified  what  the  outcome  should  be  of  a
             structured consideration of Article 8 in relation  to  foreign
             criminals as set out in section 117C, namely  that  under  the
             conditions  identified  there  the  public  interest  requires
             deportation.  The  'very  compelling  circumstances'  test  in
             section 117C(3) and (6)  provides  a  safety  valve,  with  an
             appropriately  high  threshold  of  application,   for   those
             exceptional cases involving foreign  criminals  in  which  the
             private and family life considerations are so strong  that  it
             would be disproportionate and in violation  of  Article  8  to
             remove them. If, after  working  through  the  decision-making
             framework in section 117C, a court or tribunal concludes  that
             it is a case in which section 117C(3) or  (6)  says  that  the
             public interest 'requires' deportation, it is not open to  the
             court or tribunal to deny this and to  hold  that  the  public
             interest does not require deportation."

     34. In NE-A (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2017] EWCA Civ 239, considered after Hesham Ali  [2016]  UKSC  60,
         Sir Stephen Richards, stated, at [14] and [15]

             "In my judgment, the analysis of section 117C(6)  in  Rhuppiah
             is correct and should be followed. There is  no  inconsistency
             between that analysis and what was said  in  Hesham  Ali.  The
             focus in Hesham Ali, as is conceded, was on the Rules: indeed,
             Lord Reed noted in terms at paragraph 2 of his  judgment  that
             it  was  unnecessary  to  consider  the  amendments   to   the
             legislation effected by the Immigration  Act  2014,  i.e.  the
             provisions of Part 5A of the 2002 Act. Moreover,  integral  to
             Lord Reed's reasoning was that the Rules "are not law ...  but
             a  statement  of  the  Secretary  of  State's   administrative
             practice" and they "do not therefore possess the  same  degree
             of democratic legitimacy as legislation  made  by  Parliament"
             (paragraph 17; see also paragraph 53); and that  they  do  not
             govern appellate decision-making, although they  are  relevant
             to the determination of appeals (paragraph 41). Part 5A of the
             2002 Act, by contrast,  is  primary  legislation  directed  to
             tribunals and governing their decision-making in  relation  to
             Article  8  claims  in  the  context  of  appeals  under   the
             Immigration Acts. I see no reason to  doubt  what  was  common
             ground in Rhuppiah and was  drawn  from  NA  (Pakistan),  that
             sections 117A-117D, taken together, are  intended  to  provide
             for a structured approach to  the  application  of  Article  8
             which produces in all cases a final result which is compatible
             with Article 8. In  particular,  if  in  working  through  the
             structured approach one gets to section  117C(6),  the  proper
             application  of  that  provision  produces  a   final   result
             compatible with Article 8 in all cases to  which  it  applies.
             The provision contains more than  a  statement  of  policy  to
             which  regard  must  be  had  as  a  relevant   consideration.
             Parliament's assessment that  "the  public  interest  requires
             deportation unless there are  very  compelling  circumstances,
             over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2"  is  one
             to which the tribunal is bound by law to give effect.

             None of this is problematic  for  the  proper  application  of
             Article  8.   That   a   requirement   of   "very   compelling
             circumstances" in order to outweigh the public interest in the
             deportation of foreign criminals sentenced to  at  least  four
             years' imprisonment is compatible with Article 8 was  accepted
             in MF (Nigeria) and in  Hesham  Ali  itself.  Of  course,  the
             provision to that  effect  in  section  117C(6)  must  not  be
             applied as if it contained some  abstract  statutory  formula.
             The context is that of the balancing exercise under Article 8,
             and  the  "very   compelling   circumstances"   required   are
             circumstances  sufficient  to  outweigh  the   strong   public
             interest  in  the  deportation  of   the   foreign   criminals
             concerned. Provided that a tribunal has that context in  mind,
             however, a finding that "very compelling circumstances" do not
             exist in a case to which section 117C(6) applies will  produce
             a final result, compatible with Article  8,  that  the  public
             interest requires  deportation.  There  is  no  room  for  any
             additional element in the proportionality  balancing  exercise
             under Article 8."

     35.  For the reasons clearly set out in the above extracts it is  clear
         that the proportionality assessment under  Article  8  takes  place
         within the 'very compelling circumstances'  provisions  of  s.117C.
         There was no requirement for the judge to consider  any  additional
         element in the proportionality balancing exercise, as she purported
         to do at [53]. Given that the factors she  considered  included  an
         assessment of  very  compelling  circumstances  and  the  statutory
         factors in Part 5A of the 2002 Act, she did not misdirect herself.

     36. I am not persuaded that the  judge  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
         consider whether the appellant was a  victim  of  trafficking.  The
         respondent's  bundle  contained  the  decision  of  the   Competent
         Authority. I have considered the Competent Authority's decision  in
         detail. Although  there  were  'reasonable  grounds'  to  initially
         believe the  appellant  may  have  been  trafficked  the  Competent
         Authority concluded, in a  Conclusive  Grounds  decision  dated  12
         September 2012, that he was not  the  victim  of  trafficking.  The
         appellant was not found by the Competent Authority to be a credible
         witness. The account given by him in the September 2012 decision is
         significantly at odds with his claim to  be  in  contact  with  his
         family  in  Nigeria.  The  Competent   Authority's   decision   was
         adequately reasoned, and disclosed proper  direction  according  to
         the appropriate legal provisions. It  is  also  apparent  that  the
         Competent   Authority   applied   the   appropriate   'balance   of
         probabilities' standard of proof.  There  was  no  judicial  review
         challenge to the Competent Authority's decision.

     37. In Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  MS  (Pakistan)
         [2018] EWCA Civ 594, a  decision  decided  before  the  significant
         amendments to the appeal regime  wrought  by  the  Immigration  Act
         2014, Lord Justice Flaux held, at [69] and [70],

             "In my judgment, it is absolutely  clear  that  the  Court  of
             Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) was limiting the  circumstances  in
             which, on a statutory appeal against a  removal  decision,  an
             appellant can  mount  an  indirect  challenge  to  a  negative
             trafficking decision by the authority  (in  the  circumstances
             where the appellant has not challenged it by way  of  judicial
             review), to where the trafficking decision can be demonstrated
             to be perverse or irrational or one which was not open to  the
             authority, those expressions being effectively synonymous  for
             present purposes. Mr Lewis is correct  that  there  is  a  two
             stage approach. First, a determination whether the trafficking
             decision is perverse or irrational or one which was  not  open
             to the authority and second, only if it is, can the  appellant
             invite the Tribunal to re-determine  the  relevant  facts  and
             take account of subsequent evidence since the decision of  the
             authority was made.

             Of  course,  a  trafficking  decision,  whether  positive   or
             negative, may  well  be  relevant  to  the  issue  before  the
             Tribunal  as  to  the  lawfulness  of  the  removal  decision.
             However, an appellant can  only  invite  the  tribunal  to  go
             behind the trafficking decision and re-determine  the  factual
             issues as to whether trafficking has in fact occurred  if  the
             decision  of  the  authority  is  shown  to  be  perverse   or
             irrational or one which was not open to it.  This  is  clearly
             what Longmore LJ was saying in the last two sentences of  [18]
             of his judgment."

     38.  Mr Southey relies on ES and submits that the change in the  appeal
         regime distinguishes MS (Pakistan)  as  the  right  of  appeal  now
         attaches to a refusal of a human rights claim and not a decision to
         remove, and because it is no longer possible for a  judge  to  find
         that a decision is 'not in accordance with the  law'  as  the  only
         grounds available are, inter alia, that the refusal  of  the  human
         rights claim is unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act
         1998. Whilst I accept that the changes are as stated by Mr Southey,
         I am not persuaded that they render MS (Pakistan)  inapplicable  to
         the instant appeal. The principle reason identified  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal in ES for distinguishing MS (Pakistan) relied on the  UK's
         obligations under the Refugee Convention and the lower standard  of
         proof (the 'real risk' standard) in protection claims (see [27] and
         [30] to [34] of ES). The standard of proof in human rights  claims,
         such as the underlying claim in the present appeal, is the  balance
         of  probabilities,  the  same  standard  as  that  applied  by  the
         Competent Authority. Given that the instant appeal does not involve
         the Refugee Convention and the lower standard of proof, I  consider
         myself bound by the Court of Appeal's decision.

     39. Mr  Southey  additionally  relies  on  FG's  conviction  for  fraud
         subsequent to  the  Competent  Authority's  decision.  Although  my
         attention was  not  drawn  to  any  independent  evidence  of  FG's
         conviction, I have no reason to doubt the assertion  that  she  was
         subsequently convicted of fraud. It is however  apparent  that  the
         Competent Authority were aware  of  the  concerns  surrounding  the
         alleged  relationship  between  JT  and  FG,  and  therefore   FG's
         character, as the EEA residence  permits  applications  made  on  4
         August 2004 were refused on 19 January 2005 on the basis  that  the
         marriage was bogus. I do not find that  the  subsequent  conviction
         materially  undermines  the   Competent   Authority's   conclusion,
         especially when one considers the significant  differences  in  the
         account given by  the  appellant  to  the  Competent  Authority  in
         comparison to his present account of events.

     40. I note further the absence of clear evidence before the  First-tier
         Tribunal that the therapy received by the appellant related to  the
         circumstances of his entry and initial  residence  in  the  UK.  Mr
         Southey relied on a letter from the Refugee Therapy  Centre,  dated
         28 February 2018, but this indicated that the organisation did  not
         provide reports for external agencies in any circumstances  because
         of a wish to keep its therapeutic surface for people's mental well-
         being and not for practical issues such as immigration matters. The
         letter confirmed the frequency  of  the  appellant's  psychotherapy
         sessions and that he was making gradual progress.  I  am  satisfied
         the judge did not materially err in law in failing to consider  for
         herself whether the appellant was a victim of trafficking. Had  she
         done so, she would have misdirected herself in law.

     41. I do not accept Mr Southey's submission that the  judge  failed  to
         engage in an adequate assessment of NN's best interests. There  was
         no requirement for the judge to refer to or replicate  all  of  the
         ISW's findings. It is sufficiently  clear,  having  considered  the
         decision holistically, that the judge  lawfully  engaged  with  and
         took account of the ISW's report and that this fed into the judge's
         assessment of the child's best interests. At [36] the  judge  noted
         the principal elements necessary in undertaking a 'best  interests'
         assessment including NN's age, that he resided all  his  life  with
         his parents, that his mother worked full-time hours, that  when  NN
         is not at school he  is  cared  for  by  the  appellant,  that  the
         appellant is a loving father, that NN would be distraught by  being
         separated from the appellant, and that as a British citizen it  was
         in NN's best interests to remain with both his parents in  the  UK.
         Although the judge did not expressly mention the inferior nature of
         the  Nigerian  health  and  education  system  or  the  challenging
         environment in that country in [36], it is irresistibly clear  that
         the judge appreciated the advantages NN would  enjoy  in  terms  of
         health and education when noting that, if he resided in the UK,  he
         would be able to benefit from all  that  citizenship  entails.  The
         judge did, in any event, make express reference to the existence of
         an  education  system  and  health  system  in  Nigeria,  and   the
         unreliability of electricity supply or running water in  all  parts
         of Nigeria, at [39], albeit in the context of  an  undue  harshness
         assessment. This suggests that the judge was, at all times, mindful
         of these factors.

     42. Nor am I persuaded that the judge  failed  to  consider  NN's  best
         interests when assessing whether the appellant's deportation  would
         have an  unduly  harsh  impact  on  the  child.  Having  previously
         identified NN's best interests at [36], it is necessarily  implicit
         in the subsequent assessment of undue harshness, at [37]  to  [43],
         that the judge bore in mind the child's  best  interests.  This  is
         particularly apparent at [39] and [43] when the judge considers  in
         detail NN's circumstances if he were  to  relocate  to  Nigeria  or
         remain in the UK.

     43. Mr Southey criticises the judge's accordance of 'due weight' to the
         fact that the appellant had built his family life with LN and NN in
         the full knowledge that he had no status to remain in the  UK.  The
         paragraph begins, "in relation to my consideration  of  the  issues
         below..." The issues  then  considered  "below"  related  to  undue
         harshness. I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge  inappropriately
         attached limited weight to the appellant's  relationship  with  his
         son in the context of a best interests assessment,  which  occurred
         in the preceding paragraph. I bear in mind that,  in  his  skeleton
         argument (paragraph 5), Mr Southey abandoned the ground that argued
         that the judge erred in  her  approach  to  the  harshness  of  the
         situation faced by NN.

     44. I do have  some  concern  that,  by  giving  "due  weight"  to  the
         appellant's relationship with his son because it was established in
         the full knowledge that he was present unlawfully,  the  judge  may
         have attached less weight to the father-son  relationship.  Neither
         sections 117B(4) or (5) require the attachment of little weight  to
         a family life relationship between a parent and child.  Whilst  the
         judge was undoubtedly entitled (and was indeed obliged)  to  attach
         little weight to the private life established by the  appellant  in
         the UK, and to the family life relationship with LN, the same  does
         not, at least by reference to s.117B, extend  to  his  relationship
         with NN, and Zoumbas [2013] 1 WLR 3690 makes it clear that a  child
         must not be blamed for matters for which  he  is  not  responsible,
         such as a parent's conduct. The judge does however consider  s.117B
         at [50], and, in her assessment in this context, does not refer  to
         NN, suggesting that she has not reduced the weight she attached  to
         the father-son relationship because it  was  established  when  the
         appellant was present unlawfully. The judge, in  any  event,  found
         the relationship between the appellant and NN to be strong [36] and
         demonstrably attach significant weight to that relationship.

     45.  Mr  Southey  helpfully  went  through  the  chronology  of  events
         supporting his delay  argument.  I  note  in  particular  that  the
         appellant claimed asylum in May  2011,  that  he  was  released  on
         licence in June 2012, but the deportation decision was made  on  11
         September 2013, that the first-tier Tribunal allowed his appeal  on
         the basis that it was not in accordance with the law on 10  October
         2014, that the respondent attempted to remove the appellant  on  21
         December 2015 and that the new decision to deport him was  made  on
         23 January  2016,  that  he  made  further  representations  on  22
         February 2016, and that the respondent responded to the submissions
         by refusing his human rights claim on 22 May 2017.

     46. Although the appellant was released on licence in  June  2012,  the
         initial decision to deport him  and  the  decision  to  refuse  his
         asylum claim were not served on him  until  11  September  2013,  a
         delay of one year and 3 months. Mr Southey accepts that  any  delay
         by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  listing  the  appeal  cannot  be
         attributed to the respondent. Following the decision of the  First-
         tier Tribunal on 14 October 2014 there was a further delay  of  one
         year and approximately 2 months before  the  respondent  unlawfully
         attempted to remove the appellant and then issued the new  decision
         to deport him. Following the appellant's further representations in
         February 2016, there was a further delay of one year and  3  months
         until the respondent made his decision that was the subject of  the
         appeal before the judge.

     47. The judge considered the issue of delay at  [52],  concluding  that
         there was no 'undue delay'. 'Undue' generally means unwarranted  or
         excessive. It is not apparent from  the  decision  what  particular
         periods  of  delay  were  considered  by  the  judge,  and  it   is
         unfortunate that she did  not  identify  the  relevant  periods  in
         greater detail given the prominence of  these  submissions  in  the
         arguments presented to her.  Although  the  judge  did  set  out  a
         general chronology of events at [2], she later  erroneously  stated
         that the first deportation order was issued in 2014 when it was  in
         fact issued in September 2013. The delays in excess of  a  year  as
         described above are not uncommon in this  jurisdiction,  and  given
         that each individual period of delay was, at most,  a  year  and  3
         months, I find the judge was entitled to conclude that  the  delays
         did not reflect a lack of interest by the respondent  in  deporting
         the appellant, or that the public interest was thereby  diminished.
         The  delays  were  nevertheless,  when   cumulatively   considered,
         relatively significant in the context of a married man with a young
         child. I therefore accept that the cumulative effect of the  delays
         allowed the appellant's community ties to strengthen and that, even
         though they were aware  of  his  extremely  precarious  immigration
         status, it allowed  NL  to  become  pregnant.  It  is  not  however
         apparent that the judge took this consequence of  the  delays  into
         account. I find this constitutes an  error  of  law,  although  its
         materiality remains to be considered.

     48. I additionally see  some  merit  in  Mr  Southey's  argument  that,
         through no fault of her  own,  the  judge  misdirected  herself  in
         holding that the appellant was not financially independent  because
         he was supported by LN. I do not read the Supreme Court's  decision
         in Rhuppiah as departing from the Court of Appeal's conclusion that
         the fact of financial independence is, at most, a  neutral  factor.
         The  judge  however,  in  finding  that  the  appellant   was   not
         financially independent, actively held this against him. It  became
         a  further  factor  in  favour  of  the  public  interest  in   the
         appellant's deportation. Following  Rhuppiah,  the  judge  was  not
         entitled to  hold  this  particular  public  interest  against  the
         appellant. I am not however persuaded that this error, on its  own,
         was capable of materially undermining  the  sustainability  of  the
         judge's decision. This is a relatively small factor in the face  of
         what  were  otherwise  strong  public  interest  factors   in   the
         appellant's deportation.

     49. In assessing whether the judge erred in her overall proportionality
         assessment (with reference to the 'very  compelling  circumstances'
         test) I have regard to the conclusions  of  the  Supreme  Court  in
         Regina (R) v Chief  Constable  of  Greater  Manchester  Police  and
         Another, and note that an error of law may be disclosed  not  by  a
         specific error of principle in a narrow sense,  but  because  of  a
         flaw  in  the  reasoning  underlying  the   First-tier   Tribunal's
         conclusion.

     50. whilst I am not persuaded that the judge erred in law in failing to
         determine whether the appellant was a victim of trafficking, it  is
         nevertheless clear from the decision, read as  a  whole,  that  she
         accepted that the appellant experienced a "traumatic  time  at  the
         hands of his supposed guardian", who abused and neglected him.  The
         judge noted, at  [43],  that  it  was  in  this  context  that  the
         appellant  committed  crimes  and  got  involved  in  a  gang.  The
         circumstances in which the appellant came to the UK, as a  13-year-
         old boy leaving his family and accompanying a relative stranger who
         mistreated  him,  whilst  not   excusing   his   criminality,   may
         nevertheless constitute a relevant consideration  when  determining
         the existence of 'very compelling circumstances'. Whilst the  judge
         was aware of this when assessing the issue of undue  harshness,  it
         is not apparent from her brief assessment at  [51]  that  she  took
         this into account.

     51. I further accept Mr Southey's criticism that the judge's assessment
         of 'very compelling circumstances' only referred to the breakup  of
         the family. Whilst this was undoubtedly  an  extremely  significant
         factor, there were other factors relevant to a lawful assessment. I
         have already mentioned the circumstances  in  which  the  appellant
         entered and resided in the UK and which constituted the context for
         his  drift  into  criminality.  When  assessing  'very   compelling
         circumstances', the judge did  not  take  express  account  of  the
         significant efforts undertaken by the appellant to  turn  his  life
         around or his length of residence in  the  UK,  or  the  cumulative
         delays  by  the  respondent  and  the  impact  this  had   on   the
         establishment of further family and private life ties. Although the
         judge clearly made positive findings in respect of the  appellant's
         rehabilitation, I am unable to find, even by  way  of  implication,
         that this was considered  in  the  assessment  of  very  compelling
         circumstances. Although the judge  may  well  have  been  entitled,
         having lawfully considered these other factors,  to  conclude  that
         they did not amount to very compelling circumstances and  therefore
         would not result in a disproportionate breach of Article  8,  I  am
         not satisfied that this would have been an inevitable conclusion. I
         consequently  find  that  these  identified  errors,   cumulatively
         considered, render the decision unsafe such that  it  must  be  set
         aside.

     52. I see no reason in disturbing the  factual  findings  made  by  the
         judge. These factual findings are retained.  I  am  aware  that  an
         application has been made pursuant to rule 15 (2A) of the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to adduce fresh evidence, and
         I am aware that the appellant's 2nd child  has  now  been  born.  I
         grant permission for the new material to be  considered.  In  these
         circumstances I consider it appropriate to remake the decision at a
         further hearing.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by material  errors  on  points
of law and is set aside.

The decision will be remade at a further hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]    4 December 2018
Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

