
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/05047/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15 August 2017                        |On 24 August 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before


                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   Mr Abdesslam Sheikheddine Adoud Marjan
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONNOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation; no attendance


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department,  who
    appeals with the  permission  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Adio allowing on Article 3
    grounds the appeal of Mr Marjan against  her  decision  to  refuse  his
    protection and human rights claims.  The Secretary of State's  decision
    was made on 9 May 2016.

 2. It is more convenient to refer to the parties as they were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  We shall therefore refer from now on to Mr Marjan
    as the appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal declined to make an  anonymity  direction.   No
    such direction was sought from us and we saw no reason to make one.

 4. The background to this appeal is set out in the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and the respondent's notice of decision and we shall therefore
    only set out a concise summary.  It is common ground that the appellant
    is a national of Sudan.  On four occasions between September  2011  and
    May 2012 the appellant claimed asylum in the UK and  on  each  occasion
    his application was refused on the ground that he should  claim  asylum
    in Italy to where he was removed.

 5. He next came to the attention of the authorities when he was  convicted
    at Isleworth Crown Court on two counts of robbery and  sentenced  to  a
    total of six years' imprisonment.  The appellant made a  further  claim
    for asylum whilst serving his sentence and, after initially  indicating
    he wished to withdraw it, changed his mind.  In view of the appellant's
    conviction, the respondent certified the asylum claim under section  72
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 6. The appellant claimed to be at risk on return to Sudan because  he  had
    been a driver for the Justice and Equality Movement ("JEM").   He  said
    he was on a wanted list so he fled  to  Libya.   Although  he  did  not
    mention it in his interview, the appellant also claimed  to  have  been
    detained and tortured.

 7. The respondent did not believe his account in view of  the  significant
    discrepancies contained in it and concluded he would not be at risk  on
    return.

 8. Judge Adio heard oral evidence from the appellant, whom he treated as a
    vulnerable witness in view of a medical report indicating the appellant
    required in-patient psychiatric assessment and treatment.   Judge  Adio
    upheld the section 72 certificate and dismissed the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.  In assessing the claim under Article 3,  the  judge  did  not
    consider the appellant's claim other than in relation to  his  fear  of
    ill-treatment on ethnicity grounds.

 9. The judge concluded the appellant had shown on the  lower  standard  of
    proof that he was a non-Arab Darfuri.   He  noted  that  there  was  no
    evidence to  displace  the  country  guidance  given  in  AA  (Non-Arab
    Darfuris - relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056  and  MM  (Darfuris)
    Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010 (IAC) and allowed the appeal.

10. The respondent's grounds seeking permission to appeal argued Judge Adio
    had erred in finding the appellant was a non-Arab  Darfuri,  which  had
    not been conceded in the reasons for refusal letter.  The appellant had
    stated he was from the Al Nuba tribe.  Judge Adio had not addressed the
    credibility challenge mounted by the respondent and he  had  not  given
    adequate reasons for his conclusion on the appellant's ethnicity.

11. Permission to appeal was granted because it was arguable that the judge
    had erred in finding the appellant to be a non-Arab Darfuri when he did
    not come from Darfur.  It was also arguable he had  given  insufficient
    reasons for finding the appellant was not of Arab ethnicity.

12. The appellant filed a Rule 25 response opposing the  appeal.   However,
    he did not attend the hearing before us. We have received a letter from
    his  former  solicitors  stating  they   were   no   longer   receiving
    instructions from the appellant.   In  the  circumstances,  we  saw  no
    reason not to proceed with the hearing.

13. We heard submissions from Mr Melvin on the question  of  whether  Judge
    Adio made a material error of law.  We have recorded his  arguments  in
    full in our record of the proceedings.

14. Mr Melvin developed the grounds seeking permission to appeal.  He  made
    two points.  Firstly, Judge Adio failed to make  adequate  findings  on
    the appellant's ethnicity.  Secondly,  the  judge  failed  to  consider
    evidence before him that the country guidance should not  be  followed.
    Mr Melvin agreed that he only needed to succeed on one of those grounds
    for the decision to be set aside and we have only found it necessary to
    consider his first point.

15. Having considered the submissions, we decided to allow the respondent's
    appeal and to set aside the decision of Judge Adio  for  the  following
    reasons.

16. We note  in  detail  the  judge's  reasoning,  which  is  contained  in
    paragraphs 16 and 17 of his decision.

17. In our view, there are a number of deficiencies in this reasoning which
    vitiate the decision.  Firstly, it was incumbent on the judge  to  make
    his  findings  after  giving  full  consideration  to  the  credibility
    challenge mounted by the respondent.  The judge upheld the  section  72
    certificate (a decision not challenged by the  appellant)  and  treated
    this as being a full disposal of the claim.

18. The judge then turned his attention to Article 3 on the discrete  basis
    of the appellant's ethnicity without making any findings on  the  claim
    put forward by the appellant that he feared ill-treatment by reason  of
    his perceived political opinions.  It is trite law  that  the  evidence
    must be considered in the round and, by adopting this route, the  judge
    left out of account the impact of any adverse  credibility  finding  on
    the issue of the appellant's ethnicity.  That is a serious error in our
    view.

19. Secondly, we find it difficult to understand on what  basis  the  judge
    was able to arrive at the conclusion that the appellant was  reasonably
    likely to be perceived to be a  non-Arab  Darfuri.  He  does  not  give
    reasons for his observation that the appellant is clearly not of Arabic
    origin.

20. We accept that the issue  was  one  of  ethnic  origin  as  opposed  to
    geographical location as explained in MM.  The appellant has claimed to
    be a non-Arab.  However, the appellant has not, as far as we  can  see,
    ever self-identified as a non-Arab Darfuri prior to the hearing in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In his screening  interview  dated  20  September
    2011 he gave his ethnicity as "African/Arab". He went on  to  state  he
    was part of the tribe called "Al Nouba from  South  Kurdofan".   On  26
    February 2012, he stated his ethnicity was "Nuba Tribe".   On  21  July
    2015, he gave his ethnicity as "Southern Kurdofan / Nuba Mountains".

21. If this is what the judge had in mind when he stated that the appellant
    had been consistent about these aspects of his claim, we regard it as a
    rather flimsy basis for such a conclusion.

22. The judge appears to have treated the absence of any challenge  to  the
    appellant's claimed ethnicity in  the  refusal  letter  as  easing  the
    appellant's path towards a positive finding in this  respect.  However,
    it is far from clear to us that the appellant had ever made a claim  to
    be Darfuri.  He has not been consistent about where he was born.

23. We note the Al  Nuba,  which  is  the  tribe  the  appellant  has  most
    consistently said he belongs to, are not on the list of non-Arab tribes
    shown to the judge at paragraph 9 of MM.

24. For these reasons, the appeal is allowed and the decision of Judge Adio
    set aside.

25. The appeal must be heard de novo by a different Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal and we make the  following  directions  to  assist  with  that
    process:




                           DIRECTIONS




    (1)  The appeal will be heard by any Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    except Judge Adio on a date and at a place to be notified;

    (2)  The decision of Judge Adio to uphold the section 72 certificate is
    preserved;

    (3)  Findings must be made on the credibility of the appellant's  claim
    to fear ill-treatment on the grounds of both his political opinions and
    his ethnicity;

    (4)  If either party wishes to file additional evidence not  previously
    filed, a consolidated bundle should be prepared  containing  the  fresh
    evidence and all the evidence previously filed, which  bundle  must  be
    filed at the Tribunal and served on the other party no  later  than  14
    days before the hearing;

    (5)  If the respondent intends to argue that existing country  guidance
    on the risk to non-Arab Darfuris (MM and AA) should  not  be  followed,
    then cogent evidence to support such arguments must be filed and served
    no later than 14 days before the hearing;

    (6)  The appellant must provide proof of his  current  address.  If  he
    wishes to have the appeal transferred from Hatton Cross  to  a  hearing
    centre nearer to where he currently  resides,  he  must  write  to  the
    tribunal with a request for a transfer.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed and the First-tier Tribunal's decision is set aside.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 18 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom


