
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05345/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 June 2017                            |On 22 June 2017                  |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     ZAA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms U. Dirie of Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge Stewart, promulgated on 16 January  2017,  in  which  he
     allowed the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
     refuse her claim on human rights grounds, but did not fully address the
     issue of the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.


  2. As this is an asylum appeal, I make an anonymity direction.


  3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


     "The appeal was allowed on human rights grounds  because  the  Tribunal
     accepted that were the Appellant and her daughter  to  be  returned  to
     Somalia, "it is extremely likely that her daughter would be required by
     society to undergo FGM" and that this was contrary to the child's  best
     interests.


     It is arguable that the Tribunal may have erred  in  not  allowing  the
     appeal on asylum grounds."


  4. The Appellant attended the  hearing.   In  the  Rule  24  response  the
     Respondent stated that she did not oppose the  Appellant's  application
     for permission to appeal, and invited the  Tribunal  to  determine  the
     appeal in relation to whether the Appellant could  establish  that  she
     qualified for asylum.  I heard submissions from Ms Dirie and Mr Bramble
     on this issue.


Error of Law


  5. As accepted by the Respondent, I find that the  decision  involves  the
     making of a material error of law.  In paragraph 25 the judge  rejected
     the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds,  but  then  in  paragraph  27
     found that it was "extremely likely that her daughter would be required
     by society to undergo  FGM".   However,  he  then  failed  to  consider
     whether the Appellant qualified for asylum on this basis.  I  therefore
     set aside the decision not to allow the Appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
     grounds, and turn to consider whether she qualifies for asylum  on  the
     basis that her daughter is extremely likely to be subjected to  FGM  on
     return to Somalia.


Remaking


  6. The facts before  me  are  not  in  dispute.   It  was  agreed  by  the
     representatives that the issue before me was whether the Appellant, who
     herself had undergone FGM,  and  who  had  a  young  daughter  who  was
     extremely likely to be subjected to FGM  on  return  to  Somalia,  fell
     within a particular social group.


  7. The relevant country guidance case  is  the  case  of  AMM  and  others
     (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011]  UKUT
     00445 (IAC).  The headnote states:


     "(16) The incidence of FGM in Somalia is universally agreed to be  over
     90%.  The predominant type of FGM is the  'pharaonic',  categorised  by
     the World Health Organisation as Type III.   The  societal  requirement
     for any girl or woman  to  undergo  FGM  is  strong.   In  general,  an
     uncircumcised, unmarried Somali woman, up to the age of 39, will be  at
     real risk of suffering FGM.


     (17) The risk will be greatest in  cases  where  both  parents  are  in
     favour of FGM.  Where both are opposed, the  question  of  whether  the
     risk will reach the requisite level  will  need  to  be  determined  by
     reference to the extent to which the parents are likely to be  able  to
     withstand the strong societal pressures.  Unless the parents are from a
     socio-economic  background  that  is  likely  to  distance  them   from
     mainstream social attitudes, or there is some other particular  feature
     of their case, the fact of parental opposition may well  as  a  general
     matter be incapable of eliminating the real risk to the  daughter  that
     others (particularly relatives) will at some point inflict FGM on her."


  8. Paragraphs 547 to 567 of AMM deal with FGM in more detail.  I was  also
     referred by Mr. Bramble to part H  of  the  decision,  referred  to  at
     [561], although he accepted that it might not be  relevant.   Paragraph
     561 states:


     "At this point, it is necessary to say something more about  the  issue
     discussed in Part H of this determination, regarding the entitlement to
     international protection of a mother whose claim to be opposed  to  FGM
     has been disbelieved."


  9. At paragraph 16 of the decision the judge sets out that  the  Appellant
     herself had to undergo FGM, despite the  fact  that  her  parents  were
     "enlightened people" who were not happy for her to be circumcised.  The
     Appellant's three sisters were all circumcised [17].  It  was  accepted
     that the Appellant could not  have  mentioned  her  concern  about  her
     daughter having to undergo FGM at her screening  interview  given  that
     she was still pregnant at the time and did not  know  the  sex  of  her
     child [18].  The judge also refers to the fact that the  Appellant  did
     not  mention  her  concern  about  her  daughter  at  her   substantive
     interview, but  explained  that  she  had  been  thinking  of  her  own
     predicament, and should have spoken more about her  concerns  regarding
     her daughter.


 10. I was referred to the Appellant's witness  statement  provided  to  the
     Respondent prior to the decision being made but after the birth of  her
     daughter.  This states at paragraph 33:


     "I am very worried about female genital mutilation (FGM) in Somalia now
     I have given birth to a girl.  It would be known that I had given birth
     in a country where FGM is not carried out and as a result we  would  be
     at risk of being attacked so that FGM could be carried out by force."


 11. I was also referred to the  Appellant's  witness  statement  where  the
     Appellant states:


     "I do not want my daughter to experience FGM in Somalia and this is one
     of the main concerns that I have about a return to Somalia  in  regards
     to our safety.  There will be heavy pressure from people in  the  local
     community in Somalia to make my daughter undergo FGM.  There is no  way
     I would be able to stop it and I believe  this  is  what  would  happen
     anywhere I would be returned to in Somalia. [62]


     Before I gave birth I went to the FGM clinic at the hospital in January
     2016 as I feared the pain that the circumcision would cause  during  me
     giving birth.  I was confirmed to have undergone Type  3  FGM  and  was
     referred by the FGM Clinic to a  social  worker  from  Hammersmith  and
     Fulham Council.  FGM was enforced on me by the community in Somalia.  I
     am strongly against it.  It is still believed that a  female  will  not
     find a husband without undergoing FGM.  The pressure  is  great  and  a
     woman who has not undergone FGM is likely to be ostracised.   It  would
     be known that I had given birth in a country where FGM is  not  carried
     out and as a result would be at risk.  It  would  also  be  carried  by
     force. [63]"


 12. The judge accepted the Appellant's account of the  pressure  placed  on
     Somalian girls to be circumcised.  He also accepted her account of  the
     wishes of her parents that she should not undergo this procedure  being
     overriden by community pressure.  He found that her  evidence  accorded
     with the country guidance set out in AMM.


 13. Taking all of the above into account, I find that  the  Appellant  does
     not fall within the class of those referred to in paragraph 361,  those
     whose claim to be opposed to FGM has been disbelieved.  I find that the
     Appellant is opposed to FGM.  In  further  support  of  this  Ms  Dirie
     submitted that the Appellant had been assessed by the  local  authority
     owing to the fact that she was the mother to a daughter, and  that  she
     herself had undergone FGM.  The fact that she had been deemed not to be
     a threat to her child was further evidence that she was opposed to FGM.


 14. I therefore find that I need to consider whether  the  Appellant  falls
     within the country guidance case of AMM as someone who is  at  risk  on
     return on account of the fact that her daughter would  be  required  to
     undergo FGM.   Although the Appellant is herself  opposed  to  FGM,  in
     accordance with paragraph 17 of  the  headnote  to  AMM,  the  fact  of
     parental opposition may be incapable of eliminating the  real  risk  to
     her daughter from others.


 15. I find that the Appellant is a single mother.  She is  a  member  of  a
     minority clan, as accepted in the Reasons for Refusal Letter, where  it
     was accepted that she was in the Ashraaf clan.


 16. I was referred to paragraphs  32  to  34  of  the  Appellant's  witness
     statement prepared for the  appeal  regarding  the  Appellant's  socio-
     economic group.


     "I fled when I did because I finally got the resources together  to  be
     able to.  I owned traditional jewellery (which I received after getting
     married) and this was sold along with the family home for the  purposes
     of financing my journey out  of  Somalia.   The  latter  provided  more
     capital. [32]


     Even though I wanted to flee earlier for the sake of my life,  I  could
     not.  I did not have any money and my father was  responsible  for  me.
     He therefore made the final decision when it was the right time for  me
     to leave and it was thus decided that I should leave for my own and  my
     family's safety once I had the money and documents together in November
     2015." [33]


 17. In paragraph [34] she states that "The arrangement with the agents  who
     brought me to the UK was to take me to  a  safe  country  and  then  my
     father would give up his house for them."  She goes on  to  state  that
     documents were handed over to put the house into the name of the agents
     and that her family had fled to Kenya.


 18. I find that this evidence shows that the Appellant is not from  a  rich
     socio-economic background in Somalia.  Her  parents  had  to  sell  the
     family home in order that she could flee to the United Kingdom.


 19. In relation to the question of whether the Appellant, on the  basis  of
     her daughter suffering FGM, may herself suffer  persecution,  paragraph
     558 of AMM states that "Likewise, we have no difficulty in finding that
     a Somali mother may face persecution and treatment in breach of her own
     Article 3/15(b) rights if her daughter is subjected to FGM against  the
     mother's wishes."


 20. Paragraph 559 refers to the  UNHCR  Guidance  Note  on  refugee  claims
     relating to FGM:


     The parent could nevertheless be considered a principal applicant where
     he or she is found to have a claim in  his  or  her  own  right.   This
     includes cases where the parent will be forced to witness the pain  and
     suffering of the child, or risk persecution for being  opposed  to  the
     practice."


 21. Paragraph 567 states:


     "Accordingly, we consider that it would be open  to  a  judicial  fact-
     finder, in such circumstances, to find the Refugee  Convention  engaged
     in the  case  of  a  mother  who  was  genuinely  strongly  opposed  to
     inflicting or procuring FGM on her daughter but who, on  the  evidence,
     was reasonably likely, sooner or  later,  to  countenance  it,  as  the
     lesser of two evils."


 22. I find that the fact that even though the Appellant is opposed to  FGM,
     as a single mother, who is not from a wealthy background,  and  who  is
     from a minority clan, she will be "incapable of  eliminating  the  real
     risk" to her daughter of having FGM inflicted on her.  I find therefore
     that the Appellant falls within the country guidance case  of  AMM  and
     her claim succeeds on asylum grounds.


Notice of Decision


 23. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.
 24. The appeal is allowed under Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 21 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 21 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
