
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA054252016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 June 2017                                |On 27 June 2017               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                    [b i]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Counsel instructed by Morden Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh and his date of birth is  [  ]
    1977.  He made a claim for asylum which was refused by the Secretary of
    State on 13 May 2016.  He appealed against that decision.  On  24  June
    2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle dismissed the appeal on the  basis
    that the appellant failed to comply with a direction of  the  Tribunal.
    The judge concluded that the Tribunal issued directions on 26  February
    2016 asking the appellant to supply specific and  complete  grounds  of
    appeal not later than 8 April 2016, but the appellant failed to  comply
    and there were no grounds of appeal before Judge Doyle.  Judge  Doyle's
    decision was promulgated on 28 June 2016.

2.   Permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Adio  on  26
    April 2017.  The grounds, in a nutshell, are that the appellant did not
    receive the directions referred to by Judge Doyle. He asserted that  he
    faxed the grounds of appeal to the Tribunal, on 13 June 2016, following
    directions that were sent to him from  the  Tribunal  on  7  June  2016
    requiring the appellant to serve and file grounds by 14 June 2016.

3.   In support of the application the  appellant  has  served  a  statement
    from the fee earner at the firm of solicitors representing him  at  the
    relevant time and his evidence is that the grounds of appeal were faxed
    to the Tribunal on 13 June,  in  compliance  with  the  direction,  and
    therefore should have been before the  Tribunal.   Mr  Duffy  helpfully
    conceded that if the facts as presented by the  appellant  are  correct
    there is a clear error of law because the appellant has not had a  fair
    hearing.

4.   I conclude that there has been a material error of law  in  this  case.
    Judge Doyle made  reference  to  a  notice  having  been  sent  to  the
    appellant in February 2016 which does not fit into the timeline because
    there were no proceedings at this time (the  respondent's  decision  is
    dated 13 May 2016), therefore there  could  not  have  been  directions
    issued at that time.  Although the grounds of appeal  were  not  before
    Judge Doyle, it appears that they were either faxed successfully to the
    Tribunal and for one reason or another not linked to the file, or there
    has been a genuine error in sending the document by  way  of  fax,  but
    either way there has been a procedural irregularity which  has  led  to
    unfairness. I set aside the decision of  Judge  Doyle  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal.  Both parties agreed that,  in  the  light  of  the
    nature of the error, the matter should be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing. I agreed with this.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam                        Date  22 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


