
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05539/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 October 2020                    |On 8 October 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     VB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge P-J S White ('the Judge') promulgated on  12  November
       2019  in  which  the  Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal   on
       protection and human rights grounds.
    2. Permission to appeal was initially refused by another  judge  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal but granted on a renewed application by the Upper
       Tribunal, the operative part of the  grant  being  in  the  following
       terms:

           "4.    The  judge  did  not  find  the  appellant  credible  and
                rejected her account of being  trafficked  and  forced  into
                prostitution in its entirety. It is apparent that one of the
                reasons the judge did not find  the  appellant  credible  is
                that  he  considered  aspects  of  her  account  to  not  be
                plausible or probable.  For  example,  at  paragraph  27  he
                stated that the chance of various events described  in  that
                paragraph occurring together seemed "very low indeed" and at
                paragraph 28 he stated that the appellant's account required
                "a significant number of individually improbable  things  to
                go just right for her".


           5. At paragraph 38 the judge stated that  although  "perceptions
                of plausibility" are not always a safe  or  reliable  guide,
                this is "tempered by the fact that I am here considering the
                supposed actions of a group of  European  criminals  and  an
                educated European appellant, rather than the cultural  norms
                of a wholly strange society". Arguably, the  judge  has  not
                explained  why  he  has  taken  the  view  that  in  a  case
                concerning Albanian traffickers it is safer/more reliable to
                rely  on  "perceptions  of  plausibility"  than   in   cases
                concerning certain other societies. Arguably, the judge  has
                fallen into legal error in his approach to  the  reliability
                of his perception of plausibility.


           6. All grounds are arguable."

    3. As a result of the Covid-19 pandemic  directions  were  sent  to  the
       parties indicating a provisional view reached by the  Upper  Tribunal
       that it would be appropriate in this case to  determine  whether  the
       Judge had made an error of law material to the  decision  to  dismiss
       the appeal of the papers and providing an opportunity for the parties
       to make additional submissions in relation to  the  merits  of  their
       case if they wished to do so.
    4. The Secretary of State filed a response dated 30 July 2020 indicating
       no objection to a remote hearing. No response had  been  received  at
       the date for consideration of these matters from either the appellant
       or her representatives.
    5. The Overriding Objective is contained in the Upper Tribunal Procedure
       Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing   with   a   case   fairly
       and   justly   includes:   dealing  with   it   in   ways  that   are
       proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the   case,   the  complexity
       of   the   issues,   etc;   avoiding   unnecessary   formality    and
       seeking flexibility  in  the  proceedings;  ensuring,   so   far   as
       practicable,  that the parties are able to participate fully  in  the
       proceedings; using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       effectively; and avoiding delay, so far  as  compatible  with  proper
       consideration of the issues.
    6. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the  Upper  Tribunal  to
       further the overriding objective; and to  cooperate  with  the  Upper
       Tribunal generally.
    7. Rule 34  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
       provides:

           '34.-


           (1)    Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may
                make any decision without a hearing.


           (2)    The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed
                by a party when  deciding  whether  to  hold  a  hearing  to
                consider any matter, and the form of any such hearing.


           (3)    In immigration judicial  review  proceedings,  the  Upper
                Tribunal must hold a hearing before making a decision  which
                disposes of proceedings.


           (4)    Paragraph (3) does not affect  the  power  of  the  Upper
                Tribunal to-


                (a)    strike out a party's case, pursuant to  rule  8(1)(b)
                    or 8(2);


                (b)    consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;


                (c)    determine an  application  for  permission  to  bring
                    judicial review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or


                (d)     make  a  consent  order  disposing  of  proceedings,
                    pursuant to rule 39, without a hearing.

    8. It has not been shown to be inappropriate or unfair to  exercise  the
       discretion provided in Rule 34 by enabling the error of law  question
       to be determined on the papers rather  than  in  any  other  form  of
       remote hearing.  Nothing on the facts or in  law  is  made  out  that
       makes consideration of the issues on the  papers  not  in  accordance
       with overriding objectives at this stage.

Background

    9. The appellant is a national of Albania born  on  4  April  1990.  The
       Judge sets out her  immigration  history,  the  basis  on  which  she
       claimed to be entitled to a grant of  international  protection  and,
       having had the benefit of considering documentary and oral  evidence,
       sets out findings of fact from [17] of the decision under challenge.
   10. The appellant asserts the Judge failed to make a finding of  fact  in
       relation to two key events;  in  relation  to  what  were  identified
       perceived discrepancies about the appellant's freedom to move  around
       the property she was held  at  in  Tirana  and  in  relation  to  the
       appellant's alleged escape from a hotel in Switzerland.  The  grounds
       assert the Judge  ignored  the  appellant's  evidence  regarding  her
       method of escape. The appellant also asserts the Judge made a mistake
       of fact finding at [26] that  the  appellant  travelled  on  her  own
       passport for the journey to Switzerland suggesting in the grounds the
       appellant had never said she had her passport through  this  journey.
       The appellant also alleges that claiming to  have  travelled  on  her
       passport is different to saying she had it on her at that  time.  The
       Grounds assert the appellant had never at any time  claimed  she  had
       control of the passport when she travelled to Switzerland but arguing
       in the alternative that even if  she  did  it  was  not  unlikely  or
       incredible given the circumstances of the claim.
   11. The appellant also assert  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  material
       evidence in failing to factor into the analysis  of  the  substantial
       volume of medical evidence which is said to show a consistent account
       of  trafficking,  enforced  prostitution  and  exploitation.  It   is
       asserted the Judge failed to take the material into account including
       the fact the appellant was being treated for PTSD.
   12.  The  Grounds  insert  the  Judges  made  irrational   and   perverse
       conclusions for the reasons set out in the document  drafted  in  May
       2020.
   13. The Secretary of State in her response to directions  dated  30  July
       2020 asserts no arguable legal error for the reasons set out therein.

Error of law

   14. It is not made out the Judge failed to consider all the  written  and
       oral evidence with the required degree of  anxious  scrutiny.  It  is
       necessary to read the decision as a whole. The Judge was not required
       to make findings in relation to every aspect of the evidence  and  it
       is not made out the Judge did  not  identify  and  consider  relevant
       issues upon which adequate findings are made.
   15. In relation to the assertion the Judge failed  to  make  findings  in
       relation to the two key elements  referred  to  in  Ground  one,  the
       relevant evidence was clearly considered by the Judge.  At  [19]  the
       Judge notes unexplained inconsistency in relation to the  appellant's
       evidence concerning the Tirana house in which the  appellant  claimed
       that she both had some freedom of movement within the house but  also
       that she did not. The assertion the Judge failed to make findings  in
       relation  to  the  appellant's  alleged  escape  from  a   hotel   in
       Switzerland is dealt with at [22] in which the Judge writes:

           "22.   In relation to her eventual  escape  from  the  hotel  in
                Switzerland the respondent  queried  why  the  window  in  a
                toilet would have been left unlocked, when the window in the
                appellant's room was firmly locked. The  appellant  says  in
                her witness statement that there were always guards  in  the
                corridors. In her interview, after describing  how  she  was
                sometimes allowed to move around the hotel, and chat to [J],
                she was asked whether there were  any  guards  present.  She
                said "No  but  they  kept  moving  around  the  corridor  on
                occasions [A] would not allow her  to  speak".  The  officer
                evidently understood that answer as meaning  there  were  no
                guards, because a little later she was asked why,  if  there
                were no guards, she did not try to escape, and replied  that
                the guards  were  "from  outside".  That  leaves  it  rather
                unclear whether there were guards inside or  not.  Later  in
                the interview, describing the actual escape  on  New  Year's
                Eve, the appellant said the guards had come in from  outside
                and were in the bar waiting for the change of the  year.  It
                appears from that there would normally  be  guards  outside,
                rather than in the building, which would be contrary to what
                she said in her  statement.  Fortuitously,  on  the  day  of
                escape they were all inside, and not only inside but in  the
                bar rather than keeping any sort of guard  at  all.  If  the
                appellant meant that there were normally guards both  inside
                and out the lucky chance that they were all in  the  bar  on
                the crucial evening is still more surprising. In any  event,
                the presence of guards in the corridors  would  not  explain
                why a toilet window  would  be  left  unlocked;  it  is  not
                suggested that the guards supervised the girls when they use
                the toilet."

   16. In relation to passport the Judge writes at [26]:

           "26.   There are in my judgement other  difficulties  about  the
                appellant's account. She says that  she  was  taken  to  the
                hotel in Switzerland by [A] and another person,  whose  name
                she did not know, but who was apparently a man. She had  her
                own passport for the journey. The first part was by  bus  to
                Pristina and the second part by  plane  to  Switzerland.  By
                this time the appellant had already  been  beaten,  detained
                and forced into prosecution in Albania, and would  therefore
                have been under no illusion about why she was being taken to
                Switzerland. To  travel  by  such  public  means,  including
                through two  international  airports  where  there  will  be
                security staff, seems a very risky approach by  traffickers,
                minimising their control  and  increasing  the  risk  of  an
                attempt to escape."

   17. The findings in relation to the actual escape from the hotel are  set
       out at [27-28] in the following terms:

           "27.   The actual escape required first that  [M],  one  of  the
                clients, was willing to assist in escape, not just  by  [J],
                who had become his girlfriend, but also by the appellant  as
                her friend, second that  [M]  somehow  discovered  that  [A]
                would  be  somewhere  else  that  night,  and  relayed  that
                information to [J], third that the girls  rooms,  which  she
                said were normally locked, were on this occasion left  open,
                fourth that neither the appellant nor [J] had any clients at
                the crucial time, although normally  they  worked  about  10
                hours after  lunch  and  fifth  that  all  the  guards  were
                clustered in the bar and keeping no lookout.  Clearly,  none
                of these things individually is  impossible,  and  some  are
                less implausible than others, but they  all  seem  unlikely,
                and the chance of all of them occurring together seems  very
                low indeed.


           28.    Moreover, having escaped from the building  was  not  the
                end of the appellant's  surprising  good  fortune.  [M]  was
                unwilling or unable to look after her, bar her first  night,
                in Switzerland,  but  he  was  able  to  make  arrangements,
                including presumably  the  payment  of  any  fees,  for  the
                appellant to be taken  to  the  United  Kingdom,  while  [J]
                turned out to have a cousin in the United Kingdom who  would
                be able to assist the appellant on arrival and  the  cousin,
                while apparently unable  or  unwilling  to  assist  for  any
                length of time, had a builder [MA] round next day to do some
                work, and he was both able and willing to take the appellant
                in and support her. From the reference in the medical  notes
                to her living with a couple I must infer that [MA's] partner
                has  also  been  willing  to  accommodate  and  support  the
                appellant long term. I note that no  evidence  was  provided
                from  either  the  cousin   or   the   builder   about   the
                circumstances in which they met the appellant or their roles
                as  good  Samaritans.  Again  it  seems  to  me   that   the
                appellant's  account  requires  a  significant   number   of
                individually improbable things all  to  go  just  right  for
                her."

   18. It is important that the Judge's findings are read as a whole and not
       'cherry picked' and criticised  in  isolation.   The  Judges  overall
       finding is that the cumulative effect of negative issues  that  arise
       from the  appellant's  evidence  led  to  the  appellant's  claim  to
       international protection not being found to be  credible.  The  Judge
       gives adequate findings for this position  based  upon  the  numerous
       problems identified in  the  appellant's  evidence.  The  appellant's
       grounds are selective and fail to address all the  concerns  recorded
       by the Judge. It is not made out the Judge's findings are in any  way
       perverse or irrational.
   19. In relation to the assertion of mistake of fact, as  noted  above  at
       [27] the Judge properly notes the evidence given in written and  oral
       in relation to these matters and makes findings upon  the  same.  The
       grounds failed to identify in  what  manner  the  Judge  has  made  a
       finding outside the range of those reasonably available to him on the
       evidence.  It is not  irrational  for  Judge  to  conclude  that  the
       appellant was claiming to have travelled using her own passport.  The
       appellant was represented at the hearing and her claim in the grounds
       that what she was saying was that  she  did  not  have  her  passport
       throughout the  whole  of  the  journey,  even  though  the  evidence
       supports the findings made, could have been put to her but  was  not.
       Reading of the evidence indicates that the matter is as  recorded  by
       the Judge. It is not made out the Judge erred in  law  in  commenting
       upon the fact that travelling on her  own  travel  documents  through
       international  airports  could  have  increased  the  chance  of  the
       appellant escaping or seeking help.
   20. The Judge clearly considered the medical evidence and  the  assertion
       the Judge failed to  do  so  is  without  arguable  merit.  There  is
       specific reference to the documents between [30 - 34] and it  is  not
       made out that having done so the Judge ignored the  medical  evidence
       or failed to factor the same into the assessment process. It  is  not
       made out the approach adopted by the Judge to  the  medical  evidence
       renders the Judges overall conclusions unsafe. The credibility of the
       claim was a matter for the Judge not the medics.
   21. In relation to the assertion of irrational and perverse findings;  it
       is not made out the high threshold of perversity is met  in  relation
       to this matter and nor is it made out that the findings made  by  the
       Judge are outside the range of those reasonably available to  him  on
       the evidence. It is not a decision in which the Judge  has  dismissed
       the claim as a result of minor concerns arising from the evidence but
       as a result of  the  Judge  carefully  analysing  that  evidence  and
       considered whether the claim  was  made  out  to  lower  standard  by
       reference to written and  oral  evidence  and  the  relevant  country
       guidance caselaw. Read as a whole and placed in  context  it  is  not
       made out the Judge erred in law in a manner material to the  decision
       to dismiss the  appeal  sufficient  to  warrant  the  Upper  Tribunal
       interfering any further in  relation  to  this  matter.  The  Judge's
       comments with regard to the plausibility of  the  claim  are  clearly
       within the range of those available to the Judge on the facts. Whilst
       the appelanst does not agree with the Judge's  conclusions,  suggests
       alternative findings that she say should have been made, and  seek  a
       more favourable outcome  to  enable  her  to  remain  in  the  United
       Kingdom, this does not establish arguable material legal error.

Decision


   22. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   23. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 5 October 2020

