
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/05989/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 October 2018                       |On 07 November 2018                |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                         mr Darbaz Mustapha Mohammed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Jagadesham, Counsel, instructed by Barnes
                    Harrild & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant who claims to be a national of  Iran  has  permission  to
    challenge the  decision  of  Judge  Andrew  Davies  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal sent on  20  June  2018  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision  made  by  the  respondent  on  25  April  2018  refusing  his
    protection claim.  The respondent considered that the appellant  was  a
    national of Iraq, not Iran.  The judge agreed.

2.    The  grounds  principally  focus  on  the  judge's  findings  on   the
    nationality issue.  Prior  to  reaching  her  decision  the  respondent
    obtained a Sprakab linguistic analysis report  dated  1  November  2017
    which assessed the appellant's linguistic background as being Iraq with
    a "high" degree of certainty and his stated  linguistic  background  of
    Iran, Azarbaijan-e  Gharbi,  Sardasht  as  being  "unlikely".   In  the
    appellant's skeleton argument before the  FtT  Judge  this  report  was
    subjected to a number of criticisms, especially of  the  expertise  and
    qualifications of the principal analyst.  The judge considered these in
    detail and rejected them.  At paragraphs 38-39 the judge stated:

         "38. In RB (Linguistic evidence-Sprakab) Somalia  [2010]  UKUT  329
             (IAC) the Upper Tribunal confirmed that Sprakab  reports  were
             entitled to be accorded considerable weight.  That  conclusion
             derived from the data available to  Sprakab  and  the  process
             used.  The reports were not  infallible.   The  Tribunal  gave
             some general guidance on the reports.  The process of language
             analysis involved the interaction  of  several  employees  and
             this minimised the  opportunity  for  incompetence  and  false
             results.  A person's origin should  not  be  based  solely  on
             linguistic analysis but where a clear opinion was expressed in
             terms of certainty little more  would  be  required.   In  the
             present appeal the conclusion was of a high possibility so  it
             is important to consider the report in the  context  of  other
             evidence as well, as I have done.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant and his representatives have had the opportunity  to
             challenge the report and indeed counsel has submitted detailed
             representations on the  report  albeit  that  no  thought  was
             apparently given by his instructing solicitors to obtaining  a
             linguistic report.


         39.  In RM (Sierra Leone) 2015 EWCA Civ 541  the  Court  of  Appeal
             held  that  the  correct  approach  was   set   out   in   RB.
             Considerable weight should be given to  the  reports  although
             they were not infallible."

3.   The appellant's grounds  of  appeal  before  me  mount  to  three  main
    criticisms of the judge's reliance on this report:

    (1)  that it mistakenly proceeded on the basis that in RM the Court  of
         Appeal held that the correct approach to Sprakab  reports  was  set
         out by the UT in RB;


    (2)  that it erroneously considered the analyst was  fluent  in  Sorani
         and had the requisite expertise and  knowledge  in  being  able  to
         comment on the specific different dialects apparently spoken in the
         appellant's claimed home area of Sardashi (Iran) as opposed to that
         spoken in Arbil (or Erbil) Iraq; and


    (3)  that the judge did not engage with the additional submission  made
         in the skeleton argument that the linguist's  view  that  the  main
         difference between Kurdish Sorani spoken in  the  two  regions  was
         that those from  Iran  "typically"  demonstrated  an  influence  of
         Farsi, was "unsourced and unsubstantiated".


4.    I   was   greatly   aided   by   excellent   submissions   from   both
    representatives.

5.   Dealing together with grounds 2 and 3, I am not persuaded by them  that
    the judge erred in  law.   Mr  Jagadesham  seeks  to  rely  on  various
    observations made by Lord Carnwath in MN and KY (Scotland) [2014]  UKSC
    30 and by Underhill LJ in RM, the crux  of  which  is  that  linguistic
    analysts must demonstrate an expertise in the particular issue on which
    they are expressing an opinion.  However, in neither of these decisions
    is it said that to possess the necessary  expertise  analysts  have  to
    have lived in or visited the area or areas  they  are  considering,  or
    that they must evidence or source every one of their findings.   Having
    looked  at  the  stated  practical  experience  and  expertise  of  the
    principal linguist who authored the report at issue  in  this  case,  I
    observe that his expertise is partly said to be based on membership  of
    a linguistic group who meet twice a year in different Kurdish areas  to
    discuss differences and similarities  between  Kurmanji  dialects,  and
    that the report clearly draws on a broad database of information  about
    various Kurmanji dialects,  with  reference  to  academic  authorities.
    Considering  what  the  principal  analyst  sets  down  regarding   his
    experience and expertise,  I  consider  it  was  within  the  range  of
    reasonable responses for the  judge  to  conclude  that  the  principal
    analyst was "appropriately qualified" (paragraph  33).   I  would  also
    observe that although RM did not confirm that the UT in RM applied  the
    correct approach, it did acknowledge that the  general  evidence  about
    Sprakab training given to the UT in RB was a factor that could be taken
    into account (see paragraph 53).

6.   I consider it was open to the judge  to  conclude  that  the  principal
    analyst had demonstrated appropriate  expertise  both  as  regards  the
    Kurdish Sorani spoken in the appellant's home area of  Sardashi  (Iran)
    as opposed to that spoken in Arbil (or Erbil) (Iraq) and that the judge
    was entitled to treat as relevant  in  assessing  the  report  findings
    overall   that   another   Sprakab   expert,   whose   experience   and
    qualifications were also outlined, had endorsed the principal analyst's
    findings.

7.   As regards ground 1, I would accept that the judge  wrongly  stated  at
    paragraph 39 that RM endorsed the approach in RB as correct,  and  also
    that at paragraph 38 the judge wrongly endorsed the view  expressed  in
    RB that (I use the judge's paraphrase here) "where a clear opinion  was
    expressed in  terms  of  certainty  little  more  would  be  required".
    However, the judge went on to say  that  "in  the  present  appeal  the
    conclusion was of a high possibility so it is important to consider the
    report in the context of other evidence as well, as I have done".   The
    grounds assail the judge for attaching  "considerable  weight"  to  the
    report in this case.  I would accept that the judge  went  too  far  in
    implying by reference to RB that all Sprakab reports  should  be  given
    considerable weight (which is the effect  of  the  second  sentence  of
    paragraph 38).  But I cannot agree that this gave rise to  my  material
    error in the judge's consideration of the report in  this  case.   That
    consideration was not simply deduced from RB.  It was clearly based  on
    precisely what MN and KY  at  paragraph  51  and  RM  at  paragraph  55
    enjoins, namely a specific consideration of the particular  report  and
    the report was given considerable weight by the judge by virtue of  the
    perceived  quality  of  its  analysis.   Further,  the  judge   clearly
    considered the arguments directed against the report by  the  appellant
    in his skeleton argument and in my judgement was entitled to find  they
    did not undermine its value.  I would also  note  that  the  judge  was
    entitled   to   take   into   consideration   that   the    appellant's
    representatives had not taken the opportunity  afforded  to  them  when
    they appealed of obtaining their own linguistic report.

8.   The judge made clear that because the report in this  case  assessed  a
    "high possibility that  [the  appellant's]  linguistic  background  was
    Iranian", he needed to consider  the  report  in  the  context  of  the
    evidence as a whole.  Separately from the linguistic analysis the judge
    went on to identify extensive shortcomings in the  appellant's  account
    of difficulties arising from  his  smuggling  activities,  his  claimed
    involvement with the KDPI and of facing  threats  from  another  family
    because of his brother's affair.  None of these findings are challenged
    in the grounds.

9.   To conclude, I am not persuaded that the judge materially erred in  law
    and accordingly his decision must stand.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 26 October 2018

           [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal






