

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
pa/05122/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 31 January 2018                        | On 16 April 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          THE RIGHT HON. LORD BOYD
                 (sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     a s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith, Counsel instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. Pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules  2008  we  make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure   or
         publication of any matter likely to lead members of the  public  to
         identify the appellant. Breach of this order can be punished  as  a
         contempt of court. I make this order because this is  a  protection
         case and there is invariably a risk in  cases  of  this  kind  that
         publicity will itself create a risk.

      2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Afghanistan against the  decision
         of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
         decision of the Secretary  of  State  refusing  him  some  form  of
         international protection.

      3. We do not think it necessary or helpful to say  too  much.   It  is
         quite plain  from  the  evidence  before  us  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge on his own initiative asked  to  look  at  a  mobile
         phone that was being used by one of the witnesses. The judge looked
         for things on the phone and then made no reference to having looked
         or what he found in his subsequent determination.

      4. We do not know what he discovered. We cannot know if  it  made  any
         difference.  It may be that it did not. Indeed, we  agree  with  Mr
         Melvin for the Secretary of State  to  the  extent  that  there  is
         nothing on the face of the Decision and Reasons which clearly shows
         that it had any impact at all.  That is not the point.   The  point
         is that we are satisfied that the intervention without  explanation
         gave the appearance of unfairness.  It is not  the  function  of  a
         judge  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  take  on  the   role   of
         investigating a case.  It was a matter for the judge  to  determine
         the issues raised by the parties in the context  of  the  law.   He
         overstepped his role.  He should not have asked to see the  'phone.
         By asking he put the witness in an impossible position because  the
         witness really had to co-operate or risk adverse  inferences  being
         drawn. It follows that by making the request  the  judge  gave  the
         appearance of impartiality.

      5. Having asked to see it he should have referred to the event in  the
         Decision and Reasons. A short explanation may have been  enough  to
         allay all concerns.

      6. The consequence of that is that the subsequent decision  is  unfair
         and has to be set aside and we set it aside.

      7. It also means that  this  appellant  has  not  had  a  satisfactory
         hearing in the First-tier Tribunal and therefore  the  only  proper
         remedy on the facts of this case is remit  the  case  to  be  heard
         again in the First-tier Tribunal because the initial  decision  was
         as a result of a decision erroneous in law.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the appeal must be heard  again  in
the First-tier Tribunal.







|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 12 April 2018                 |
|Judge                                |                                     |

