
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05908/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th October 2018                           |On 30th October 2018          |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 Kochar [R]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Janjua (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Chapman, promulgated on  31st  August  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 24th August  2017.   In  this  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a national of Iraq, is a female, and was born on  27th
    November 1991.  She is of Kurdish ethnicity from the town of Raniya  in
    the Iraq Kurdistan Region (IKR).

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that she fears that if  she  is
    returned to Iraq, she will be killed by  members  of  her  family,  for
    bringing shame to them, as a result of having disobeyed  them,  by  not
    marrying the person who had been chosen for her  to  marry.   She  also
    fears that if returned to Iraq, she will be subjected to ill-treatment,
    for having left the country without her family's  permission,  and  for
    having  had  a  child  out  of  wedlock  (see  paragraph  19   of   the
    determination).

The Judge's Determination

 4. The judge set out the essential components of the Appellant's claim  in
    considerable detail.  He observed how the  Appellant  met  with  a  man
    called Mr Hussani, when he was visiting  from  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2015, in Raniya, where the Appellant lived.   Mr  Hussani  was  staying
    with his uncle, and the Appellant met him when Mr Hussani was  visiting
    his cousin, who happened to be the husband of the  Appellant's  cousin.
    They met, they talked, and began  a  relationship.   After  Mr  Hussani
    returned back to the UK on 15th May 2016, the relationship continued by
    telephone and other means.  They discussed getting married.  Mr Hussani
    returned to Iraq to see the Appellant again, and he  proposed  marriage
    to her family, and the two proposals were discussed by family  members,
    but they were rejected because  they  did  not  know  enough  about  Mr
    Hussani, as he lived  in  the  United  Kingdom.   However,  Mr  Hussani
    continued to see the Appellant, and this was known to  the  Appellant's
    cousin, and on 29th May 2016, their relationship became sexual, and the
    Appellant lost her virginity.  A further twist to the relationship then
    took place.  In August 2016 the Appellant's  family  decided  that  she
    should marry one of her older cousins, who had previously been married,
    and fearing that he would discover  the  loss  of  her  virginity,  the
    Appellant  confided  in  her  mother.   The  mother   confiscated   the
    Appellant's mobile phone, and contacted the Appellant's maternal uncle,
    who arranged for an agent,  so  that  the  Appellant  could  leave  the
    country.

 5. The judge observed how the Respondent accepted the existence of honour-
    based violence as being widespread and common in  Iraq.   However,  the
    Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant   had   a   physical
    relationship with Mr Hussani in Iraq, or that a marriage  was  arranged
    with her cousin,  causing  her  to  disclose  that  she  had  lost  her
    virginity.  There were inconsistencies in the Appellant's  account  and
    it lacked credibility.   The  Respondent  was  of  the  view  that  the
    documents submitted for a Schengen visa showed  that  she  was  already
    married, making it less credible for her to  have  had  a  relationship
    with Mr Hussani outside her marriage (see paragraphs 21 to 23).

 6. Against this background, the judge considered the documentary  evidence
    (paragraphs 27 to 29).  He heard oral evidence (paragraphs  30  to  36)
    both from the Appellant and from Mr Hussani.

 7. In his conclusions,  the  judge  fully  accepted  that  "the  objective
    evidence suggests that the IKR is one of the areas in the  world  where
    honour killings are still prevalent" (paragraph 54).  He observed  that
    "there is no guaranteed state protection" (paragraph  54).   The  judge
    even made allowance for the fact that false information was  given,  to
    the effect that the Appellant was already married to a man in Iraq,  in
    order for her to get a Schengen visa.  His view was that, "I accept the
    Appellant's evidence that she had not been married  before"  (paragraph
    57).  The judge also accepted "the evidence of both the  Appellant  and
    Mr Hussani that they met and formed a relationship when he was visiting
    Iraq to visit his family" (paragraph 58).

 8. However, the appeal was dismissed, thereafter, for a number of reasons.
     First, the judge did not accept why the  Appellant's  cousin,  knowing
    full well the risk to the Appellant in  the  IKR  of  honour  killings,
    would have permitted  the  relationship  between  Mr  Hussani  and  the
    Appellant to develop "under their roof, when they belonged to a  family
    which would be prepared to kill the Appellant for marrying against  the
    wishes of her family" (paragraph 59(1)).

 9. Second, the accounts of both the Appellant and Mr  Hussani  "are  vague
    and lacking in detail about how the relationship developed"  (paragraph
    59(2)), and the judge gives an example of this.

10. Third, the judge did not find it credible that  the  Appellant  and  Mr
    Hussani would take the risk of  being  seen  together  given  that  her
    family were aware that he was there (paragraph 59(3)).

11. Fourth, the Appellant's evidence that she was restricted from going out
    was also inconsistent with her answer at interview that they first  had
    sex when they were out together (paragraph 59(4)).  The judge also gave
    detailed other reasons.

12. However, ultimately, what mattered was that the judge did not  find  it
    credible that, in a family which the Appellant said would kill her  for
    her indiscretion, she immediately told her mother that she had lost her
    virginity, after learning of the marriage proposal from an elder cousin
    (paragraph 59(9)).  In conclusion,  the  judge  held  that,  whilst  he
    accepted that a relationship  developed  between  Mr  Hussani  and  the
    Appellant in Iraq, he did not accept that she received  a  proposal  of
    marriage from an elder cousin, and was then forced to tell  her  mother
    about the loss of her virginity (paragraph 60).

13. On the contrary, the judge's view was that it was,

         "Much more likely that the Appellant and Mr Hussani,  and  probably
         the Appellant's and Mr Hussani's  families,  have  collaborated  in
         planning for the Appellant to come to the United Kingdom to join Mr
         Hussani, and that the Appellant  and  Mr  Hussani  have  fabricated
         their accounts to  make  this  happen,  and  get  round  the  entry
         clearance requirements for the United Kingdom, which they would not
         have satisfied ..." (paragraph 61).

14. Thereafter, the judge went on to consider the  best  interests  of  the
    child (paragraph 70).  The child was a British citizen child, but "this
    is a very young child, aged 8 weeks, whose  life  revolves  around  his
    mother", and that "the child is still at an age when  the  presence  of
    his father is not so  significant  or  crucial  as  he  becomes  older"
    (paragraph 71).  There is nothing preventing Mr Hussani  from  visiting
    his wife in Iraq (paragraph 72).  There were no  significant  obstacles
    to the Appellant's integration into a country where she  had  grown  up
    and there were no insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing
    there (paragraph 73).

15. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

16. The  grounds  of  application  stated  that  the  judge  erred  in  the
    assessment of credibility; erred in misdirecting himself  on  the  law;
    erred in taking into account  immaterial  matters;  and  erred  in  his
    proportionality assessment.

17. On 3rd January 2018, permission to appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  This was on two specific grounds.  First, the judge accepted
    that there was evidence to show that having a child out of marriage may
    lead to honour-based violence, but concluded that the evidence did  not
    "inevitably" show that it would give rise to such a  risk,  and  in  so
    stating it was arguable that too high a  standard  of  proof  had  been
    applied (see paragraph 3 of the grant of permission).  Second, although
    the judge gave weight to the fact that  the  Appellant's  child  was  a
    British citizen, it was at least arguable that the judge failed to give
    due regard to the Respondent's own policy, as outlined in the Court  of
    Appeal judgment in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705,  without  giving
    weight to the rights of a British child, to  be  balanced  against  the
    public policy considerations.

18. On 29th January 2018, a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect that
    the judge had directed himself appropriately and that he had given full
    consideration to the best interests of the child at  paragraphs  70  to
    73.

Submissions

19. At the hearing before  me  on  5th  October  2018,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Janjua of Counsel, who made it quite clear  that,  on
    the basis of the grounds  of  application,  the  age  of  a  child  was
    irrelevant, so long as there was in existence a British citizen  child,
    and so long as it was the case that there was no  criminality  involved
    on the part of the parents, in which case the balance of considerations
    would fall in favour of the Appellant.  The  judge's  failure  to  heed
    this drew him into error.  In this, Mr Janjua relied on paragraph 6  of
    his grounds of application.  Second, insofar as  the  judge  recognised
    that objective evidence suggested that the IKR  is  one  of  the  areas
    where honour killings are still  prevalent  without  any  guarantee  of
    state protection (see paragraphs 53 to 57) it was wrong for  the  judge
    to have decided that the Appellant, as a single  woman  with  a  child,
    would be able to return back to Iraq,  without  her  husband,  who  was
    based in the United Kingdom, and settled here.

20. For his part,  Mr  Diwnycz  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response.   He
    submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  expressly  recognised   the
    existence of honour killings in the IKR, and so did the judge,  and  so
    there was nothing in this point.  The  fact  was  that  the  judge  had
    comprehensively disbelieved the Appellant's claim that she was promised
    in marriage to an older  cousin,  who  was  already  married,  and  had
    escaped that arrangement, in order to come and live with Mr Hussani  in
    the UK.  His finding was that she and Mr  Hussani  were  already  in  a
    relationship, with the consent of their family  members,  and  that  Mr
    Hussani had sponsored the Appellant's entry  to  the  UK,  outside  the
    entry clearance system, because she would  not  be  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of entry lawfully.  As for the Court of Appeal decision in
    MA (Pakistan),  even  the  grant  of  permission  makes  it  clear  (at
    paragraph 4) that the existence of a British citizen child in itself is
    not enough, as this has to be balanced out against  the  public  policy
    considerations, including whether or not it is "reasonable"  to  expect
    the child to leave the UK, or to be separated from his mother.

No Error of Law

21. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

22. First, it is not the case that, in recognising the  objective  evidence
    of honour killings in the IKR and the absence of state protection,  the
    judge countenanced the return of the Appellant with a child (who was at
    the time 8 weeks old) alone to Iraq,  because  he  had  held  that  the
    Appellant had a family in Iraq who  had,  together  with  Mr  Hussani's
    family, collaborated in planning for the Appellant to come to the UK to
    join Mr Hussani, and that the two of them had fabricated their accounts
    to make this happen (paragraph 61).  The Appellant, therefore, would be
    returning back to her family.

23. Second, insofar as the application of the decision in MA (Pakistan)  is
    concerned,  the  court  concluded  that  it   was   inherent   in   the
    reasonableness test in Section  117B(6)  that  the  court  should  have
    regard to wider public interest considerations and  in  particular  the
    need for effective immigration control.  This is a case where the judge
    has expressly found that Mr Hussani and the Appellant, in collaboration
    with their families, set out to  circumvent  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, by not applying for entry clearance, as  they  would
    not be able to succeed on this basis.  The court felt in that case that
    it was obliged to follow another decision of the Court of Appeal in  MM
    (Uganda) [2016] EWCA 617.  That was a case concerning foreign criminals
    which engaged Section 117C rather than Section 117B, and in  particular
    to the need in Section 117C(5) to show that it would be "unduly  harsh"
    rather than simply not unreasonable, to require the qualifying child to
    leave the UK.

24. However, the court in MA (Pakistan) considered that  the  structure  of
    the relevant provisions was sufficiently similar to  require  a  common
    approach.  Nevertheless, the court also held that Section 117B(6) was a
    self-contained  provision  in  the  sense  that  where  the  conditions
    specified in the subSection are satisfied, the public interest will not
    justify removal.  The wider public  interest  considerations  can  only
    come into play via the concept of  reasonableness  in  Section  117B(6)
    itself.  In this case, the judge has found that "the child is still  at
    an age when the presence of his father is not so significant or crucial
    as he becomes older" (paragraph 71).  The judge has  then  gone  on  to
    consider three discrete options that are available to Mr Hussani,  were
    he to remain in the UK, whilst the Appellant returns back to Iraq,  and
    the third of these options was that "the Appellant  can  go  alone  and
    apply for entry clearance to join Mr Hussani in due course".

25. This was an entirely reasonable prospect because "the waiting time  for
    most entry clearance decisions is 60 days.  There is little to  suggest
    that  any  of  these  possibilities  will  impact  adversely   on   the
    Appellant's child given his young age" (paragraph 72).

26. These findings were entirely open to the judge,  and  they  demonstrate
    that it was not unreasonable to expect the Appellant and her  child  to
    return to Iraq, bearing in mind the public interest  considerations  in
    favour  of  immigration  control,  which  are  a  matter  of  statutory
    importance and effect.

Notice of Decision

27. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

28. No anonymity direction is made.

29. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd October 2018

