
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/05279/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6 April 2017                           |On 9 May 2017                     |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     s h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Marwala, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, S H, was born in 1995 and is a  citizen  of  Iran.   The
    appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 December 2015 from  France
    and claimed asylum.  His claim was refused by the Secretary of State in
    a decision which is dated 9 May 2016.  The appellant  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Atkinson) which, in a  decision  promulgated
    on 28 September 2016, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals,
    with permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appeal turns on the Tribunal's treatment of the expert evidence  of
    Professor Joffe who had produced a number of reports between  2012-2016
    in respect of the likely risk which the appellant would face on  return
    to Iran.  Judge Atkinson referred to the  reports  of  2012,  2014  and
    August 2016 but he did not make any specific reference to a  report  of
    March 2016.  The appellant asserts that the failure  of  the  judge  to
    deal with the March 2016 report was a material error.  That report  had
    noted that, "over the past eighteen months tensions have  continued  to
    run high throughout Iranian  Kurdistan."   Inter  alia,  the  appellant
    claims that he will face the risk of persecution upon  return  to  Iran
    simply on account of his  Kurdish  ethnicity.   The  March  2016  Joffe
    report also noted that the government in  Iran  had  disproportionately
    targeted minority groups including Kurds and that "generalised tensions
    inside  Kurdistan  were  demonstrated  by   three   days   of   violent
    demonstrations  in  Mahabad  in  early  May  2015."   Professor   Joffe
    considered that Kurdistan  was  subject  to  "constant  low  levels  of
    violence which, on occasion, break out into open defiance  towards  the
    Iranian authorities ... the result is that any Kurd  returned  to  Iran
    must  anticipate  the  serious  risk  of  official  discrimination   or
    persecution simply on the  grounds  of  his  membership  of  an  ethnic
    group."

 3. Judge Atkinson [29]  referred  to  the  most  recent  country  guidance
    available from the Upper Tribunal, SSH  (illegal  exit:  failed  asylum
    seekers) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308:

    (a) An Iranian male whom it is sought to return to Iran, who  does  not
    possess a passport, will be returnable on a laissez  passer,  which  he
    can  obtain  from  the  Iranian  Embassy  on  proof  of  identity   and
    nationality.




    (b) An Iranian  male  in  respect  of  whom  no  adverse  interest  has
    previously been manifested by the Iranian State does not  face  a  real
    risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3 rights on return to Iran on
    account of having left Iran illegally  and/or  being  a  failed  asylum
    seeker. No such risk exists at the time of  questioning  on  return  to
    Iran nor after the facts (i.e. of  illegal  exit  and  being  a  failed
    asylum seeker) have been established. In particular,  there  is  not  a
    real risk of prosecution leading to imprisonment.

 4. At [30-34] Judge Atkinson wrote this:

         30.  Ms Singh submitted that it was open to me to depart from  that
             guidance [SSH] in the light of the expert evidence of Mr Joffe
             in his report dated 26 August 2016 and  his  previous  generic
             reports of 2012 and 2014.  It was submitted that the case  SSH
             failed to deal with the position of Kurds, did  not  have  the
             benefit of Mr Joffe's evidence and that the August 2016 report
             identified matters that had not been  properly  addressed.   I
             reject those submissions for the following reasons.

         31.  Personally, the Upper Tribunal clearly had  the  circumstances
             relating to the position of Kurds in mind given that both  SSH
             and [his co-appellant, HR] were accepted to be Kurds.

         32.  Second, that whilst the Upper Tribunal do not have the benefit
             of evidence of Mr Joffe (sic) his most recent report of August
             2016 in effect amounts to little more than a disagreement with
             the Upper Tribunal about the level of risk faced by  Kurds  at
             the generic level.  Mr Joffe does not forward any evidence  of
             specific cases of returnees being seriously mistreated on  the
             basis of being failed asylum seekers even if of Kurdish origin
             and in the absence of other, adverse, factors.

         33.  I follow therefore the guidance of the Upper Tribunal  in  SSH
             and HR.  I find that the appellant is a single male of Kurdish
             origin in respect of whom no adverse interests have previously
             been manifest.  Accordingly on return he will not face a  real
             risk of serious harm as a failed asylum seeker or as a  person
             who had exited Iran illegally.

         34.  I find the appellant has not discharged the burden of proof of
             having a well established fear of persecution for a Convention
             reason I therefore dismiss the appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
             Refugee Convention.

 5. There are a number of  challenges  to  the  judge's  reasoning  in  the
    grounds of appeal.  First, the appellant asserts that it is a  material
    error of law for the judge to have omitted any reference to  the  March
    2016 report (from which I have quoted above).  I do not find that  that
    ground has merit.  Having read  all  the  reports  of  Professor  Joffe
    submitted in this appeal, it is clear that he  has,  in  effect,  built
    upon his previous reports as he has successively submitted addendum and
    updating reports.  As a consequence,  his  opinion,  expressed  in  the
    March 2016 report that any  Kurd  returned  to  Iran  "must  anticipate
    serious risk of official discrimination or persecution" on the  grounds
    of his ethnicity was not expressed only and exclusively  in  the  March
    2016 report but was an opinion which is fundamental to the entirety  of
    Professor Joffe's evidence.  Furthermore, there is no  suggestion  that
    Judge  Atkinson  did  not  address  the  question  of  the  appellant's
    ethnicity as a risk factor in his analysis, as the  passages  from  the
    decision which I have quoted set out above make entirely clear.   Judge
    Atkinson did  not,  therefore,  err  in  law  by  not  making  specific
    reference to the March 2016 report; Judge Atkinson  has  addressed  the
    very issue which the appellant now complains he failed to address  from
    that March 2016 report.

 6. Secondly, the appellant asserts  that  the  Tribunal  in  SSH  was  not
    concerned specifically with Kurdish ethnicity as  a  sole  risk  factor
    upon return to Iran but also did not  have  the  benefit  of  Professor
    Joffe's reports that had been before Judge Atkinson.  In addition,  the
    appellant asserts that the Tribunal in SSH did not pay proper attention
    to the deteriorating security and domestic situation in Kurdistan which
    was outlined in Professor Joffe's evidence.

 7. At [34] the Tribunal in SSH wrote this:

    It was not suggested to us that an individual faces risk on  return  on
    the sole basis of being Kurdish.  It  was  however  agreed  that  being
    Kurdish was relevant  to  how  a  returnee  would  be  treated  by  the
    authorities. For example,  the  Operational  Guidance  Note  refers  at
    3.12.14 to the government disproportionally targeting minority  groups,
    including Kurds, for arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention and physical
    abuse. No examples however  have  been  provided  of  ill-treatment  of
    returnees with no relevant adverse interest factors  other  than  their
    Kurdish ethnicity, and we conclude that the evidence does not show risk
    of ill-treatment to such returnees, though we accept that it  might  be
    an  exacerbating  factor  for  a  returnee   otherwise   of   interest.
    Accordingly we conclude that it has not been shown that a person in the
    position of these appellants faces a real risk on return to Iran either
    on the basis of what would  happen  to  them  when  questioned  at  the
    airport or subsequently if they were convicted of an offence of illegal
    exit. With regard to HR specifically, it does not appear to be disputed
    that he is Kurdish and that he is undocumented: hence we see no  reason
    for remittal. Prosecution for illegal exit is an outcome not  generally
    experienced by such returnees, and where it does occur, the most likely
    sentence in relation to the illegal exit charge would be a fine. It has
    not been shown that there would be a real  risk  of  prosecution  under
    Article 500 for propaganda against the state on  the  basis  of  having
    made an asylum claim which was found to  be  false.  Accordingly  these
    appeals are dismissed.

 8. In the light of what is said by the Upper Tribunal at [34] of SSH, I do
    not accept the assertion made by the appellant in the  present  appeal.
    I do not accept that the comments of the Tribunal at [34]  are  obiter;
    indeed, the Tribunal has directly addressed Kurdish ethnicity as a risk
    factor.  The fact that the Tribunal records that it was "not  suggested
    to us" that Kurdish ethnicity per se was a risk factor is  not,  in  my
    opinion, an indication that the Tribunal  did  not  consider  that  its
    decision covered the position of ethnic Kurds.  It was simply the Upper
    Tribunal recording the fact that that there was no evidence  before  it
    to show that Kurdish ethnicity per se would  expose  an  individual  to
    risk.  Further, I accept that the Tribunal in SSH may not have had  the
    same expert evidence as was before Judge Atkinson in the present appeal
    but it did have expert evidence from Professor Joffe which, as  I  have
    noted above, asserts that Kurdish ethnicity is a risk factor.   In  the
    light of that fact, it cannot be successfully argued that the  Tribunal
    in SSH did not consider Kurdish ethnicity or that  Judge  Atkinson  had
    new and different evidence which was not before the Tribunal in SSH and
    which should have led him to discard the guidance offered  in  SSH.   I
    find that the risk factors argued before Judge Atkinson were in essence
    the same as those before the Tribunal in SSH.  On  the  basis  of  very
    similar or the same evidence (Professor Joffe) which  the  Tribunal  in
    SSH had rejected, Judge Atkinson gave  clear  and  cogent  reasons  for
    following SSH and refraining to depart from it.

 9. In the circumstances, I find that Judge Atkinson did not fail  to  deal
    with relevant evidence as  the  appellant  asserts.   I  find  that  he
    addressed all the issues which were put before  him.  I  find  that  he
    reached a conclusion to follow the country guidance of SSH  in  respect
    of the risk which the appellant  claimed  on  account  of  his  Kurdish
    ethnicity he would face on return to Iran.  There  is  nothing  in  the
    March 2016 report of Professor Joffe which compels a different  outcome
    to the appeal whilst the grounds of appeal have failed to  persuade  me
    that Judge Atkinson erred in law by following country guidance in  this
    instance.  The appeal is, therefore, dismissed.



Notice of Decision

10. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 29 April 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 29 April 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



