
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05329/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 27 February 2018                  |On 05 April 2018                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               MEHBOOB MUSTAFA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Warren instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton promulgated on  18  August  2017  in
        which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal.






Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on 20 February  1967
        who claims that if returned to Bangladeshi he will face persecution
        on the basis of his political opinion as a member of the Bangladesh
        National Party (BNP) and due to having been forced  to  give  false
        evidence in a murder case.
     3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom lawfully  with  a  Tier  4
        (General) Student Migrant Visa on 12 October 2009. On 3 March  2017
        the appellant  was  arrested  by  the  West  Midlands  Home  Office
        Enforcement team when he was discovered hiding under a bed  in  his
        wife's bedroom. On 4 March 2017 the appellant's wife  and  children
        were returned to Bangladesh by the UK  authorities.  The  appellant
        claimed asylum on 22 March 2017.  He was interviewed on 5 May 2017.
        The protection claim was refused in a refusal letter dated  25  May
        2017.
     4. The Secretary of State accepted the  appellant  is  a  national  of
        Bangladesh and his personal identity but not that he was  a  member
        of the BNP or that he experienced problems in Bangladesh due to his
        involvement with the BNP.
     5. Having considered the evidence, the Judge sets out findings of fact
        from [21] of the decision under challenge. The Judge draws together
        his thoughts at [29 - 31] in the following terms:

             29.   I must now draw together the various points in the  case
                  to  arrive  at  a  decision.  On  the  one  hand,  I  have
                  highlighted several aspects of the Appellant's case  which
                  troubled me and which have caused me to  exercise  caution
                  before arriving at a decision such as the  inconsistencies
                  in his account as to his role in  the  BNP,  the  lack  of
                  consistency and credibility relating to his  account  that
                  he had been politically engaged  for  the  8  or  9  years
                  before coming to the UK whilst also being  in  hiding  and
                  not living in any fixed abode, the  lack  of  any  further
                  threats having been made against him from  about  2004  or
                  2005 until he left Bangladesh, the lack of plausibility of
                  the continued outstanding  nature  of  the  criminal  case
                  relating to the murder of Tipu and Imran which occurred 18
                  years ago, and the claimed outstanding cases  against  the
                  Appellant stemming from the years 1991 to  1995  which  is
                  more than twenty years ago. On  the  other  hand,  I  have
                  referred to some documentation provided by  the  Appellant
                  in support of his claim such as the report from Dr  Obuaya
                  and the Rule 35 report.


             30.   In  conclusion,  applying  the  low  standard  of  proof
                  applicable to an appeal of this nature, I am not satisfied
                  that the Appellant  has  given  a  truthful  and  accurate
                  account and I do not find that he would be at real risk if
                  returned to Bangladesh. Taking all the available  evidence
                  into account, I do not accept  the  core  account  of  the
                  Appellant.


             31.  The Appellant has been in the UK for a  few  months  less
                  than 8 years. He has no family in the UK. His wife and two
                  children aged 11 and 13  were  removed  to  Bangladesh  in
                  March 2017 and are living there. The  Appellant  qualified
                  as a medical doctor in Bangladesh  and  pursued  unrelated
                  studies in the UK. Prior to  leaving  Bangladesh,  he  had
                  lived all his life in Bangladesh. I have not accepted  his
                  account and I see  no  reason  why  the  Appellant  cannot
                  return to Bangladesh and continue his life there with  the
                  assistance of his family. I do not find that there are any
                  exceptional  compelling  circumstances  and,  applying  SS
                  (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387, the Tribunal has no  need  to
                  consider Article 8 of the  ECHR  outside  the  Immigration
                  Rules.

     6. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on 16 November 2017; the operative part of the grant being
        in the following terms:

             "The grounds assert that the judge failed to deal with  highly
             material evidence. At [11] the Judge  noted  that  it  is  the
             Respondent's case that the Appellant was not named in  any  of
             the newspaper articles that he relied upon. However,  at  page
             C69 and C71 of the respondent's bundle the Appellant is  named
             in two separate articles in the Daily  Juger  Alo;  the  Judge
             does not deal with  this  highly  material  evidence  at  all.
             Additionally the Judge  states  at  [25]  that  the  Appellant
             stated that he did not experience any problems  in  Bangladesh
             for the last four or five years before he left the country. In
             fact the Appellant  stated  at  question  116  of  the  asylum
             interview that he was contacted and  threatened  in  2008  and
             2009. The Judge therefore left out of account three  important
             pieces of evidence. That amounts to an error  of  law  in  the
             assessment of the Appellant's credibility.


             In  an  otherwise  careful  decision  and   reasons,   it   is
             nonetheless arguable that the Judge erred in failing  to  take
             into account the Appellant's reply  to  question  116  of  the
             asylum interview. In that  reply  the  Appellant  stated  that
             Joseph had contacted him in 2008 and 2009 just before he  left
             Bangladesh to come to the UK. That is  arguably  pertinent  to
             the issue of credibility and in failing to  refer  to  it  the
             Judge arguably erred in law.

     7. The application is opposed by the Secretary of State.




Error of law


     8. It is submitted on the appellant's behalf that the Judge  erred  in
        failing to have regard to a particular piece  of  evidence,  namely
        the newspaper article. It was submitted on the  appellant's  behalf
        that  the  last  paragraph  of  the  newspaper  article  names  the
        appellant and that he also gave evidence that the  article  relates
        to him. At C71 is a further translation of the same newspaper  said
        to be dated 24 December 1994 which is said to  be  consistent  with
        the appellants involvement with the party and the fact  he  was  an
        activist. It was  argued  the  article  supported  the  appellant's
        account that  had  been  given.  At  [11]  of  the  decision  under
        challenge it is written:

             11.   With  respect  to  the  problems  of  the  Appellant  in
                  Bangladesh, reference is made to a different name to  that
                  of the Appellant being stated in the FIR of  the  incident
                  in September 1991 and to none  of  the  newspaper  article
                  submitted in relation to the incident  in  September  1991
                  mentioning the Appellant. It is stated that the  Appellant
                  has provided self-serving documents without  UK  certified
                  translations of them and, applying the principles  in  the
                  Tanveer Ahmed case, no weight has been placed  upon  those
                  documents.

     9. Although it is submitted on the appellants that  the  Judge  should
        have considered the same and the evidence as part of the claim  and
        that if the articles are accepted this will  be  highly  convincing
        evidence of the veracity of the appellant's claim, the first  issue
        to note is that [11] of the decision under  challenge  is  not  the
        Judge setting out findings of fact based upon an assessment of  the
        evidence. It falls within the section of the decision in which  the
        Judge was setting out the respondent's case. So far as [11] records
        the respondent's case no arguable legal error can be said to arise.
        Asserting it is anything more is the first of two  material  errors
        in the three pleaded grounds.
    10. The Judge set out what occurred at the hearing before  setting  out
        his findings of fact and reasons between [21 - 31] of the  decision
        under challenge.
    11. Miss Warren on behalf of the appellant  submitted  that  the  Judge
        sets out at [24] the reasons why the appellant's  account  was  not
        accepted relying on a number of further forms of evidence; although
        it is submitted this evidence shows that the appellant is a  leader
        and activist and that  the  Judge  needed  to  take  the  newspaper
        article into account in relation to this aspect. It  was  submitted
        the evidence was a material part of the account.
    12. There is no evidence made out, or credible submissions  made,  that
        all the Judge did in this  case  was  to  accept  the  respondent's
        position and go  no  further.  The  Judge's  findings  are  in  the
        following terms:

             24.  There are several aspects of this case which troubled me.
                  One of those aspects relates to the role of the  Appellant
                  within the  BNP.  The  Appellant  claims  to  have  become
                  involved with the BNP in January 1986 when he  would  have
                  been aged 18.  At  the  asylum  interview,  the  Appellant
                  stated that he was a normal activist when  he  joined  and
                  then from January 1993, some 7 years later, he was elected
                  to be the General  Secretary  of  Chattra  Dal  of  Rangur
                  Medical. A little  later  in  the  asylum  interview,  the
                  Appellant gives a different answer and states  that,  from
                  the very beginning, he was the leader of the  Chattra  Dal
                  wing. When asked to  explain  this  inconsistency  at  the
                  asylum, the Appellant answered that a leader  is  also  an
                  activist. I do not accept that explanation  and  find  the
                  Appellant has given inconsistent answers as  to  his  role
                  within the BNP. At the hearing, the  Appellant  was  asked
                  about the comment in his witness statement that,  for  the
                  last 8 or 9 years in Bangladesh, he had lived at the  same
                  address whereas in his witness statement  he  states  that
                  his nightly sleeping routine during that  period  was  not
                  permanent, nobody knew where he lived and he only gave the
                  address in the asylum interview as a  postal  address.  At
                  the hearing, when asked about  this,  the  Appellant  gave
                  evidence that he had been working on  policy  matters  for
                  political leaders during that period and  would  sleep  in
                  their accommodation. I do not accept that evidence because
                  I found the Appellant to be entirely unconvincing  in  the
                  evidence he that he gave  in  this  respect.  No  credible
                  explanation was given as to why the Appellant would change
                  his account so significantly in respect of  where  he  had
                  lived for a  period  of  8  or  9  years  before  he  left
                  Bangladesh. I was also unconvinced by the  evidence  given
                  by the Appellant as to exactly  what  were  his  political
                  activities during that period of time. I found his answers
                  to be evasive and to lack detail and I do not believe that
                  he was engaged in policy work for senior political leaders
                  and, at the same time, remaining in hiding. In respect  of
                  where the Appellant lived during his last 8 to 9 years  in
                  Bangladesh which, by his account, is directly connected to
                  the role that he was undertaking for the BNP  during  this
                  period of time, I found his evidence to be far-fetched and
                  not credible and I reject it for the reasons stated above.
                  I reach that conclusion having reminded  myself  again  of
                  the danger of  rejecting  evidence  because  it  does  not
                  appear to be inherently  plausible  from  a  'Westernised'
                  perspective.


             25.  Another aspect of the Appellant's account  that  troubles
                  me relates to the claimed incident  when  Tipu  and  Imran
                  were murdered. The Appellant's  account  is  that  he  was
                  threatened by the  brothers  of  Tipu,  namely  Lieutenant
                  General Ahmed Aziz and  Tofail  Ahmed  Joseph,  a  leading
                  figure in the criminal  underworld.  The  account  of  the
                  Appellant is that he was pressured to give false  evidence
                  to help exonerate the perpetrators of  the  murders  which
                  led to the threats against him. He stated  at  the  asylum
                  interview that he gave evidence as a witness in  2004  and
                  that the case is still ongoing. When asked at  the  asylum
                  interview as to when was the last time that he heard  from
                  Lieutenant General Ahmed Aziz, he answered that it was  in
                  2004 or 2005. When asked at the asylum  interview  whether
                  he had experienced any other problems in Bangladesh  after
                  this,  he  did  not  specify  having  suffered  any  other
                  problems. The last threat from the brothers  of  Tipu  was
                  therefore at the latest 12 years ago in 2005 and, for  the
                  4 to 5 years that  the  Appellant  continued  to  live  in
                  Bangladesh engaged in his claim  to  political  activities
                  prior to coming to the UK, he did not by his  own  account
                  experience any problems. I find it,  therefore,  difficult
                  to see how the Appellant could be in fear of his life  due
                  to the murder of Tipu and Imran  given  that  the  claimed
                  murders took place 18 years  ago,  the  last  threat  made
                  against the Appellant in relation to the murders was 12 to
                  13 years ago  and  the  Appellant  was  able  to  live  in
                  Bangladesh for 4 to 5 years after  the  last  threat  made
                  against him without experiencing any other threats. I also
                  find it difficult to accept that a criminal case  relating
                  to murders that took place 18  years  ago  has  still  not
                  reached a conclusion. I find the account of the  Appellant
                  as to the murders of Tipu and Imran and his involvement in
                  them to be far-fetched and not credible and, even  if  his
                  account is true, I do not see how the events since 2004 or
                  2005 demonstrates that the  Appellant  is  at  risk  as  a
                  consequence of the murders. Again, I found the evidence of
                  the Appellant at the hearing in this respect  to  be  very
                  unconvincing.


             26.  An additional element of  the  Appellant's  account  that
                  concerns me relates to Appellants  claim  that  there  are
                  outstanding cases against him. Those cases are referred to
                  in the letter dated 22.7.2017 from the  President  of  the
                  Bangladesh Jatiatabadi Chatradal, Central Unit in which it
                  is stated: "Later on, he had been  with  the  BNP  Doctors
                  Association of Bangladesh (DAB). Here in the  BNP  he  was
                  also a victim of the Opposition Parties several times  and
                  always under their threat. Still has got cases  line  with
                  the top judicial court". At  the  hearing,  the  Appellant
                  stated that the cases referred to  in  the  letter  derive
                  from the period between 1991  and  1996  and,  when  asked
                  whether his claim was that there would still be  cases  in
                  the courts system pending against him  from  a  period  21
                  years ago at the latest, the Appellant answered  that  the
                  cases are still in the court system, have not been  active
                  since 1999 but could be reinstated at any time in order to
                  stop the Appellant. I find that aspect of the  Appellant's
                  account difficult to believe. No detail has been  provided
                  by the Appellant in relation to any of these alleged court
                  cases against him. Neither has any detail  or  information
                  being provided in respect of these  cases  in  the  letter
                  dated 22.7.2017 from the President of the Central Unit  of
                  the Bangladesh Jatiatabadi Chatradal.   I  do  not  accept
                  that case allegedly filed against  the  Appellant  in  the
                  1990s that have, by his own account, been inactive for  18
                  years,  would  become  reactivated  on   his   return   to
                  Bangladesh.


             27.   The  Appellant  also  provided  other  documentation  in
                  support  of  his  claim.  One  of  those  documents  is  a
                  psychiatric report from Dr Chiedu Obuaya dated  20.7.2017.
                  Dr Obuaya is a consultant psychiatrist and his  report  is
                  based upon information provided directly  to  him  by  the
                  Appellant. The report states, among other things, that the
                  Appellant currently fulfils the criteria for an adjustment
                  disorder.  In  relation  to  the  possible  mental  health
                  consequences of a forced removal from the UK,  the  report
                  states: "From a purely psychiatric  viewpoint,  given  the
                  diagnosis  of  an  Adjustment  Disorder,   a   return   to
                  Bangladesh need not necessarily  impact  adversely  on  Mr
                  Mehboob's mental capacity or his capacity to remain  safe.
                  He  would  not,  in  my  clinical  opinion,  require   any
                  medication  or  treatment  from  psychiatric  services  if
                  returned there". I do not find, based upon the conclusions
                  in the report  of  Dr  Obuaya,  that  the  return  of  the
                  Appellant to Bangladesh would be likely to exasperate  his
                  medical condition. In relation to the Rule 35 report dated
                  14.4. 2017,  I  note  that  this  refers  to  the  section
                  entitled 'Relevant clinical observations and findings', to
                  the Appellant having an upper lip laceration, two marks on
                  the left knee and healed scars, and a healed scar  on  the
                  back of the left thumb. It is stated that his injuries are
                  consistent with his narration of events and would need  to
                  be looked into further. I note, in this respect, that  the
                  injuries that occurred to the Appellant  claimed  to  have
                  occurred 26 years ago in 1991 and I do not find  that  the
                  Rule 35 report is in anyway conclusive as to the course of
                  the injuries of the Appellant.


             28.  With respect to the point  in  time  when  the  Appellant
                  claimed  asylum  which  was  in  March  2017  after  being
                  arrested, the Appellant stated  at  the  asylum  interview
                  that he did not claim asylum earlier  because  he  thought
                  that his political party would come to power in  2014  and
                  he would then be able to return to his  country.  He  also
                  stated as a reason that, when the political situation  did
                  not and his political party did not come to power in 2014,
                  he was concerned about the situation where those with dual
                  nationality would be prevented from standing for  election
                  in  Bangladesh  which  would  affect  him.  The  Appellant
                  repeated those reasons at the hearing.  I  note  that  the
                  Appellant claimed asylum about  seven  and  a  half  years
                  after arriving in the UK and, it appears,  claimed  asylum
                  after his wife had also claimed asylum and only  after  he
                  had been arrested. I do not accept the  reasons  which  he
                  has provided for the delay is reasonable or credible.  His
                  account is that he had been involved in BMP  politics  for
                  more than 20 years before  arriving  in  the  UK  and  had
                  outstanding court cases against him. I do not accept, that
                  given his  circumstances  and  the  claimed  threats  made
                  against him, that is reasonable that he  would  have  only
                  claimed asylum after being arrested and more than 12 to 13
                  years after he had last been threatened in  Bangladesh.  I
                  find that the delay  of  the  Appellant  has  damaged  his
                  credibility for the reasons stated.


             29.  I must now draw together the various points in  the  case
                  to  arrive  at  a  decision.  On  the  one  hand,  I  have
                  highlighted several aspects of the Appellant's case  which
                  troubled me and which have caused me to  exercise  caution
                  before arriving at a decision such as the  inconsistencies
                  in his account  as  to  his  role  in  the  BNP,  lack  of
                  consistency and credibility relating to his  account  that
                  he had been politically engaged for the 8 or 9 years prior
                  to coming to the UK whilst also being in  hiding  and  not
                  living in any fixed abode, the lack of any further threats
                  having been made against him from about 2004 or 2005 until
                  he left  Bangladesh,  the  lack  of  plausibility  of  the
                  continued outstanding nature of the criminal case relating
                  to the murders of Tipu and Imran which occurred  18  years
                  ago,  and  the  claimed  outstanding  cases  against   the
                  Appellant stemming from the years 1991 to  1995  which  is
                  more than twenty years ago. On  the  other  hand,  I  have
                  referred to some documentation provided by  the  Appellant
                  in support of his claim such as the report from Dr  Obuaya
                  and the Rule 35 report.


             30.   In  conclusion,  applying  the  low  standard  of  proof
                  applicable in an appeal of this nature, I am not satisfied
                  that the Appellant  has  given  a  truthful  and  accurate
                  account and I do not find that he would be at real risk if
                  returned to Bangladesh. Taking all the available  evidence
                  into account, I do not accept  the  core  account  of  the
                  Appellant.

    13. In relation to documentation the Judge, having noted  the  identity
        of  the  applicant  both  in  terms  of  name  and  nationality  of
        Bangladesh is accepted by the respondent, noted  at  [23]  that  "I
        have considered all the documentation provided, even if  I  do  not
        refer  to  it  specifically   in   my   decision,   including   the
        documentation provided in the Appellants bundle for the hearing.  I
        listened carefully to the evidence of  the  Appellant  and  to  the
        submissions made on behalf of the Appellant and the  Respondent  at
        the hearing".
    14. It is correct to say the Judge relied  on  a  number  of  different
        aspects of the evidence in coming to the overall  conclusion  which
        the Judge was entitled to do. No arguable error is made out in  the
        approach taken by the Judge in  relation  to  considering  all  the
        material.
    15. In relation to the asylum interview, question 116, this section  of
        the interview [115 - 123] is in the following terms:


        |Question |Question         |Appellants answer                       |
|no.      |                 |                                        |
|115      |When was the last|Last time?                              |
|         |time you heard   |                                        |
|         |from Joseph?     |                                        |
|116      |Yes              |Erm, before I leave my country. 2008 or |
|         |                 |2009. But he don't know that I leave my |
|         |                 |country that time.                      |
|117      |And did Aziz get |Yes. He called me. That time, 2004, he  |
|         |in touch with you|was a Colonel that time, not major.     |
|         |after you        |                                        |
|         |provided false   |                                        |
|         |witness?         |                                        |
|118      |Okay. How many   |Aziz Ahymed called me not much more...  |
|         |times did he call|Two three times but Joseph called me    |
|         |you and what     |frequently from the prison.             |
|         |would he say?    |                                        |
|         |                 |That's why I changed my number many     |
|         |                 |times but all time he knows the numbers.|
|119      |Okay but what did|Over phone he don't give me direct      |
|         |Aziz Ahmed tell  |threat but in a sense it makes threat.  |
|         |you?             |Like a threat.                          |
|120      |What exactly did |That time told me that he gives it up on|
|         |he tell you?     |on God. Just like that, but actually he |
|         |                 |don't mean that                         |
|121      |Why did you take |Because I feel insecure many times in   |
|         |this to be a     |Dhaka City because I know they are      |
|         |threat?          |Joseph people.                          |
|122      |When was the last|That was 2004, 4 or 5.                  |
|         |time you heard   |                                        |
|         |from Aziz Ahmed? |                                        |
|123      |Did you          |2009, when I get the chance I apply for |
|         |experience any   |student Visa I get it, and come to UK.  |
|         |other problems in|Because of December 2008, Awami League  |
|         |BGD after this   |came into power. That's why I take the  |
|         |incident?        |chance to leave the country up to 2009, |
|         |                 |because that time Hasan was also        |
|         |                 |involved with Awami League.             |


    16. Is to be noted that the appellant's grounds of appeal are factually
        incorrect. The appellant's reply to the question at 116 is not that
        he was threatened in 2008 and 2009 as alleged in Ground 3 but  that
        it was 2008 or 2009. This is  the  second  material  error  in  the
        pleadings. Miss Warren accepted this error and  that  in  fact  the
        appellant was claiming to have been threatened on one occasion  not
        two but that the Judge did not refer to a singular event but  found
        the appellant had not been threatened.
    17. The Judge finds at [25] that the last contact from Lieutenant  Aziz
        was in 2004  or  2005.  That  accurately  reflects  the  answer  to
        question 122, set out above. No arguable legal error is made out.
    18. In relation to the finding the appellant  did  not  specify  having
        suffered  any  other  problems  this  is  in  accordance  with  the
        evidence, including the section of his  asylum  interview  set  out
        above. The appellant only claims to have left  as  a  result  of  a
        change in the ruling party not as a  result  of  anything  specific
        having happened to him. No arguable legal error is made out.
    19. In relation to the newspaper articles, having had  the  opportunity
        to consider the same in detail set out in the respondent's  bundle,
        it is factually correct to note that the name of the individual  in
        those documents is not the same name as that used by the  appellant
        in these proceedings. Mr McVeety submitted this is  the  point  set
        out in the reasons for refusal letter; that the person named in the
        document is not the appellant as it is somebody  with  a  different
        name. That document is not therefore material.
    20. The appellant in his witness statement claimed he was mentioned  in
        the document and his representative before the First-tier  Tribunal
        relied on the fact the appellant claimed it was him. The  appellant
        was aware that the respondent's position is that he was  not  named
        in the newspaper articles. The appellant claimed that he was  named
        through the use of a nickname which is different from the  name  is
        used in these proceedings. It was asserted the  Judge  should  have
        made finding and resolved the conflict in relation to the  evidence
        and the names.  I find it not made out that the person named in the
        newspaper articles and translation of the same has the same name as
        this appellant and that the key difference relates to the  surname.
        The appellant's assertion that this can be explained by the use  of
        a nickname has not been shown to be satisfactory in  light  of  the
        evidence as a whole. There is no  further  evidence  to  support  a
        claim that the name used in the article is a nickname  rather  that
        the correct name of the person involved in  the  events.  As  such,
        even though the Judge does not make  a  specific  finding  on  this
        point it is clear the Judge did not  accept  the  appellant  was  a
        credible witness and no material error is made out in the Judge not
        devoting more time to considering  the  newspaper  article  in  any
        greater depth than that recorded in  the  determination.  The  fact
        there  is  no  specific  separate  finding  bar  a  recording   the
        respondent's position that the  appellant  is  not  named  may,  by
        implication, indicate that this is precisely  the  view  the  Judge
        adopted.
    21. My finding of fact is that the articles did not name the  appellant
        and his assertion it is him through the use of  a  nickname  is  an
        attempt to tie an  unrelated  article  in  to  his  claim  for  the
        purposes of enhancing a weak  claim  for  asylum.   Therefore,  any
        failure to examine the matter further has  not  been  shown  to  be
        arguably material.
    22. In the alternative, in relation to the interview, even if the reply
        to  question  116   suggests   the   appellant   received   further
        communication in either 2008 or  2009  this  is  not  in  isolation
        determinative even if the Judge recorded that  no  further  contact
        occurred since 2004 or 2005. It is not made out on the  appellant's
        behalf that this is sufficient to establish arguable material legal
        error in light of the findings made.  A  large  number  of  adverse
        credibility  findings  have  been  made  based   upon   substantial
        inconsistencies in the evidence not challenged in  the  application
        for permission to appeal.  Reading  the  determination,  even  when
        compared with the limited scope of the application for  permission,
        it shows that those issues not challenged, which  therefore  stand,
        are more  than  sufficient  to  support  the  Judge's  finding  the
        appellant has not been telling the  truth  and  form  a  sufficient
        basis to reject his core account.
    23. The Judge clearly considered the evidence with the required  degree
        of anxious scrutiny and has given adequate reasons for the findings
        made. As such the weight to be given to the evidence was  a  matter
        for the Judge. The adverse findings were not made in isolation  but
        following consideration of the evidence in the round.
    24. Having considered the available  material,  submissions  made,  and
        appropriate legal tests, when looking at the  question  of  whether
        material error of law  has  been  made  and  bearing  in  mind  the
        challenge is to the decision to dismiss the appeal, I do  not  find
        it made out that the Judge has materially erred in law in a  manner
        material to the decision to dismiss the  appeal.  The  findings  of
        fact and overall conclusions are well within  the  range  of  those
        reasonably available to the Judge on the evidence.


Decision

    25. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    26. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 28 March 2018











