
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/05248/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th January 2018                 |On 9th February 2018                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                            mr fazal haq oryakhel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F O Mustapha, a solicitor with Wai Leung
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, who was born on  1st  January  1999,  is  a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan who arrived in the United Kingdom on 13th May 2015, in  the
    back of a  lorry.   He  claimed  asylum  on  27th  May  2015,  but  his
    application for protection was refused by the respondent  in  a  letter
    dated 18th May 2017, for reasons set out in that letter.

2.   The appellant appealed the respondent's decision  and  his  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Eban, sitting at Hatton Cross on 3rd
    July 2017.

3.   The  judge  considered  the  oral  evidence  of  the  appellant,  heard
    submissions  from  his  representative  and  then  she  considered  the
    background  evidence,  which  she  makes  extensive  reference  to   at
    paragraphs 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15, in order that she could  put  the
    appellant's claim into context and also to better inform her assessment
    of whether the appellant would be at any risk on his return.

4.   She found that the appellant  was  from  Barkelay  village  in  Laghman
    province and accepted the appellant's  account  that  his  brother  was
    warned by AGEs not to drive his truck, that the appellant  was  present
    when his brother was warned and that his brother  ignored  the  warning
    and was killed near Toor Ghar while  driving  a  truck  for  a  foreign
    company.  She did not believe there to  be  any  reasonable  likelihood
    that the Taliban sent a threatening letter addressed to the  appellant.
    She believed that his claim that they did send him such letter, was  an
    embellishment to his evidence to show that he would be  wanted  on  his
    return.

5.    As  recently  as  six  months  ago,  the  evidence  showed  that   the
    Taliban/AGEs had not sought to  take  action  against  the  appellant's
    family members because of his brother's activities as a  truck  driver.
    This is based on the appellant's evidence that he spoke to his maternal
    uncle some six months ago and  there  was  no  mention  that  they  had
    encountered any problems at that time.  This  indicated  to  the  judge
    that members  of  the  appellant's  family  have  no  interest  to  the
    Taliban/AGEs as a result of the appellant's brother's activities.   She
    found that the appellant was of low profile and although  he  may  well
    have been present when his brother was warned not to drive lorries  for
    foreigners, there was no reasonable likelihood  that  the  Taliban/AGEs
    would have any continuing interest in the appellant either in his  home
    area or in Kabul.

6.   She reached that conclusion, because the AGEs have  taken  no  interest
    in the appellant's relatives who remained in their home in  Afghanistan
    after the appellant's brother was killed  and  because  the  background
    evidence indicates that truck drivers, when they are off duty,  do  not
    risk being targeted because of their  job.   While  the  appellant  was
    present when his brother was warned, he himself was not a truck driver,
    and based on his evidence he was clearly a  child  at  the  time.   The
    judge dismissed the appellant's asylum appeal  finding  that  returning
    the appellant to Afghanistan, including Kabul, would not expose him  to
    a real risk of serious  harm.   She  dismissed  his  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds, she  dismissed  his  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  and
    dismissed the appellant's appeal under Article 3.

7.   The appellant, dissatisfied with that decision, sought and was  granted
    leave to appeal.  The grounds are brief comprising two  paragraphs.   I
    set them out below:-
         "5.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs  25(3)  and
             (4) did not accept the Appellant's claim  about  contact  with
             his family and rejected his evidence of a  threatening  letter
             from the Taliban in which he  was  the  subject  matter.   The
             Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  this  to  be   an
             embellishment to his evidence.  The Judge  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal was in error to then make her  finding  at  paragraph
             25(4) having rejected the Appellant's evidence of contact with
             his  family  and  threatening  letter  from  the  Taliban  (at
             paragraph 24).
         6.   The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  at  paragraph  27  found
             that the Appellant was not at risk from the Taliban because he
             was not a truck driver and was  a  minor  at  the  time.   She
             quoted background evidence in support of her finding.  This is
             an error because the evidence was that the Taliban were  aware
             that the Appellant and his brother travelled together  in  the
             truck and the first warning was to both of them.  On  the  day
             of the ambush both were in the truck and they were working and
             were not  'off  duty'.   Both  brothers  were  targeted.   The
             Appellant managed to escape.  The Taliban would  not  care  to
             distinguish who was driving and who was  not  or  whether  the
             Appellant was a minor or not.  Both were in the truck  working
             in defiance of the Taliban's specific warning.  The  Judge  of
             the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to properly  consider
             background evidence on risk to the Appellant thereby."

8.   I heard submissions at some length from Ms Mustapha and from  Mr  Kotas
    on behalf of the Secretary of State.  The judge recorded at paragraph 7
    of her determination  that  when  she  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant he confirmed, "that when the lorry was stopped by the Taliban
    he was with his brother in the cab and they were both threatened".   He
    said that the Taliban shot at them about three days  later  while  they
    passed through a narrow valley.  The appellant said  that  his  brother
    was hit by a bullet and his brother told him to run ,which he did.

9.   The judge, having  considered  the  background  evidence,  quoted  from
    paragraph 8.4.2 of the European Asylum Support Office published  report
    in 2012 on  intimidation  and  targeted  violence  against  Afghans  by
    insurgents (see Paragraph 11).  Summarising the findings from  a  range
    of sources the report noted:

         "...The EASO report also noted that construction workers and  truck
         drivers may face a  risk  of  being  targeted  whilst  working  but
         generally, when they were off duty, they were not at risk of  being
         targeted because of their job, but where the risk may  increase  if
         they work for the IMF or an IMF contractor."

    She also quoted the UNHCR which provided the following  information  in
    its  eligibility  guidelines  for  Afghanistan  including  humanitarian
    workers:-

         "AGEs are  reported  to  target  civilians  who  are  employees  of
         international  or  Afghanistan  humanitarian  organisations...  and
         truck drivers....".

10.  At paragraph  12  of  her  determination,  she  also  quoted  from  the
    February 2015 Country Information and Guidance Report.  This said:-

         "2.2.33  The same [EASO] report added: 'Truck drivers may face  the
                risk of being targeted when they are on the road.  When they
                are off duty, no evidence  is  present  that  suggests  they
                would be  targeted  by  insurgents  because  of  their  job.
                However, circumstances could  increase  the  risk  of  being
                tracked down while off duty, for example truck  drivers  who
                work for IMF'."

    It is clear, therefore that before making her findings the  judge  very
    clearly did consider the background evidence.

11.  In paragraph 5 of the determination ,the judge briefly  summarises  the
    basis of the appellant's claim and explains that  some  three  or  four
    days after receiving a warning, four or five  members  of  the  Taliban
    attacked the lorry that the appellant's brother was driving  near  Toor
    Ghar.  The appellant's brother was shot in the  chest.   The  appellant
    managed to jump out and hid in a woodland area for  two  nights  before
    returning home.  The judge makes it perfectly clear therefore that  she
    was aware that the appellant was travelling with his brother  when  his
    brother was shot.

12.  However the risk to lorry drivers appears, according to the  background
    evidence, to be a risk they face only when they are driving,  not  when
    they are off duty, unless there are circumstances which could  increase
    the risk of them being tracked down while off duty, for  example  truck
    drivers who work for IMF.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  did  not
    misunderstand elements of the appellant's  claim.   The  appellant  did
    indicate in his evidence that both he and his brother  were  warned  by
    the Taliban of working and that they were both threatened.   The  judge
    has however carefully examined the background evidence and found  there
    to be no risk to the appellant were he to return, because the  risk  is
    only to drivers at a time when they are  working.   The  appellant  was
    working as his brother's assistant or "mate",  but  of  course  on  his
    return he would not be working as a lorry driver's assistant.

13.  So far as the first challenge to the determination is concerned,  I  do
    not agree that this is an error of law.  The judge was entitled on  the
    evidence before her to find that there  was  no  reasonable  likelihood
    that the Taliban sent a threatening letter addressed to the  appellant.
    She was entitled to find that this was an embellishment to his evidence
    to show that he would be wanted on his return.  He had never  mentioned
    this prior  to  the  hearing.   The  judge  made  that  finding  having
    carefully  examined  the  background  evidence.   The  appellant   gave
    evidence that he had spoken to  his  maternal  uncle  some  six  months
    previously and at  that  time  there  was  no  mention  that  they  had
    encountered any problems.  As a result, the judge was entitled to  find
    that no members of the appellant's brother's family were of interest to
    the Taliban/AGEs as a result of the appellant's brother's activities.

14.  The judge found,  at  paragraph  24  of  her  determination,  that  the
    appellant's account of his contact with his family since arrival in the
    United Kingdom differed from what he had said only a few months earlier
    in his asylum interview.  Then, he said he  had  no  contact  with  his
    family.  The questions put to the  appellant  about  contact  with  his
    family during his asylum interview were clear,  as  were  his  replies.
    However, the appellant told the judge that threats in  the  form  of  a
    letter had been sent to him by the Taliban who were seeking him out and
    that he learned of this  a  few  months  before  his  Asylum  Interview
    Record.  The appellant's evidence was that  he  did  not  mention  this
    letter from the Taliban before telling the judge about it,  because  he
    did not realise its significance.  The judge believed that even  though
    the appellant had no schooling at all, he would still have realised the
    importance to his case of him being actively sought by the Taliban  and
    this is not something he would have  forgotten  to  draw  attention  to
    those advising him when they were preparing  his  case,  from  whom  he
    feared, and why.  If the appellant had in fact been in contact with his
    family as the judge believed, then the appellant would  have  indicated
    to the judge that the Taliban had taken a continuing interest in him or
    his family members, if in fact they had done so.   The  fact  that  the
    appellant did not make that claim to the judge indicated to  the  judge
    that members of the appellant's brother's family were of no interest to
    the Taliban or the AGEs as a result of the appellant's  brother  having
    driven a lorry.  That too was a finding which the judge was entitled to
    make on the evidence before her.  I agree with Mr Kotas  who  submitted
    that the appellant's grounds of appeal amount to nothing  more  than  a
    simple disagreement with the judge's decision.  They fail  to  identify
    any error of law.

Notice of Decision

15.  The making of the determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Eban  did
    not involve the making of an error of law.  I uphold her determination.
     This appeal is dismissed.

Lifting of the Anonymity Direction

Judge Eban quite properly made an order regarding anonymity  under  Rule  13
of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
Chamber) Rules 2014.  Both representatives agreed that given  the  appellant
has now passed the age of maturity it was no  longer  necessary  to  protect
his identity.  The anonymity direction shall no longer apply.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley   Date: 9 February 2018
