
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05442/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 October 2019                   |On 18 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    Z. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr. I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Griffith ('the Judge') issued on 26 July 2019 by which the  appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the respondent  to  refuse  to  grant  him
    international protection was dismissed.

 2. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Murray granted permission to appeal on
    all grounds.  I shall address the contents of this grant in more detail
    below.

Anonymity

 3. The Judge did not issue an anonymity order. This is a matter  in  which
    the appellant has sought asylum. I am mindful of Guidance Note 2013  No
    1 concerned with anonymity orders and I observe that the starting point
    for consideration of anonymity orders in  this  chamber  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, as in all courts and Tribunals, is open justice.  However,  I
    note paragraph 13 of the Guidance Note where it is confirmed that it is
    the present practice of both the First-tier Tribunal and this  Tribunal
    that an anonymity order is made in all appeals raising asylum or  other
    international protection claims. Pursuant to Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ('the  2008  Rules')  I  make  an
    anonymity order in the following terms:

         'Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no  report
         of these  proceedings  or  any  formal  publication  thereof  shall
         directly or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This  direction
         applies to amongst others the appellant  and  the  respondent.  Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
         of court proceedings and I do so in order to avoid a likelihood  of
         serious harm arising to the appellant  from  the  contents  of  his
         protection claim being known to the public.'




Hearing of Appeal in the Absence of the Appellant

 4. The Tribunal received a letter from Winston Rose  Solicitors,  dated  4
    October 2019,  in  which  it  was  confirmed  that  they  were  without
    instructions and wished to come off the Tribunal record.  Efforts  were
    made by the Tribunal on the morning of the hearing to ascertain  as  to
    whether the appellant intended to attend the hearing. A member  of  the
    Tribunal staff contacted the appellant by  telephone  at  approximately
    10.25 in the morning. The appellant stated that according to  a  letter
    he had received a letter from the  Home  Office  his  appeal  had  been
    listed in error. He was not coming to the hearing and he confirmed that
    he was content for the matter be decided by the Judge. Upon  inspection
    of the file it is much more likely  than  not  that  the  appellant  is
    referring to the Rule 24 letter issued  by  the  respondent,  dated  13
    September 2019, in which it is observed that  there  was  a  likelihood
    that permission to appeal had been accidentally granted by  a  slip  of
    the pen.

 5.  I  considered  Rule  38  of  the  2008  Rules   when   assessing   the
    appropriateness of  continuing  the  hearing  in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant. I was satisfied that  the  appellant  was  notified  of  the
    hearing as his previous solicitors confirmed that they were aware as to
    it having been listed when seeking to come off record.  This  evidences
    that they received the notice of hearing on the appellant's  behalf.  I
    further considered that it was in the interests of justice  to  proceed
    with this hearing as the respondent ensured that she had taken steps to
    be represented, and Mr Jarvis confirmed that he was ready to proceed. I
    further observed that the appellant had consented for this matter to be
    decided in his absence.  In  such  circumstances  I  confirmed  at  the
    hearing that I would proceed in the appellant's absence.


Background

 6. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh and is presently aged 37.  He
    entered this country unlawfully in  2000  with  the  assistance  of  an
    agent. In 2005 he applied for indefinite leave to remain outside of the
    Immigration Rules. The  respondent  refused  the  application  and  the
    appellant's appeal was dismissed on 7 October 2008.

 7. On 14 October 2015, he made an application for leave to remain on human
    rights (article 8) grounds relying upon his private  life  rights.  The
    application was refused by way of a decision dated 22 February 2016 and
    was certified by  the  respondent  as  being  clearly  unfounded  under
    section 94  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    Preparations were made for the applicant's departure from this country,
    but he failed to report and was considered to have absconded as  of  22
    March 2016.

 8. The appellant applied for asylum on 7 November 2017.  He  detailed  two
    reasons for seeking international protection. Firstly,  he  asserted  a
    fear of  ill-treatment  at  the  hands  of  the  brother  of  a  former
    girlfriend from whom he had split in 2001. He further relied  upon  his
    having joined the Bangladesh National Party ('the BNP') whilst  present
    in this country in 2016. He confirmed that his political activities had
    been revealed to  persons  in  Bangladesh  through  Facebook  postings,
    leading to members of  his  family  being  threatened.  The  respondent
    refused the claim by way of a decision dated 24 May 2019.


Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at  Taylor  House  on  8  July
    2019. She found the appellant to be incredible as to his stated history
    and dismissed the appeal. In reaching  this  decision  she  relied,  in
    part, upon the appellant's history. At [68] she reasoned:

         'I consider the appellant's immigration history is relevant to  the
         assessment of his credibility. He only claimed asylum when he  knew
         he was going to be  removed  and  had  absconded.  His  immigration
         history shows that he failed to leave the UK after  attempting  and
         failing on more than one occasion to secure leave under  the  rules
         or the ECHR. I find he claimed asylum when he did in order to delay
         his removal and for no other reason.  I  find  the  delay  and  the
         circumstances in which  he  claimed  asylum  are  damaging  to  his
         credibility. I note that in previous applications he stated that he
         came to the UK in order to improve his education and for  a  better
         life.  I also note that in the 2008  appeal  the  judge  made  very
         serious adverse credibility findings against him.'

10. As to the appellant's involvement with the BNP the  Judge  reasoned  at
    [65]:

         'I also find his grasp of the party's aims, given his claim to have
         been a member for three years and an active participant, to be very
         weak. Both in his interview and oral evidence he was only  able  to
         give the most general information about  the  aims  of  the  party,
         which is available in the public domain. Also, none of the  letters
         of support (all recently dated) from individuals who  claim  to  be
         his friends make any mention of his membership of,  or  association
         with, the BNP UK. I am not, therefore, satisfied he is a member  of
         the BNP UK as claimed.'

11. The Judge further reasoned  as  to  the  asserted  fear  from  the  ex-
    girlfriend's brother, at [66] - [67]:


         'The appellant also relied  on  his  fear  of  reprisals  from  the
         brother of a former girlfriend with whom he was in  a  relationship
         when he was in his teens and to whom he has not spoken since  1998.
         His claim that he would be at risk from the brother seventeen years
         after his last telephone conversation with his former girlfriend in
         2001 is not credible. His evidence regarding the brother is  rather
         vague and contradictory in that he said in interview  that  he  did
         not speak to the brother but that he had threatened to beat him  if
         he continued the relationship and warned him not to  go  to  school
         with her.


         It is also surprising that he would  put  his  former  girlfriend's
         safety at risk by continuing to telephone her from the UK when  her
         brother was present. He claimed that her  brother  would  take  the
         telephone, tell her off and beat her. Even if at its highest  I  am
         prepared to accept that he was friends with a girl of his  own  age
         which did not meet with the  approval  of  her  family,  I  do  not
         accept, given the passage of time and the appellant's absence  from
         the country, that the brother poses any risk to  him.  Furthermore,
         there is no evidence  that  the  brother  is  associated  with  the
         student wing of the Awami League and in a  position  where  he  can
         exert influence over the party or over the police.'




Grounds of Appeal

12. The grounds of appeal are confusingly drafted.  Paragraph  numbers  are
    non-sequential, and  it  is  difficult  to  identify  when  one  ground
    concludes and the next one commences. The drafting style  suggests  the
    use of a template for sections of  the  grounds  with  bald  assertions
    being made in the absence of any  express  reference  to  the  decision
    itself. Such approach to the drafting of grounds of appeal  as  adopted
    by Winston Rose Solicitors is  inappropriate  and  has  the  effect  of
    diminishing the quality and efficiency of justice  in  immigration  and
    asylum work.

13. Seven grounds of appeal are identified:

         (i)      The Judge erred at [64] of the  decision  and  reasons  in
             requiring corroboration of the appellant's  membership  of  the
             BNP.


         (ii)     The Judge erred  at  [65]  in  failing  to  identify  what
             questions if any the appellant was unable to answer  about  his
             association with the BNP.


         (iii)    The Judge erred at [66] in failing to provide any  or  any
             adequate reasoning as  to  the  rejection  of  the  appellant's
             evidence contrary to MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan  [2013]
             UKUT 00641 (IAC).


         (iv)     The Judge applied the wrong standard of proof.


         (v)      The Judge failed to consider the case in the round.


         (vi)      The  Judge  erred  in  'failing  to  consider  that   the
             appellant's return would trigger the adverse interest in him by
             the girlfriend's brother and that  the  only  reason  that  the
             interest is dormant is because  the  appellant  is  not  within
             reach.'


         (vii)    The Judge failed to apply the low threshold as to the risk
             on return.


14. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Murray granted permission  to  appeal.
    However, her reasoning confirms her actual intention had been to refuse
    to grant permission as can be observed at [2] and [3]:

         'The grounds assert that the Judge erred in requiring corroboration
         of the Appellant's membership of the BNP; failing to refer  to  the
         Appellant's witness' evidence; failing to provide adequate reasons;
         failing to take relevant factors  into  account  and  applying  the
         wrong standard of proof and making findings on an erroneous basis.


         There is no arguable  error  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal. The Judge  found  at  paragraph  64  that  there  was  no
         satisfactory explanation as to why evidence had not  been  produced
         in circumstances where on the  Appellant's  account  such  evidence
         existed. The Judge gave adequate reasons at paragraphs 64 to 70 for
         finding that the Appellant's account was not  a  credible  one  and
         took all relevant evidence into account. There is  no  misdirection
         as to the standard of proof.'


15. In the circumstances arising in this matter, as permission  was  stated
    as 'granted' in the Tribunal's standard  document  and  there  were  no
    words of limitation the appellant is  entitled  to  argue  all  grounds
    before the Tribunal.

16. A Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent and details at [2]:

         'The respondent opposes the appellant's appeal. It  is  clear  from
         the reasons for decision  that  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Murray
         intended to refuse  permission  to  appeal,  and  that  the  header
         'Permission to Appeal is Granted' is a slip of the pen. Paragraph 3
         of the reasons states that there is no arguable  error,  the  judge
         gave adequate reasons for finding that the appellant's account  was
         not credible, took all relevant  evidence  into  account  and  that
         there is no misdirection as to the standard of proof.'






Decision on Error of Law

17. The grounds concerned with the application of the standard of proof and
    consideration of the case in the round, namely grounds  (iv),  (v)  and
    (vii), have been drafted in a  template  nature  and  do  not  seek  to
    specify where such error is said to arise  within  the  decision.  Upon
    careful consideration of the Judge's reasoning it is clear  that  these
    grounds have no meritorious basis.

18. As to the issue of corroboration, the appellant asserts  that  [64]  of
    the decision provides clear evidence that the  Judge  required  him  to
    provide corroboration as to his  membership  of  the  BNP  contrary  to
    paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules, and further having  made  this
    decision  at  the  outset  of  her  findings  the  Judge  allowed  this
    requirement to infect the remaining assessment and so she operated with
    a closed mind. It is well established that  it  is  a  misdirection  to
    imply that  corroboration  is  necessary  for  a  positive  credibility
    finding, however upon considering [64] it is clear that the Judge  does
    not adopt this erroneous approach. She does  not  assert  that  without
    providing corroborating  evidence  the  appellant  could  not  succeed.
    Rather she comments that documents that could reasonably be expected to
    be produced had not been. A Judge is not required to leave out of their
    assessment the absence of documentary evidence which  could  reasonably
    be expected and is relatively  easy  to  secure:  ST  (Corroboration  -
    Kasolo) Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119.  The Court of Appeal  held  in  TK
    (Burundi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA  Civ
    40; [2009] Imm AR 488 that  where  there  are  circumstances  in  which
    evidence corroborating the appellant's evidence was  easily  obtainable
    the lack of such evidence must affect the assessment of the appellant's
    credibility.  It  follows  that  where  in  assessing  the  appellant's
    credibility the Judge relied on the fact that there was no  independent
    supporting  evidence  provided  by  the  appellant  that   was   easily
    obtainable and there was no  credible  account  for  its  absence,  she
    committed no error of law when relying on that fact when rejecting  the
    account of the appellant.

19. The appellant complains that at [65] the Judge failed to identify  what
    if any questions he was unable to answer as to his association with the
    BNP. This is not an accurate reflection of the Judge's  reasoning.  She
    did not assert that  the  appellant  was  unable  to  answer  questions
    correctly. Rather, she made a lawful  evaluative  judgment  as  to  the
    limited general knowledge possessed by the appellant as to the aims and
    structure of the political party that he claimed to be active with. The
    appellant was made aware by the respondent by  means  of  the  decision
    letter that he was deemed to have provided poorly detailed  answers  as
    to his  political  involvement  with  the  respondent  observing  'your
    answers were vague and given your claimed membership it  is  considered
    reasonable to expect a level of detail when describing your  motivation
    for joining the political party.' The Judge was  lawfully  entitled  to
    assess the evidence presented to her and to observe that it possessed a
    general quality reflecting information available in the  public  domain
    and did not exhibit the detailed  knowledge  expected  of  a  political
    activist, a status the appellant asserted he held. She gave cogent  and
    lawful reasons for her findings. There is no merit in  this  ground  of
    challenge.

20. In all of the circumstances,  though  concise,  the  Judge's  reasoning
    provides  lawful  reasons  as  to  why  the  appellant's  evidence  was
    rejected. Clear reliance was placed upon his poor  immigration  history
    and the significant delay in claiming asylum. The Judge was entitled to
    assess the vague account provided in  circumstances  where  the  burden
    rested upon the appellant not only to establish his claim on  political
    grounds but also  to  explain  why  the  brother  of  an  ex-girlfriend
    continued to hold significant hostility towards him some  twenty  years
    after the relationship had come to an end and seventeen years after  he
    had last spoken to the brother. There are no merits  in  grounds  (iii)
    and (vi).


Notice of Decision

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

23. An anonymity order is made.

24. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 15 October 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and no fee award is payable.

Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 15 October 2019

