
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/05709/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Oral decision given following hearing     | On 4 October 2017                |
|On 24 August 2017                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                     NF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by Times PBS Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior  Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Afghanistan who was born on
    21 July 2001; accordingly she is now 16 years  old.   She  applied  for
    asylum and humanitarian protection in this country but her  application
    was refused by the respondent.  She was 13 years old at the  time  when
    she had entered the UK and claimed asylum on 30 March 2015,  which  was
    the day after she had  entered.   Unusually  the  respondent  not  only
    refused the claim for asylum but did not grant her discretionary  leave
    to remain.  Also, and this would appear not to  be  standard  practice,
    the respondent did not make any attempt to  trace  whether  or  not  if
    returned to Afghanistan as  a  minor  adequate  reception  arrangements
    would be made.  It is the  appellant's  case  that  she  had  told  the
    respondent not only the name of the village where she had  been  living
    in Afghanistan but also the name of the school and her teacher.  It was
    her case that her parents were currently living in Pakistan where  they
    had fled and would accordingly not be available to receive her.

 2. It is not necessary for the purposes of this decision  to  set  out  in
    great detail the case which the appellant put; the reasons why this  is
    not necessary will appear from what is set out below.

 3. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision and her appeal
    was heard before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Chana  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross on 22 March 2017.  In a Decision and Reasons  promulgated  on  11
    April 2017 the appeal was dismissed.

 4. Regrettably the decision  itself  is  riddled  with  typographical  and
    grammatical errors which would (or should)  have  been  discovered  and
    corrected following a proper exercise in proofreading; they  were  not.
    Amongst the more egregious errors which should have been corrected  the
    appellant's Counsel, Mr Edward Nicholson, is described  throughout  the
    decision as Ms Nicholson.  Also, (and it is not clear whether this  was
    as a result of the judge sending an incomplete decision or pages  being
    left out following the  sending  of  the  decision  by  the  judge  for
    promulgation and  the  Tribunal  then  sending  that  decision  to  the
    parties) it appears that two or  three  pages  were  missing  from  the
    decision when it was  sent  to  the  parties.   Also,  regrettably,  Mr
    Nicholson before this Tribunal today  has  confirmed  that  it  is  his
    understanding that the appellant did not in terms ask for a copy of the
    full decision to be sent which the appellant's solicitors  should  have
    requested formally.  If they had it would undoubtedly have  been  sent;
    to the extent that the appellant then  needed  further  time  to  lodge
    their appeal or draft their grounds, this would undoubtedly  have  been
    granted because clearly it is inappropriate for a party to be  expected
    to draft grounds of appeal in respect of a decision which they had  not
    received.  Rather than doing this, however, grounds were settled  which
    included a ground that the decision should be set aside for the  reason
    that the complete decision had not been sent.  Although  this  Tribunal
    has a discretion to set aside a judgment where a complete decision  has
    not been sent, in these circumstances, where no prejudice has  resulted
    because this error can  be  corrected,  it  is  neither  necessary  nor
    appropriate to exercise this discretion.  I  accordingly  turn  now  to
    consider this appeal on its merits.

 5. The appellant now appeals against the decision, permission having  been
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on  3  July  2017.   I  note  in
    passing that although the first ground, which, as I  have  stated,  was
    that the appeal should be allowed because the complete decision had not
    been sent, was not excluded Judge Kebede did state in her  reasons  for
    granting permission that "I find little merit in the first ground".

 6. At paragraph 5 of her decision Judge Chana had said  that  "she  claims
    that she wold [sic] be at risk of persecution in Pakistan [sic] as  she
    will be forced to marry a former Mujahedin commander".   The  case  was
    that she would be at risk of persecution  in  Afghanistan  but  nothing
    turns on that.  The reason why the appellant claimed that she would  be
    at risk was because it is  said  the  commander  wanted  to  exact  his
    revenge on the appellant's family because her  father  had  killed  his
    (the commander's) son in a road  accident.   Her  claim  (supported  by
    expert evidence by Dr Giustozzi) was that she would be  forced  into  a
    baad marriage, which occurs when girls are "given" to persons in  order
    to compensate for  a  crime  which  has  been  committed.   The  expert
    evidence given referred to a UNICEF report from  2008,  which  set  out
    that although marriages of girls under 15 were not allowed, in practice
    this law is not respected.

 7. The respondent did not accept that the appellant's  case  was  credible
    and did not carry out the tracing obligations which it was incumbent on
    her to carry out in order to ensure that  the  best  interests  of  the
    child were properly  considered  and  looked  after  in  light  of  her
    obligations  within  Section  55  of  the  Borders,   Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009, which provides as follows:

         "55  Duty regarding the welfare of children

             (1)   The  Secretary  of  State  must  make  arrangements  for
                  ensuring that -

                  (a)   the  functions  mentioned  in  subsection  (2)   are
                      discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and
                      promote the welfare of children who are in the United
                      Kingdom, and

                  (b)  any services provided by another person  pursuant  to
                      arrangements which are made by the Secretary of State
                      and relate to the discharge of a  function  mentioned
                      in subSection (2) are provided having regard to  that
                      need.

             (2)  The functions referred to in subSection (1) are -

                  (a)  any function of the Secretary of State in relation to
                      immigration, asylum or nationality;

                  (b)  any  function  conferred  by  or  by  virtue  of  the
                      Immigration Acts on an Immigration Officer;

                  (c)  any general customs  function  of  the  Secretary  of
                      State;

                  (d)   any  customs  function  conferred  on  a  designated
                      customs official.

             (3)  A person exercising  any  of  those  functions  must,  in
                  exercising the function, have regard to any guidance given
                  to the person by the Secretary of State for the purpose of
                  subSection (1).  ..."

 8. The general practice of the respondent in cases like this is  to  grant
    discretionary leave to remain to a minor until that minor  reaches  his
    or her adulthood, and certainly this would not usually be departed from
    unless the respondent was satisfied that  there  will  be  satisfactory
    arrangements made for that child to be properly received in the country
    to which that child was to be returned.

 9. Without needing to go through the decision in any  great  detail  there
    are a number of assumptions made within the decision which  should  not
    have been made.  I need only refer to the most obvious,  because  these
    have been accepted on behalf of the respondent  as  being  sufficiently
    serious that the decision itself is not sustainable.  I  note  that  at
    the hearing Mr Nicholson (referred to as "Ms  Nicholson"  at  paragraph
    24) made an application for an adjournment  in  order  to  provide  the
    respondent  with  a  proper  opportunity  to  carry  out  her   tracing
    obligations with regard to the  circumstances  which  would  greet  the
    appellant on return to Afghanistan, the appellant having given the name
    of her school and her teacher.  However,  at  paragraph  67  the  judge
    found as follows:

         "67. The appellant and her uncle [who had  given  evidence  at  the
             hearing]  know  exactly  where  the  appellant's  parents  are
             because they are in contact with each other constantly.   This
             relieves the respondent of their duty to trace the appellant's
             parent's [sic] whereabouts.  It is not  enough  therefore  for
             the uncle now to say that he will not take the appellant to be
             with her parents".

10. It was, as noted above, the appellant's case that her parents  were  in
    Pakistan, and it is not clear what standard of proof the judge  applied
    when two paragraphs later at paragraph 69 she stated  that  "I  do  not
    accept  that  the  appellant's  parents  went  to  Pakistan  after  the
    appellant came to the United Kingdom".  Also  it  is  unclear  how  the
    judge could properly find that the uncle would take  the  appellant  to
    Afghanistan when he had said in terms in evidence that he would not.

11. At paragraph 56 of her decision, the judge stated as follows:

         "56. If the commander met the appellant  he  would  have  seen  the
             appellant has a disability in her hand.  The appellant  claims
             that she is missing fingers and toes.  Background evidence  on
             treatment of people with disabilities in Afghanistan states

                  'thirdly, the  value  given  by  this  approach  to  human
                  diversity and the interactions between disability, gender,
                  cultural and  ethnic  dynamics  and  religion  [presumably
                  meant to be 'religious'] implications is also particularly
                  important  in  view  of  the  research  carried   out   in
                  Afghanistan.  The difference entailed by these  variations
                  has to be accounted for when addressing the demands of the
                  quality.  The burden of physical disability on men injured
                  during the war is considerably less than that of the  same
                  disability on a young unmarried woman disabled at birth'.

             It further states 'disability, especially  those  that  result
             from congenital problems, disease and cannot be attributed  to
             clear-cut cause, is often considered as a problem  brought  on
             by divine punishment or  a  person's  bad  luck.   [Presumably
             there should be a close quotation mark there].

         57.  I therefore do not find  it  credible  that  [presumably  this
             should then be 'a']  high-ranking  and  influential  commander
             would want to marry a girl aged 13 years old with a disability
             she has had since birth".

12. I will refer below to the submissions made on behalf of the  respondent
    with respect to this aspect of the decision.

13. At paragraph 54, having set out what was said in the UNICEF  report  of
    2008, which I have referred to above, in which it was stated  that  the
    law was not respected with regard to the minimum age of  marriage,  the
    judge stated as follows:

         "However, the dates  of  the  report  are  from  2008  -  2009  and
         therefore it is not the current situation".

14. What is missing from this decision is any reference to any evidence  at
    all that the position had changed since the date this report was  made.
    It is also unclear from within the decision that the judge  appreciated
    the correct standard of proof.  Although it is  the  responsibility  of
    the judge to consider overall whether a  person  is  at  real  risk  on
    return, the judge did speculate as to what the explanation was for  the
    appellant having been sent to this country and  this  is  contained  at
    paragraph 66 of her decision:

         "66. In her witness statement at paragraph 3, the appellant  stated
             that her disability makes it difficult  for  her  to  do  what
             other kids are doing.  She also said that she has pain in  her
             hands and legs especially when she does sports.  She said that
             she did not go to a doctor in Afghanistan because there are no
             medical facilities in Afghanistan.  Her uncle  said  all  that
             the appellant can get in Afghanistan are  painkillers  because
             there are no adequate medical facilities.   This  demonstrates
             to me that the  appellant  and  her  parents  would  like  the
             appellant to have good medical facilities for  her  condition.
             In the circumstances, I find that the more likely  explanation
             for why the appellant has come to this country for  for  [sic]
             medical  reasons  and  not  because  she   fears   anyone   in
             Afghanistan.  I find that the appellant's asylum claim  is  an
             elaborate ruse in order to come to this country to  live  with
             her uncle for medical treatment".

15. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Singh very properly  conceded  that  he
    could not seek to persuade the Tribunal to uphold this decision.  I set
    out his words as follows:

         "The parts you have read [I had referred him to some of the aspects
         of the decision  with  which  I  had  concern]  clearly  amount  to
         material errors of law, particularly in relation to the  assumption
         of what the commander would feel  about  marrying  a  girl  with  a
         disability.

         There is nothing in the papers which suggests  that  the  appellant
         came  to  the  UK  solely  because  of  her  medical  difficulties.
         Therefore,  the  judge's  conclusion  to   this   effect   is   not
         sustainable.  Also I cannot maintain either that  the  parents  are
         still in Pakistan and can receive the appellant".

16. I entirely agree and I agree also with the submissions made  on  behalf
    of both parties that the appropriate course is for this  appeal  to  be
    sent back to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard de  novo  completely
    afresh with no findings retained.  The reason is because the  appellant
    has not had yet a fair hearing, and I shall so order.

17. It may be appropriate in this case for the respondent in  the  meantime
    to make proper attempts to trace whatever family the appellant may have
    either in Afghanistan  or  in  Pakistan  if  it  is  feasible  for  the
    appellant to be returned to that country, but that is not a matter  for
    me to decide at this stage.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana is set aside  as  containing
a material error of law.  The appeal will  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal, sitting at Hatton Cross, to be reheard by any First-tier  Tribunal
Judge other than Judge Chana.  No findings will be retained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal  Judge  Craig                                           Date:
    29 September 2017





