
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05472/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 2 October 2017                     |On 9 October 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     NF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms a Heller, Counsel instructed by John Street
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Thailand and her date of  birth  is  [  ]
    1981. She came to the UK in 2013 as a visitor with leave until 11 March
    2014.    She made an application for asylum and this was refused on  25
    May 2017. She appealed and her appeal was dismissed  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Mitchell in a determination that was promulgated on
    7 July 2017, following a  hearing  on  5  July  2017.   Permission  was
    granted to the Appellant by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hodgkinson
    on 1 August 2017.

2.   The first ground asserts  that  the  judge  erred  in  respect  of  the
    credibility findings and a number of  points  are  raised.  The  second
    ground of appeal is that the judge did not assess  credibility  in  the
    light of the background  evidence  that  was  before  him.   Ms  Heller
    expanded on this ground in oral submissions and did not address  me  in
    relation to the first ground of appeal which is set out at considerable
    length between [2] and [15] of the grounds, but  she  stated  that  she
    relied on both grounds.

3.   The Appellant's case before Judge Mitchell was that she attended a  New
    Year's Eve party in Bangkok in December 2011 and that the  majority  of
    people who attended the party were police officers.  At the  party  she
    was introduced to a high ranking  member  of  the  police  force  whose
    nickname was John.  She refused  his  offer  to  become  his  mistress.
    During her screening interview when she was asked at  2.5  whether  she
    had been  subject  to  exploitation,  for  example  being  forced  into
    prostitution, forced labour or whether she has reason to  believe  that
    she was exploited, she stated that "Police in  Thailand  wanted  me  to
    sleep with them - this has not actually happened as I  ran  away  -  in
    2010".  At paragraph 4.1 of the screening interview when she was  asked
    to briefly explain all of the reasons why she could not return home  to
    Thailand she stated:-

     "I am scared of a policeman - he is a powerful person.  He said  -  'If
         I will not be with him - I will not have freedom.'   He  will  find
         me.  If I return I can't do anything - he will find me".

4.   The Appellant was interviewed in respect of her claim  for  asylum  and
    she stated that she had overheard John speaking to another officer, her
    friend's husband, and John stated to the officer that he had  killed  a
    solicitor.  John, according to the Appellant, looked  shocked  when  he
    became aware that the Appellant had heard him.  John sent the Appellant
    a text on 2 January 2012 that said "Since you have turned  me  down  it
    will cause me to lose face in front of my peers and you know my  secret
    about the solicitor.  I will kill you the same  way  as  I  killed  the
    solicitor".  The judge attached weight  to  the  Appellant  having  not
    mentioned the murder in her  screening  interview,  or  indeed  to  the
    witness, her partner, S.  The judge found the evidence was unsupported.
     The Appellant did not have evidence of the text message and the  judge
    attached weight to this.  The judge concluded that it  was  not  likely
    that a senior officer would make a confession of murder by  text.   The
    judge found as follows at [20]:-

         "The Secretary of State has raised the valid credibility issue that
         it does not likely that the senior police officer would  send  what
         amounts to a confession to the  Appellant  by  text  message  which
         presumably would have been traceable back to him if she  had  shown
         the matter to a police officer investigating the alleged  death  of
         the solicitor.  Any police officer would know this and it does  not
         seem to be a credible claim at all."

5.   The Appellant's evidence relating to after the incident  at  the  party
    was that she was threatened on three occasions and she was followed and
    someone came to the door of her home.  She asserted that someone put  a
    note under the door threatening her and telling her that she had better
    disappear.  The  judge  recorded  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  the
    threatening letter was made after  April  in  May  (with  reference  to
    question 16 of the asylum interview).  However, her evidence  was  that
    she had travelled to Singapore in February 2012 for 21 to 25  days  and
    the judge concluded that it was hard to understand  why  the  Appellant
    returned to her apartment as according to her evidence she had received
    a  death  threat  and  had  already  fled  to  another  country.    The
    Appellant's evidence was that when she returned to  Bangkok  she  moved
    out of her apartment and did not return to her place of work.

6.   The judge recorded the Appellant's oral evidence that  she  stated  her
    friend's husband put the note through the door.  However,  he  observed
    that she had not mentioned this before and when she was asked  how  she
    knew that this was the case she stated that she had viewed the CCTV  of
    the security personnel in  the  place  where  she  lived.   Again,  the
    Appellant had not mentioned this previously  and  the  judge  concluded
    that it was a surprising development.

7.   The Appellant's evidence was that she had been followed and  there  was
    a police officer outside her building in a civilian car.   However,  it
    transpired that this was a marked car with a civilian  inside  and  the
    judge found that the Appellant has at various times described this as a
    single police officer in a car and a car full of policemen (see  [21]).



8.   In oral evidence the Appellant said  that  the  senior  police  officer
    came and knocked at the door at 4.00 a.m. and that she did  not  answer
    the door and that the  knocking  continued  for  ten  minutes  and  she
    pretended not to be there.  However, the judge considered  question  15
    of the asylum interview where the Appellant had stated  that  "someone"
    came to the door of her home and put a piece of paper under  the  door.
    At this time she did not mention the senior police  officer  coming  to
    the door or the prolonged  knocking.   The  judge  found  that  it  was
    surprising that she would not mention this  direct  threat  during  her
    interview.

9.   The judge concluded as follows:-

         "23. The appellant has been significantly inconsistent as  to  when
             these events occurred.  It was highlighted to me that the Thai
             calendar is approximately 543  years  ahead  of  the  European
             calendar.  This may explain why the appellant one point  (sic)
             in the interview (question 19) was trying to convert the  Thai
             year to an English year.  However, the appellant  has  claimed
             in her screening  interview  that  the  party  occurred  since
             December 2009.  The appellant in her statement said  that  she
             started to see some men following (me) and  became  frightened
             and decided to leave and go to Singapore  I  think  in  August
             2011; that would mean that the New Year's  party  occurred  in
             December 2010.  In  her  evidence,  she  said  that  she  left
             Thailand six months after the party and  threats.   Since  she
             left after August 2013 that would have meant  that  the  party
             was in December 2012.


         24.  I sought clarification of this during the hearing  as  it  was
             extremely unclear what the appellant  was  saying  at  various
             times.     It    was    eventually     clarified,     somewhat
             unsatisfactorily, that the New Year's party  occurred  at  the
             end of December 2011.


         25.  The appellant left Thailand in September 2013 to come  to  the
             United Kingdom.  In the intervening period, the appellant says
             that she travelled to Singapore on four occasions to get  away
             from the senior police officer.  She could only spend up to 25
             days on each occasion in Singapore before having to return  to
             Thailand.  Her evidence was that she had spent two periods  of
             21 days and two periods of 25 days in Singapore; less than 100
             days in total.  The first time  she  travelled  there  was  in
             February 2012 and the last time was  in  November  2012.   The
             appellant therefore spent at least 15 months back in Thailand.
              The appellant in her interview was asked when  she  had  left
             Thailand.  She said at question 25 in August  2011  I  do  not
             remember the month (sic).  She said at question  28  that  she
             had only spent 20 days in Singapore.  She did not mention  the
             number of time (sic) she  had  travelled  to  Singapore.   The
             appellant confirmed its (sic) question 38 that she could  only
             stay in Singapore for 25 days with  her  Visa.   Fundamentally
             the appellant spent at least 18 months after the event  either
             in Singapore or in Thailand.  The maximum period of  time  she
             would have been outside of Thailand would have been 100 days.


         26.  The appellant in her oral evidence said that she had travelled
             to Phuket and remained there.  In her interview and  statement
             she did not mention moving to Phuket.  She did not  say  where
             she had been living but was given the opportunity  to  explain
             where she had been living and  she  said  that  she  had  live
             daughter-in-law Bangkok (question 44).  It is unclear  whether
             that meant  she  lived  in  Bangkok  when  she  returned  from
             Singapore or she lived there generally before the party.


         27.  The appellant was able to remain in Thailand for a significant
             period of time before she travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom.
             Her  story   has   grown   and   has   been   embellished   as
             inconsistencies have been highlighted to her  in  the  reasons
             for decision letter and earlier."

10.  The judge again considered the timing  issue  at  [31]  and  stated  as
    follows:-

         "The appellant has claimed that there were police officers  outside
         the place where she resided.  The appellant described this as being
         a single police officer in a marked police car.  The story she told
         [S] was that there were lots of police officers in  a  car  outside
         the accommodation.  The appellant has claimed that there  would  be
         police officers outside her accommodation undertaking surveillance.
          The appellant implies that all of this happened  between  the  New
         Year's party and her first  departure  for  Singapore  in  February
         2012.  If the police officers knew  where  the  appellant  was  and
         wished to cause harm they could have easily  done  so  during  that
         time.  The fact that there  were  no  other  threats  made  to  the
         appellant subsequently and that she was able to leave  the  country
         on her own passport on several occasions is indicative that  senior
         police officer (sic) does  not  have  any  power  or  has  no  real
         interest in the appellant."

11.  The judge found that the Appellant had been remarkably vague about  the
    name and rank of the police officer and that she had had opportunity to
    ascertain his name and identity:

         "13. The appellant has been unclear as regards  the  rank  of  this
             police officer and he has been at various times referred to as
             a Colonel, a Major, a Major General, a secret agent, a  senior
             police officer, and finally a Superintendent.   The  appellant
             clearly has no idea as to the rank of this officer but assumes
             that he is a senior officer as  he  is  the  superior  to  her
             friend's husband, Oout.
         ...
         32.  The appellant has been remarkably vague  about  the  name  and
             rank  of  the  police   officer   involved.    She   has   had
             opportunities to ascertain his correct name and his identity."

12.   The judge made the following findings:-

         "33. The appellant remained in Thailand for a significant period of
             time. The appellant clearly had a viable  option  of  internal
             relocation within that country.  She lived in that country for
             a significant period of time before travelling to  the  United
             Kingdom.  The appellant once in the  United  Kingdom  did  not
             return to her home country or claim asylum upon arrival.


         34.  There is no evidence of any enquiries being made with  regards
             to the appellant.  No charges have been laid against her.  The
             appellant has never been attacked or  directly  threatened  by
             the senior police officer or any  of  his  men.   The  claimed
             events occurred many years ago.


         35.   The  Secretary  of  State  considers  that  the   appellant's
             credibility has been adversely affected as she failed to claim
             asylum until she was arrested 10 April 2017 or upon arrival in
             the United Kingdom on 28 November 2013 as she claimed she  was
             fleeing problems in her country Section 8 of  the  Asylum  and
             Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004.   The
             appellant only claimed asylum on 24 April 2017 some two  weeks
             after she had been encountered by  the  immigration  officers.
             The appellant's claim that she was unaware  of  the  issue  of
             asylum is  not  credible.   She  has  passed  through  several
             immigration controls in Singapore and Thailand.  The appellant
             travelled to the United Kingdom to escape but  did  not  claim
             asylum  upon  arrival.   She  passed  through  UK  immigration
             control.   She  speaks  English  well  and  is   clearly   not
             unsophisticated or unworldly.  It is simply not credible  that
             she did not know about the issue of asylum.


         36.  Having considered the evidence, I conclude that the  appellant
             has fabricated her claim.  Her credibility has been  adversely
             affected.  She has been inconsistent as regards  key  elements
             of her story and remarkably vague as regards  other  elements.
             The appellant has no credibility about her claim to be in fear
             of return to Thailand.  In reaching  that  assessment  I  have
             applied the low standard required in these proceedings.


         37.  The appellant has not shown that there is a convention  reason
             under  the  refugee  convention.   I  therefore  dismiss   the
             appellant's appeal under the refugee convention as there is no
             convention reason."

13.  The judge took into account that the Appellant came to the UK  in  2013
    but she failed to make an asylum claim until she  was  arrested  on  10
    April 2017. The judge found at [41] that the Secretary of State clearly
    set out in the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  why  the  authorities  in
    Thailand would be able to offer protection to the Appellant  and  "that
    has not been challenged in any material way by the respondent (sic)  or
    her representatives" and  the  judge  went  on  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant could seek the protection  of  the  authorities  in  Thailand
    and/or has a viable option of living elsewhere in Thailand as  she  did
    do for a considerable period of time.

The Grounds of Appeal

14.  The  grounds  argue  that  the  judge  erred  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant had been remarkably vague about the  name  and  rank  of  the
    police officer involved and that she had had opportunities to ascertain
    his correct name and identity.  The judge  erred  because  he  made  no
    reference to the interpreter having had difficulty in  translating  the
    police officer's rank in the course of the hearing. He did not refer to
    the appellant's evidence, following a break in  the  hearing  with  the
    judge's permission, which gave her  the  opportunity  to  look  up  the
    English equivalent for the Thai ranks within the police  force.  Having
    done this, her evidence was, ultimately, that the police officer was  a
    Superintendent  and  that   her   friend's   husband   was   a   Deputy
    Superintendent.

15.  First, the grounds as conceded by Ms Heller misquote  the  decision  of
    the judge by making reference to "multiple"  opportunities,  whilst  in
    fact the judge stated that  the  Appellant  had  had  opportunities  to
    ascertain the police officer's correct name and rank.  Secondly; there,
    is no mention at the hearing of an adjournment,  but  in  my  view  the
    issue is not material.  The judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant had been unclear  and  inconsistent  in  her  evidence.   The
    grounds argue that the Appellant would not risk alerting her friend  in
    Bangkok who is married to the subordinate  police  officer  as  to  her
    whereabouts in order to find out the rank of the officers and that  her
    parents who live elsewhere in Thailand would not have  access  to  such
    information. However, the  judge  did  not  expect  her  to  make  such
    enquiries.  The Appellant had plenty of opportunity before the  hearing
    to confirm her evidence in relation to the  police  officer's  rank  by
    looking  up  the  English  equivalent,  as  she  did  at  the  hearing,
    presumably by way of an online dictionary, instead of leaving  this  to
    the eleventh hour.   I observe that the  Appellant's  evidence  in  her
    witness statement is that she did not know the officer's rank  and  she
    had not been able to ascertain his rank when  she  was  interviewed  in
    relation to her asylum claim.

16.  The grounds argue that the judge erred because he  attached  weight  to
    the Appellant failure to mention a  significant  aspect  of  her  claim
    during her screening interview.  The grounds argue that the nature of a
    screening interview is that it is not apt for a detailed description of
    the Appellant's claim.  However,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  attach
    weight to the omission  by  the  Appellant  to  mention  that  she  had
    overheard the senior officer saying that he had killed a solicitor  and
    that this and the fact that she had turned him down led to him making a
    threat to kill her.  It is not a matter of  the  Appellant  failing  to
    give details of her claim. She failed to mention a  significant  aspect
    of her claim and the judge was entitled to conclude  that  this  was  a
    material omission.

17.   It is argued in the grounds that the judge did not take  into  account
    the  submissions raised in the Appellant's  skeleton  argument,  namely
    that in the Appellant's screening interview there  was  no  interpreter
    present and it was argued that any discrepancies between the  screening
    interview and later accounts could not be relied on.   The  judge  also
    did not mention the Appellant's claim in oral evidence when  questioned
    about the lack of detail about the policeman that the Thai  interpreter
    present at her substantive interview "was not very efficient".

18.      It is my view that the judge was entitled to attach weight  to  the
    screening interview.  Whilst there may have been no interpreter present
    it is inconceivable, having read the  screening  interview,   that  the
    Appellant did  not  understand  the  questions  asked.  Whilst  it  was
    conducted in English, there was no suggestion at the time that she  was
    unable to understand the questions and it is simply  not  supported  by
    the answers that she gave,  despite  her  request  for  an  interpreter
    during the substantive interview.

19.  In respect of any problem the  Appellant  claims  to  have  experienced
    with interpretation at the substantive interview  stage,  she  made  no
    mention of it in her witness statement. It is not entirely  clear  what
    evidence was before the judge in this respect; however, she signed  the
    record of the interview and she had not made any challenge to it  prior
    to the hearing.   The  argument  raised  in  the  submissions  was  not
    supported by the evidence and if the judge did not engage with  it,  it
    was not material to the outcome.

20.  The grounds argue that the judge erred in relation to the  evidence  of
    S (the Appellant's partner).  He gave evidence and the judge stated the
    following at [28] in relation to this:-

     "The appellant did not mention the fact  that  she  had  overheard  the
         senior police officer saying that he had killed a solicitor or that
         he would kill her because she had overheard  that  conversation  in
         her screening interview.  This is reinforced by the fact  that  [S]
         came to give evidence to the tribunal and his evidence related only
         to the fact that the senior police officer had been rebuffed in his
         sexual advances to the appellant and there was no  mention  of  the
         murder of the solicitor at all.  [S] did not know about the alleged
         murder of the solicitor whatsoever.  He had been told this story at
         the outset of their relationship  before  the  appellant  had  been
         detained.   The  appellant  had  recited  the  story  about   being
         rejecting (sic) the senior police officer's  advances  to  him  and
         then she repeated that in the screening interview that occurred  on
         28 April 2017.  She had never ever  mentioned  the  murder  of  the
         solicitor previously.  The murder was only mentioned later  at  the
         Asylum Interview (AI)."

21.  The grounds argue that the  judge  omitted  to  record  that  S  stated
    evidence that "he was appalled at what (the Appellant) said,  (he)  did
    not want to ask any further questions."  However, in my view the  judge
    drew reasonable inferences from the evidence that the Appellant had not
    told him of a material piece of evidence that formed part of her claim.
    This was considered in the context of the evidence as a whole  and  the
    grounds fail to establish error in the approach of the judge.

22.  It is argued  in  the  grounds  that  the  judge  erred  at  [30]  with
    reference  to  the  Appellant  having  not  produced  a  copy  of   the
    letter/note or text that was allegedly sent  to  her.   The  ground  is
    misconceived.  It was a matter for the judge what weight to  attach  to
    the evidence or lack of it.

23.   The judge was wholly entitled to take  into  account  the  Appellant's
    evidence that she gave at the hearing which she had failed  to  mention
    previously, including the CCTV evidence and the note having been pushed
    under her door.  The judge was entitled to conclude that this was a key
    element in the story.

24.  The grounds assert that the Appellant answered all the questions  asked
    in the interview and cannot be blamed for failing  to  mention  matters
    that she had not been asked about.  However, this wholly misunderstands
    the burden of proof and the opportunity that the  Appellant  had  post-
    interview to make reference to material matters, for  example,  in  her
    witness statement which she failed to do. I have taken into account the
    Appellant's witness statement which is, considering the issues, lacking
    in detail.  It may be that the  appellant  was  poorly  served  by  her
    representatives, but I cannot speculate.

25.  The grounds assert that the judge at  [31]  was  wrong  to  expect  the
    Appellant to go behind the thinking  of  police  officers.   The  judge
    found that if the police officers knew  where  the  Appellant  was  and
    wished to cause harm to her that they could easily have done so  during
    the period between New Year and her first departure  for  Singapore  in
    February 2012.  What weight to attach to  this  evidence  was  again  a
    matter for the judge and [31] discloses no error of law.

26.   The grounds argue that the judge erred at [34]  because  he  concluded
    that there was no evidence of enquiries having been made  with  regards
    to the Appellant, however this did  not  take  into  account  her  oral
    evidence where the Appellant stated that she knew her friend was trying
    to get in touch because her husband had told her to  find  her  through
    Facebook and social media and that all of her friends  were  asked  the
    same question to try and find her.  However,  the  grounds  ignore  the
    conclusions of the judge.  He  did  not  accept  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant. He did not find her to be credible.

27.      The background evidence that was before  the  judge  was  a  report
    entitled "Royal Thai Police" from Wikipedia and the  document  is  four
    pages and establishes that there is  corruption  in  the  Thai  Police.
    Specific reference was made by Ms Heller to a particular  paragraph  on
    the second page, fifth bullet point, which reads:-

     "As a condition of being appointed to the National Legislative  Council
         (NLC), prospective members were required to reveal their assets and
         liabilities. The disclosures  by  would-be  NLC  members  of  their
         assets shocked many Thais. 'Police Chief  Somyos  Poompanmuang  and
         his wife's net worth was  revealed  to  about  355.8  million  baht
         (roughly $11 million) [sic], raising questions about how a lifelong
         career in the public service could have made him a millionaire many
         times over'."

28.  Ms Heller also referred to the skeleton argument that  was  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  reference  in  it  to  "sufficiency  of
    protection and the US State Department Report" of  which  she  did  not
    have a copy, but the quote in the skeleton argument reads as follows:-

     "Few complaints resulted in punishment of alleged offenders, and  there
         were numerous examples  of  investigations  lasting  years  without
         resolution of alleged security force abuses.  Human  rights  groups
         criticized  the  'superficial  nature'  of  police   and   judicial
         investigations  into  incidents  of  alleged  torture   and   other
         mistreatment by security officers."

     The report, according to the skeleton argument,  went  on  to  consider
    complaints of police abuse and noted "There were reports police  abused
    prisoners and detainees, generally with impunity".  Reference  is  made
    to "Trial procedures" and the following is quoted:-

     "Several NGOs expressed concern about the lack of  adequate  protection
         for witnesses,  particularly  in  cases  involving  alleged  police
         wrongdoing".

     It  was  asserted  in  the  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that  the  Appellant's  subjective  fear  is  corroborated  by
    country materials.

29.  Whilst Ms Heller did not make oral submissions, she indicated that  the
    Appellant relied on ground 1. Therefore I have engaged with the  issues
    raised therein. However, ground 1 is an extensive list of disagreements
    with a selection of findings of the judge. They  wholly  disregard  the
    significant problems in the account given by the Appellant and they  do
    not properly engage with the judge's findings.

30.      In respect of ground 2, sufficiency of  protection  as  a  discrete
    issue was not material to the outcome of this appeal because the  judge
    found that the Appellant was not at risk on return.  I understand  that
    in order to reach that conclusion the  judge  should  have  taken  into
    account the background evidence that  was  before  him  in  respect  of
    police corruption.   A  proper  reading  of  that  background  evidence
    reveals that there is corruption within the police force  in  Thailand.
    However,  there  were  many  problems  with  the  Appellant's  account,
    including that she had delayed making a claim and the rejection of  her
    explanation that she was not aware of the "issue of asylum."  The judge
    made  extensive  adverse  credibility  findings,  many  of  which   are
    unchallenged in respect of her claim to be at risk on return.  I am not
    satisfied that the judge did not  take  the  background  evidence  into
    account. My view is that he concluded that it was not  material  and  I
    agree with this. Whilst the  evidence  establishes  corruption  in  the
    police force in Thailand, there  is  no  specific  evidence  about  the
    officers involved in this incident or any background evidence  specific
    to the claim made by the Appellant.  In these circumstances, if  indeed
    the judge erred, I am satisfied  that  it  is  not  a  material  error,
    because considering the evidence in the round, he  would  have  reached
    the same conclusion.  In respect of the finding at [20],  whilst  there
    is corruption within the  police  force,  this  would  not  necessarily
    explain why a senior police officer would recklessly confess to  murder
    to the Appellant in a text message. The judge was entitled  to  take  a
    negative view of this.

Notice of Decision

There is no material  error  of  law  and  the  decision  of  the  judge  is
    maintained.


Signed                 Joanna McWilliam          Date  6 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
