
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05171/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 22 January 2019                     |On 13 February 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                           ATHULA INDIKA JAYARATNE
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 1  February  1971.  He
      appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Young
      sitting at Hatton Cross on 23 May 2018 in which  the  Judge  dismissed
      the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the  Respondent  dated  5
      April 2018. That decision was to refuse  the  Appellant's  application
      for international protection.


   2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 October 2008 with  a
      student visa issued on 11 September 2008. His leave as a  student  was
      extended until 14 March 2011.  An  application  for  leave  to  remain
      outside the rules was refused on 5 July 2013. After being served  with
      form IAS 96 he made a claim for asylum on 5 July 2016 the  refusal  of
      which led to the present proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant claimed asylum on the basis that he had  a  well-founded
      fear of persecution in Sri Lanka due  to  his  political  opinion.  On
      return to Sri Lanka he would be killed  because  of  articles  he  had
      written whilst working as a journalist.  He  had  written  an  article
      about the illegal production and distribution of alcohol in Sri  Lanka
      and had written articles whilst living in Dubai  criticising  the  Sri
      Lankan government. He was arrested on 25 March 2008 and ill-treated by
      a group of unknown men. Since  arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom  his
      family continued to receive threats because he had continued with  his
      critical articles after the incident in March 2008.

The Decision at First Instance

   4. At [86] the Judge set out his conclusions. It was not  clear  how  the
      Appellant would become known to and receive threats from alleged thugs
      at a time when he was said to be writing articles under a pseudonym in
      Dubai. There were no articles written by the  Appellant  produced  for
      the hearing. He claimed he had given them to his  previous  solicitors
      who had lost them but there was no support for that proposition. There
      was no correspondence from any hospital  in  Colombo  to  confirm  the
      treatment the Appellant received in 2008.


   5. His account of the attacks upon him were inconsistent. He had made  no
      mention of a subsequent incident  in  July  2008  in  his  substantive
      asylum interview. There was an inconsistency in  the  account  of  the
      March 2008  incident  between  what  he  said  to  the  Respondent  in
      interview and what he said in his  subsequent  witness  statement.  In
      interview he said he was taken away  and  beaten  up  whereas  in  his
      witness statement he said he was attacked in front of the attendees of
      a ceremony. The Appellant was  inconsistent  about  what  injuries  he
      reported from the March 2008 incident.

   6. An Article which the Appellant  relied  upon  about  the  ceremony  in
      question made no reference to anyone being attacked. The Appellant had
      delayed his claim for asylum having entered a course of  study  rather
      than making any asylum claim based on his  past  experiences.  He  had
      sought an extension to his student visa but still made  no  claim  for
      asylum. There was no confirmation of  his  claim  that  he  had  given
      instructions for an asylum claim to be made in 2011. Even on the lower
      standard of proof the Appellant's account was  not  credible  and  the
      Judge dismissed it.

The Onward Appeal

   7. The Appellant appealed against this decision  in  grounds  settled  by
      counsel who appeared at first instance and who appeared before me. The
      grounds argued that the Judge had refused to adjourn the hearing for a
      medico-legal report in respect of the  Appellant's  physical  scarring
      and mental health. The refusal was on the grounds that  the  Appellant
      had had considerable time to obtain a report. That was the wrong test.
      The correct test was whether an appeal could be fairly  determined  in
      the absence of an adjournment and the  grounds  relied  on  the  Upper
      Tribunal authority of Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 418.


   8. The Judge's approach to  the  evidence  was  flawed  in  that  he  had
      rejected the Appellant's account  because  of  a  lack  of  supporting
      documentation when corroboration was  not  necessary,  see  ST  [2004]
      UKAIT 119. The Judge had given no reasons why he rejected the evidence
      in support of the Appellant's claim to be a journalist which  included
      a letter from a fellow  journalist  and  a  letter  from  a  newspaper
      confirming the Appellant worked as a  senior  journalist.  There  were
      also photographs showing the Appellant with  media  persons  at  media
      events. The co-worker had confirmed  the  Appellant  contributed  news
      items criticising the then government and was attacked by  the  Deputy
      Labour Minister and his security team.  The  Appellant  could  not  be
      expected to explain how the alleged thugs had found him.

   9. The Judge had given inadequate reasons for rejecting  the  claim  that
      the Appellant had given papers to a previous solicitor  who  had  lost
      them. The news article  written  by  the  Appellant  was  inflammatory
      because it referred to  further  enquiries  revealing  that  a  highly
      influential politician in the area had  interfered  in  police  raids.
      Further, the Judge had directed himself that the standard of proof was
      the balance of probabilities whereas the  same  standard  applied  for
      asylum as Article 3. There were inadequate findings about the risk  of
      suicide given the clinical psychologist's reference to the Appellant's
      frequent feelings of suicide and his history of suicidal ideation.

  10. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Povey on 1 October 2018. He  referred
      to the determination as being both coherent and detailed and that  the
      Judge  had  correctly  directed  himself  on  the  law.  In   refusing
      permission, he wrote that the Judge's decision to  refuse  to  adjourn
      disclosed no error of law and the credibility findings were based upon
      an exhaustive consideration of the evidence. Whilst  Judge  Young  had
      misdirected himself on the standard of proof for  Article  3  and  its
      status as an absolute right those errors were  immaterial.  Given  the
      Judge's findings  of  fact  and  the  evidence  on  medical  treatment
      available in Sri Lanka the misdirection  made  no  difference  to  the
      outcome namely that Article 3 was not breached.

  11. The Appellant renewed his application  for  permission  to  appeal  on
      similar grounds to those previously submitted. The renewed application
      came on the papers before Upper Tribunal Judge  Kekic  on  5  December
      2018. She noted the Appellant's arguments,  found  them  arguable  and
      granted permission.

The Hearing Before Me

  12. In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me to
      determine in the first place whether there was a material error of law
      in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  If  there  was  then  the
      decision would be set aside  and  I  would  make  directions  for  the
      rehearing. If there was not, then the decision at first instance would
      stand.


  13. For the Appellant counsel relied upon the grounds  of  onward  appeal.
      The Judge had failed to consider whether he could fairly determine the
      appeal without the medico-legal report sought by  the  Appellant.  The
      report would have addressed the complaint  about  inconsistencies  and
      omissions in the Appellant's account. The Judge had failed to reach  a
      conclusion on the reasonableness of not obtaining supporting evidence.
      The Appellant had given supporting documents to Joy and co, they  were
      lost and that firm had since folded.  The  Appellant  been  unable  to
      obtain a report from hospital on the  injuries  he  sustained  in  the
      March 2008 attack. 10 years have passed since then.

  14. Counsel acknowledged the authority of TK Burundi  but  the  Judge  had
      failed to give adequate reasons for  his  rejection  of  the  evidence
      which supported the claim. The Judge had not dealt with a letter  from
      a fellow journalist and given no reason for rejecting that letter. The
      credibility findings could  not  be  made  in  isolation,  there  were
      photographs showing the Appellant with media persons and  showing  the
      Appellant's injuries. There was inadequate consideration of Articles 2
      and 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

  15. For the Respondent it was submitted there was  no  material  error  of
      law. It was important to look at the  timeline  when  considering  the
      adjournment request. The Judge had  dealt  with  the  request  for  an
      adjournment at [14] to [17] of the determination and  his  conclusions
      were open to him. There had been significant delay by the Appellant in
      this case.  The  Judge  had  found  it  important  that  the  articles
      submitted by the Appellant were not  written  by  him.  There  was  no
      evidence that the Appellant had made any complaint  about  or  to  his
      previous solicitors who it was said had lost his documents. There  was
      nothing from the  Appellant's  father  about  the  failure  to  obtain
      medical evidence of the Appellant's injuries in Sri Lanka.  There  was
      no evidence put forward of any claim under Article 8.

  16. In conclusion, counsel argued that the challenge in the grounds was in
      relation to Articles 2 and 3 not Article 8. The issue was not  whether
      the Tribunal acted reasonably in refusing to adjourn but the test  was
      one of fairness. The report on the Appellant was expected  in  October
      2018 but that was not the reason given by the Judge for the refusal to
      adjourn. The sole reason was that the Appellant had already  had  time
      to obtain a report. For the Respondent to  argue  that  the  Appellant
      should have got on with matters more quickly was for the pot  to  call
      the kettle black as the Appellant's asylum claim had been made in 2016
      but was not decided by the Respondent for 21 months.  The  possibility
      of an adjournment application had been raised in the reply form at the
      PHR stage.

Findings

  17. The appeal in this case is largely a reasons-based  challenge  to  the
      Judge's adverse credibility findings. The first  issue  the  Appellant
      relies upon is the refusal of the Judge to adjourn the appeal hearing.
      It is correct that the test of whether to adjourn is one of  fairness.
      The  Judge  directed  himself  that  he  should  have  regard  to  the
      overriding objective and the  need  to  deal  with  cases  justly  and
      expeditiously. Whilst the Judge did not refer by  name  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal authority of Nwaigwe it is clear from [17] that he was  aware
      of the appropriate test when considering an adjournment. Thereafter it
      was a matter for him to decide whether to adjourn.


  18. The Appellant had apparently undergone a psychological  assessment  in
      January 2017 and if a subsequent report was necessary the Judge's view
      was that there had been considerable time since  then  for  it  to  be
      obtained. Although the Respondent had refused the  claim  on  5  April
      2018 and the hearing came before the Judge seven weeks later on 23 May
      2018 the Appellant had in reality had  considerably  more  than  seven
      weeks to prepare his case. Not only had the Appellant  had  16  months
      since the psychological assessment to obtain a subsequent  report  but
      as the Judge pointed out the Appellant had been in the United  Kingdom
      since October 2008 and could have had  a  referral  for  psychological
      treatment at any time since then.

  19. It was not being suggested that the  Appellant  could  not  give  oral
      testimony and the Judge at the conclusion of [17] indicated that given
      the   information   received   about   the   Appellant's   psychiatric
      difficulties the hearing should proceed in line with the  Presidential
      Guidance on vulnerable witnesses. In the circumstances it is difficult
      to see what was to be gained from a lengthy adjournment  of  at  least
      five months until October 2018 for the Appellant to  obtain  a  report
      which he could and  should  have  obtained  much  earlier.  I  do  not
      consider there was any material error of law in the Judge's refusal to
      adjourn and continue with the hearing.

  20. The remainder of the grounds are really a  lengthy  disagreement  with
      the Judge's conclusions.  The  point  about  TK  Burundi  is  that  if
      evidence could reasonably be obtained but it has not been obtained, it
      is open to a Judge to draw an adverse inference from  the  absence  of
      such evidence. If the Appellant was the journalist he claimed  to  be,
      it was reasonable to expect him to have had some evidence in the  form
      of past articles he had written to produce either to the Respondent or
      to the Tribunal, yet the Appellant  had  produced  nothing.  What  the
      Appellant had produced was evidence in letter form  from  a  co-worker
      claiming that the Appellant was a journalist. What the Judge evidently
      wanted to see was something more direct than that, evidencing what the
      Appellant claimed to have done in  Sri  Lanka.  The  absence  of  that
      evidence meant it was open to the Judge to conclude that the Appellant
      had not provided supporting evidence because he did not have  any  and
      that was because his claim was bogus.

  21. The  Appellant's  argument  that  he  had  supplied  a  previous  firm
      solicitors, Joy and Co, with the documents but they had lost them  did
      not impress the Judge who expected that there would at least have been
      a letter of complaint to the previous solicitors. If the practice  had
      been intervened, it might have been possible  to  write  to  the  firm
      appointed by the Law Society to intervene but nothing of that sort had
      been done. The Appellant had not even  obtained  medical  evidence  to
      support his claim of injuries in the 2008 incident. There was  nothing
      from the father detailing what  enquiries  had  been  made  to  obtain
      medical evidence and why those enquiries  had  been  unsuccessful.  In
      those circumstances it would have been open to the Judge to  draw  the
      conclusion that there was no medical evidence to obtain.

  22. There were serious inconsistencies in the  Appellant's  account  which
      were itemised in some detail by the Judge in rejecting the Appellant's
      credibility. There is no satisfactory answer  from  the  Appellant  to
      those inconsistencies. The grounds sought to criticise the  Judge  for
      failing to  deal  adequately  with  the  evidence  that  was  supplied
      confirming the Appellant's claim to work as a journalist. This  ground
      overlooked [87] of the determination  in  which  the  Judge  carefully
      considered evidence that had been before him  supporting  the  claimed
      employment as a journalist. He noted that there was no  evidence  that
      the Appellant had written an article on 21 February 2008 prior to  the
      alleged assault in March 2008. The Appellant  had  no  answer  to  the
      particularly serious finding that the Appellant had made no mention of
      any incident in July  2008  in  his  asylum  interview.  Nor  did  the
      Appellant have an answer to the conclusion that the alleged complaints
      to the police of 7 July 2008 and the father's 2016 statement had  been
      produced "after the event and to order".

  23. The grounds complained that the Judge had used the wrong  standard  of
      proof. The Judge was careful at [8] and [9] to correctly set  out  the
      burden and standard of proof in relation to asylum claims. At [11] the
      Judge referred to the standard of proof  in  human  rights  claims  as
      being the balance of probabilities. Given that the Judge had correctly
      rejected the asylum claim to the appropriate standard it is  difficult
      to see how the slip in relation to Article 3 was material. The risk of
      suicide was discounted by the Judge because he did  not  believe  that
      the Appellant had suffered the injuries or persecution  claimed.  That
      had been disbelieved to the lower standard. Whilst it  is  correct  to
      say that even a subjective fear of persecution can mean that a risk of
      suicide could arise, the Judge was careful to point out at  [89]  that
      return to Sri Lanka would mean a reunion with the Appellant's wife and
      son, mother and wider family. They could provide  the  Appellant  with
      support.


  24. The Respondent had outlined in some detail in the refusal  letter  the
      treatment  that  was  available  in  Colombo  should  the  Appellant's
      depression continue. This appears to be a reference to paragraph 79 of
      the refusal letter which had referred to the fact that Sri  Lanka  had
      one of the most effective health systems among developing nations  and
      the country had an extensive network of healthcare  institutions.  The
      disease burden had started shifting rapidly  towards  non-communicable
      diseases  including  mental  diseases.  The  Judge  acknowledged  this
      evidence and it was open to him to conclude  that  any  mental  health
      issues could be satisfactorily dealt with.

  25. The Judge had not rejected the Appellant's claim to be depressed, what
      he had rejected to the lower  standard  was  that  any  mental  health
      problems could have been caused by alleged persecution. The Judge held
      for cogent reasons that adequate medical treatment and family  support
      would  be  available  to  the  Appellant   upon   return.   In   those
      circumstances I agree with Judge Povey that any error in  relation  to
      the standard of proof for Article 3 was immaterial. I find that  there
      were no material errors of law in  the  determination  dismissing  the
      Appellant's claim for  international  protection  and  I  dismiss  the
      appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Signed this 4th February 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal, no fee was payable and therefore there  can  be
no fee award.

Signed this 4th February 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
