
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05109/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 December 2017                           |On 17 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                      mr Maged Gamal Abdelhamid Gaballa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Seelhoff, Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this case the appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State  or  SSHD)
    brings a challenge  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  Judge
    Nicholls of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) allowing the  appeal  of  the
    respondent (hereafter the claimant) against the decision  made  by  the
    SSHD on 17 May 2017 refusing to grant asylum.

2.   The basis of the  claimant's  asylum  claim  was  that  he  had  become
    involved in Egypt with the Freedom and Justice Party, a political  wing
    of the Muslim Brotherhood.  He had been detained and ill-treated by the
    military in August 2013.  After he had been released in  October  2013,
    he continued to help the Muslim Brotherhood.  On  9  May  2015  he  was
    again arrested and ill-treated before being released on  conditions  on
    25 May.  He then applied for a business visa to the UK and  left  Egypt
    on 27 July 2015.  He claimed that an arrest  warrant  had  been  issued
    against him after he left.

3.   In the Reasons for Refusal Letter (RFRL) the SSHD stated  that  it  was
    not accepted that the claimant had given a credible account of being  a
    member of the Liberty and Justice Party or of the Muslim Brotherhood or
    of having been detained and ill-treated by the authorities.

4.   The judge, having heard the claimant give oral evidence, found that  he
    was credible.

5.   The SSHD's grounds assail the judge's decision in  two  main  respects.
    First it is submitted that the judge failed to properly  apply  s.8  of
    the 2004 Act and in reality only paid lip service to it.   Secondly  it
    was argued that the  judge  had  simply  not  engaged  with  materially
    applicable adverse points in the RFRL.

6.   I heard brief submissions from Mr Tarlow and Mr Seelhoff.

7.   As regards the first ground, I find it lacks merit.  The judge  clearly
    did treat  the  claimant's  delay  in  claiming  asylum  as  materially
    damaging.  At paragraph 14 the judge stated:
    "14. The central question in this appeal  is  whether  the  Appellant's
         account  is  credible.   In  that  respect,  I   must   take   into
         consideration the provisions of section 8  Asylum  and  Immigration
         (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004  and  I  note  that  the
         Appellant had been in the UK for more than a  year  before  the  UK
         authorities became aware of his wish to claim asylum  and  that  he
         only made the authorities aware once he had been arrested by police
         in connection with a  potential  criminal  matter.   The  Appellant
         claims that he was receiving advice from the FJP in Egypt  that  he
         should not  make  a  claim  for  asylum,  saying  in  his  original
         statement that there was some suggestion that he might be asked  to
         go to Turkey.  That is, fundamentally, an  implausible  reason  for
         delaying his notification to the UK  authorities  when  he  claimed
         that the only reason he came to the UK  was  for  his  own  safety.
         Because of the statutory provision requiring that  his  credibility
         be considered damaged, taking into account the lengthy  delay,  the
         clear implication that he would not have claimed by  then  were  it
         not for the arrest by the police and the inherent unlikelihood that
         he would have been advised by the FJP in Egypt to delay his  claim,
         I  find  that  the  damage  to  the  Appellant's   credibility   is
         substantial."

8.   At paragraph 18 the judge reiterated that "[h]is delay  in  making  his
    claim for asylum is as I have noted, substantial and  deliberate,  even
    though he claims to have been acting in accordance with "advice"  given
    to him by the FJP from Egypt".

9.   It was for the judge to assess how damaging this late claim was.

10.  However, I consider the second ground is made out.  This was a case  in
    which  the  SSHD  in  her  refusal  decision  had  identified  numerous
    shortcomings in the  claimant's  account.   Several  of  these,  as  Mr
    Seelhoff  acknowledged,  are  not  addressed  at  all  in  the  judge's
    decision.  So far as concerns  the  issue  of  consistency,  the  judge
    appears in paragraph 13 to consider that this could be limited  to  the
    question of  whether  the  claimant's  testimony  at  the  hearing  was
    consistent with the statements he had submitted  and  with  his  asylum
    interview.  But from the refusal decision it is clear that the SSHD was
    alleging  identified  inconsistencies  to  the   claimant's   interview
    account.  Several are not addressed at all by  the  judge.   Whilst  at
    paragraph 15 the judge addresses one  of  the  alleged  inconsistencies
    ("between the [claimant's]) explanation of the policies of the FJP  and
    the published statement included in a BBC News Bulletin" (, he  appears
    to have considered this was not significant  because  the  claimant  at
    interview had identified that the FJP aspired to freedom,  justice  and
    democracy.  Why the judge did not  consider  it  significant  that  the
    claimant nevertheless failed to  identify  this  party's  call  for  an
    Islamic economic system and the implementation of Sharia law as two FJP
    essential principles, is not explained at  all.   Nor  does  the  judge
    engage  with  the  claimant's  failure  to  give  details  of  the  FYP
    consistent with the COI regarding when it was founded, by whom, etc.

11.  Also deficient was the judge's treatment of the  documentary  evidence.
    Given the judge's decision to allow the appeal it must  be  assumed  he
    was satisfied that the  documents  produced  by  the  claimant  carried
    significant weight; yet the thrust of paragraphs 15-17 was to  identify
    significant problems  with  the  documents.   Why  such  problems  were
    thought not to weigh against the claimant is not explained.

12.  I consider that the judge's failure to properly engage with  the  terms
    of the SSHD refusal decision, together with his unduly narrow  approach
    to the issue of consistency and equivocal handling of the issue of  the
    reliability of the documentary evidence, renders his  decision  legally
    erroneous.  I therefore set aside his decision.

13.  I concur with both representatives that if I decided to set  aside  the
    decision of the FtT Judge (as I have), the case should be  remitted  to
    the FtT for a fresh hearing (not before Judge Nicholls), as no findings
    of fact made by the judge can be preserved.

14.  To conclude:

    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.

    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Nicholls).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:                                 Date: 15 January 2018

                [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


