
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05310/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd November 2017                          |On 10th November 2017         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


For the Respondent:  Ms G S Peterson (instructed by CK, Solicitors)


                             NOTICE OF DECISION

   1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  the  Secretary  of  State,
      with permission, in relation to a Decision and Reasons of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal (Judge Fletcher-Hill) promulgated on 18th  May  2017  by
      which she allowed the appeal  against  the  refusal  of  a  protection
      claim.

   2. For the sake of clarity  I  will  continue  to  refer  to  AA  as  the
      Appellant and the  Secretary  of  State  as  the  Respondent  in  this
      decision.

   3. The Appellant was born on [ ] 2000 and is a citizen of Afghanistan. He
      is therefore of minor. He arrived in the UK in  November  2015  having
      been discovered inside a lorry at Dover. He claimed asylum  which  was
      refused on 11th May 2016. In accordance with her  policy  however  the
      Secretary of State granted him  discretionary  leave  until  1st  July
      2017.

   4. The Appellant claimed that he fled Afghanistan  as  a  young  teenager
      after several boys from the Madrassa in his village had been taken, in
      June 2014, by the Taliban to use as suicide bombers,  which  they  had
      been trained for at the Madrassa. He claimed that he would be risk  of
      recruitment by the Taliban, who had murdered his father. The Secretary
      of State did not accept that the Taliban had murdered his  father  nor
      do they accept the Appellant was at risk. She did not accept his claim
      to be credible.

   5. The Judge  heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant.  He  confirmed  that
      photographs that had been produced were of his home  that  had  caught
      fire after it was hit by shelling. He said that he  had  in  the  past
      spoken to his mother in Afghanistan but could not now do so as she  no
      longer had a phone and he did not know where she was.

   6. He confirmed his father had been killed by the Taliban when he  was  a
      small child and it was his mother who told him about it.

   7. The Judge accepted the Appellant as credible; that he was at  risk  of
      forced recruitment as a suicide bomber  which  was  why  he  fled  the
      country. She went on to consider whether he could safely  relocate  to
      Kabul and found he could not reasonably be  expected  to  do  so.  The
      appeal was allowed.

   8. The Secretary of State's grounds, upon which permission to appeal  was
      granted asserted that the Judge had failed to  give  adequate  reasons
      and in particular had failed to say why the  Taliban  in  Kabul  would
      have any residual ongoing interest in this particular Appellant.  They
      asserted  the  Judge,  in  considering  internal  relocation  made  no
      findings as to whether the Appellant was in contact with  his  family.
      Further that in assessing  general  credibility  failed  to  make  any
      findings on the core assertion of  the  Respondent,  namely  that  the
      Appellant had an older brother who apparently had not been targeted it
      was implausible the Appellant would be  targeted  but  not  his  older
      brother.

   9. It is further asserted that the Judge failed to consider, as  required
      by section 8, the Appellant's failure to claim asylum in another  safe
      country.

  10. Mr Nath relied on  the  grounds;  that  the  short  determination  was
      lacking in detail.  He referred to paragraph  7.20  arguing  that  the
      analysis was inadequate and reasons absent. He  referred  to  the  2nd
      ground regarding the Appellant's older brother and that it was  argued
      by the Secretary of State that is implausible the Appellant  would  be
      targeted but not his older brother and there is no reference  to  that
      at all in the determination.

  11.  Miss  Peterson  argued  that,  albeit  short  the  determination  was
      adequate. She referred to the submissions made by her colleague before
      the First-tier Tribunal, which been recorded in the determination  and
      argued that the findings were clearly based on those submissions.  She
      made various other submissions which would have had considerable force
      had they  been  made  in  connection  with  the  original  appeal  but
      unfortunately do not assist in saving this Decision and  Reasons.  The
      Judge commences her findings by saying that she finds the Appellant to
      be credible but does not give any reasons for so finding.  Furthermore
      she does not address the Secretary of State's reasons for refusing the
      claim, in particular the reference to  the  Appellant's  brother.  She
      also makes no findings in relation to whether  the  Appellant  was  in
      contact with his family and in assessing internal relocation to  Kabul
      finds it would be unreasonable without giving any reasons why.

  12. Overall the Decision and Reasons is woefully lacking in  analysis  and
      reasoned findings. That is not to say necessarily that the Appellant's
      case is a hopeless one. However, the Secretary of State is, as  is  an
      Appellant, entitled to know the reasons why she has lost.  That cannot
      be ascertained from this Decision and Reasons. Therefore, the Decision
      and Reasons must be set aside in its entirety and given the nature and
      number of findings which need to be made I remit it to the  First-tier
      Tribunal for a full rehearing before a different Judge.




 Decision

 The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  allowed  to  the
 extent that the First-tier Tribunal's Decision and Reasons  is  set  aside
 and the matter remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.



  The first-tier Tribunal having made an anonymity direction I  direct  that
is continued

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 8th November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
