
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05282/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 November 2019                  |On 16 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Ali, Aman Solicitors Advocates (London) Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana
    promulgated on 1 August 2019 dismissing the appeal of the appellant,  a
    citizen of the Palestinian authority, formerly resident  in  a  refugee
    camp in Lebanon, against a decision of the respondent dated 23 May 2019
    to refuse his application for asylum and humanitarian protection.



Factual background

 2. There are four grounds of appeal, but they are best summarised  in  the
    succinct way in which Upper Tribunal Judge Martin granted permission to
    appeal.  She said:

         "It is arguable that the decision and reasons is so  littered  with
         typographical and grammatical errors that the judge's findings  and
         assessment of the evidence are not clear, such that  it  cannot  be
         said that anxious scrutiny has been applied to the appeal."

 3. At the hearing before me, it was common ground  that  the  decision  of
    Judge Chana was indeed littered with typos, statements  which  did  not
    make sense  and  featured  reasoning  which  did  not  appear  to  flow
    logically.  The four separate grounds of  appeal  each  amounted  to  a
    different facet of the overall thrust of the  appellant's  case  before
    this Tribunal, namely that the judge cannot be  said  to  have  applied
    anxious scrutiny to her decision.  I find that  the  grounds  are  made
    out.

 4. It is a fundamental tenet of justice that justice must not only be done
    but also must manifestly be seen  to  be  done.   The  stakes  for  the
    appellant in  these  proceedings  are  high.   It  is  trite  law  that
    protection proceedings require  the  highest  standards  of  procedural
    compliance, especially from the judge.

 5. By way of example, I turn to [20] of the judge's decision.   There  are
    some, on the face of it, inconsequential typographical errors which  in
    isolation would of course be unlikely  to  merit  a  finding  that  the
    decision involved the making  of  an  error  of  law.   However,  taken
    cumulatively with the other errors I have found in the decision,  these
    do acquire a new significance, for example the first sentence states as
    follows:

         "He is a  Sunni  Muslim.he  joined  the  AA  boost  his  financial
    position..."

    Such errors are perpetuated throughout the decision.  Although  it  may
    seem petty to highlight such errors for the purposes  of  finding  that
    there had been an error of law, it is unfortunately the case  that  the
    regularity of the typos within the judgment means that they  acquire  a
    new significance.  Such errors can be easy to  miss,  especially  after
    lengthy and extensive consideration of  the  same  document.   However,
    when combined with other errors, it can give rise to a concern that the
    requisite degree of anxious scrutiny has not been applied.

 6. The next substantive sentence in [20] states that the appellant in  his
    statement claimed that the interpreter was speaking English and Arabic,
    and therefore the submission that he  was  later  to  make  during  the
    proceedings   before   Judge   Chana   concerning    difficulties    of
    interpretation was not said to be made out.  This is an  error  because
    it was  at  no  stage  said  in  the  appellant's  statement  that  the
    interpreter spoke English.  What he said was that the  interpreter  was
    speaking an Egyptian dialect of Arabic,  whereas  he  speaks  Levantine
    dialect  of  Arabic.   The  suggestion  that  the  appellant  said  the
    interpreter spoke in English is not one which was sustained or  can  be
    sustained on the face of the appellant's statement or any of the  other
    materials in the case.   The  judge  may  have  confused  Egyptian  for
    English in her notes, but it is  difficult  for  me  to  speculate  and
    resolve any ambiguity against the appellant, especially when taken with
    the other errors in the decision.

 7. Later on in [20], the judge states that the appellant said in answer to
    a question in interview that the aims of the Ansar  Allah  group  were,
    "to support has Hezbollahr in war in Syria".  It is not clear what that
    sentence means: the insertion of the seemingly redundant  "has"  brings
    an element of confusion to the sentence.   As  the  grounds  of  appeal
    note, it is not possible to know accurately  what  the  appellant  said
    from the judge's summary of his evidence in that way.  At [21]  of  the
    decision, it states:

         "at paragraph 33 to 34 of his witness statement he stated Hezbollah
         I liked and how does he know this."

    As the grounds of appeal contend, that sentence does  not  make  sense,
    and it is not clear from reading the paragraphs in  the  decision  what
    the judge meant.  Indeed, the grounds of appeal go so  far  as  to  say
    that in the first half of [21] of the determination it is not  possible
    to know what the judge meant or is referring to.  There is considerable
    force in that contention.

 8. At [32] the judge appears to bring her own subjective assumptions as to
    what the going rate would be for work  in  Syria,  without  relying  on
    specific evidence.  In his asylum interview, the appellant said he  was
    paid $300 monthly to remain in Lebanon.  The judge disbelieved that, on
    the basis she thought it was too low.  It is not clear  how  the  judge
    reached that finding, or the evidence she relied upon to reach it.  The
    appears to have brought her  own  subjective  assumption  of  what  the
    "going rate" would be for a person in  the  appellant's  circumstances,
    with no evidential foundation.

 9. Judges should be careful before making assumptions concerning  inherent
    likelihood.  In Y v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1223 at [25] Lord Justice Keane said, speaking of the role  of
    an Adjudicator, that:

         "... he  should  be  cautious  before  finding  an  account  to  be
         inherently incredible, because there is a considerable risk that he
         [the judge] will be over influenced by his own views on what is  or
         is not  plausible,  and  those  views  will  have  inevitably  been
         influenced by his own background in this country and by the customs
         and ways of our own society."

     The observations of Keene LJ apply to the judge's analysis at [32].

10. In isolation it would not necessarily be the case  that  any  of  these
    errors would merit the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  being  set
    aside.  However, I return to the opening remarks of this decision.  The
    requirement  of  anxious  scrutiny  is  of  particular  importance   in
    protection proceedings.  The appellant has the entitlement to know that
    his decision has been considered with the  utmost  care  prior  to  his
    appeal being dismissed.  It is simply not possible to characterise  the
    decision of Judge Chana as having been arrived at  with  the  requisite
    degree  of  anxious  scrutiny,  given  the  errors  which  permeate  it
    throughout.

11. On that basis, the decision involved the making of an error of  law  in
    that there was a procedural  irregularity  arising  from  the  lack  of
    anxious scrutiny.  The remedy to the defect is for  the  matter  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety to be heard by  any
    judge other than Judge Chana.


Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed.

The decision of Judge Chana is set aside.

The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  at  Hatton  Cross  to  be
heard by any other judge than Judge Chana.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Stephen H Smith                                Date 12 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

