

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05441/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th January 2018                       |On 26th January 2018           |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                              WAHEEDULLAH AMIN
                                     Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Oliveira-Agnew instructed by Middlesex Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal  a  decision
      by First-tier Tribunal  judge  Geraint  Jones  QC  who  dismissed  the
      appellant's appeal against the decision by the  respondent  to  refuse
      his international protection and human rights claims for  reasons  set
      out in in a letter  dated  25th  May  2017.  The  grounds  upon  which
      permission  was  granted  include  that  it  was  arguable  the  judge
      misdirected himself as to the confusion in dates because he failed  to
      appreciate the  appellant  would  have  been  working  on  the  Afghan
      calendar and not the Georgian calendar; in his approach to credibility
      and by failing to undertake the appropriate proportionality exercise.


   2. The basis of the appellant's international protection claim was that a
      relationship he had with a young  woman  which  led  to  her  becoming
      pregnant had resulted in her being killed by her family together  with
      threats from the Taliban because he had worked for a western  company;
      he had to flee.

   3. The judge, in paragraph 3, says in  relation  to  further  submissions
      made, "Rather generously, the  respondent  treated  this  as  a  fresh
      asylum claim which it determined by its Decision Letter dated  25  May
      2017". In paragraph  5  he  says"  I  should  also  mention  that  the
      appellant's case was put, with extreme and  unrealistic  optimism,  on
      the basis of Article 8 ECHR seemingly with no regard to the fact  that
      the appellant's sojourn in this  country  has  been  as  somebody  who
      entered clandestinely and  after  making  an  asylum  claim  chose  to
      abscond and remain her illegally". The judge refers at length  to  the
      appellant's immigration  history  of  absconding.  Of  course,  it  is
      appropriate and  correct  to  take  such  matters  into  account  when
      determining the credibility of an  asylum  seeker's  account  but  the
      tenor of this determination is  that  of  disbelief  in  anything  the
      appellant has said. Great weight is placed upon different  dates  that
      the appellant put forward at different times. The judge  refers  to  a
      confusing account and rejects the reliability of  a  letter  from  the
      appellant's claimed former employer.

   4. Although the judge states that s8 of the 2004 Act is to be  considered
      alongside other evidence as  a  whole,  he  nevertheless  places  this
      centre stage in his decision on the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
      account about his girlfriend when considered  with  the  confusion  of
      dates. The emphasis on different dates for events that occurred some 5
      to 6 years ago is difficult to understand. Although  each  comment  by
      the judge has an appearance of justification, taken overall there is a
      significant impression of  bias  arising  from  initial  disbelief  of
      anything the appellant claims. The overall decision  on  international
      protection  is  significantly  tainted  by   the   judge's   disbelief
      irrespective of the possible merits of the claim.

   5. In reaching his decision on Article 8, the  judge  does  not  consider
      s117A-D of the 2002 Act appropriately. He concludes that "it would  be
      offensive to right thinking members of the public that any private  of
      family life built up during the time when the appellant  has  wilfully
      abused and flouted the immigration laws  of  this  country  should  be
      relied upon by him with a view to gaining an immigration advantage for
      himself". This is not the correct approach.  That  the  appellant  has
      been in the UK unlawfully is a factor to be taken  into  consideration
      but it does not outweigh, of  itself,  other  factors  that  may  have
      relevance including the possible dependency of his mother upon him.

   6. I am satisfied the judge has erred in law  in  failing  to  adequately
      reason findings on international protection and to fail to address the
      Article 8 claim within the appropriate jurisprudential framework.

   7. This is a case where primary findings of  fact  have  to  be  made  on
      detailed documentary and oral evidence and should therefore  be  heard
      afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
    heard afresh, no findings preserved.
[pic]

                                    Date 25th January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
