
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05229/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14 February 2018                        |On 7 March 2018                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     R B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr C. Talacchi, Counsel instructed by City Heights
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to  refuse  a
      protection claim. In a decision promulgated on 12 July 2017 First-tier
      Tribunal Judge R.L. Walker ("the judge") dismissed the appeal.

2.    The appellant appealed against the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
      the following grounds.

      (i)   The First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  consider  the  appellant's
           evidence about how the asylum interview was conducted.

      (ii)  The First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  consider  relevant  matters
           including the fact that the  appellant's  mother  is  a  "mental
           patient" in Bangladesh and her father is deceased.

      (iii)       The judge failed to give adequate reasons to  explain  why
           he did not find the appellant's account to be credible.

3.    The Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal in an order  dated  21
      November 2017 in the following qualified terms:

           "Given that neither the appellant in her oral evidence  nor  her
           Counsel raised any concerns about the asylum interviews I see no
           force in the contention that the decision made by the respondent
           was procedurally unfair.


           However, whilst the judge's stated reasons for not  finding  the
           appellant's evidence that she had no family and nobody to return
           to in Bangladesh credible appear unexceptionable, the judge  did
           not consider whether the appellant should have been treated as a
           vulnerable witness under the 2010  Joint  Presidential  Guidance
           Note, even though the Competent Authority had found that she was
           [not] a victim of trafficking. It is arguable that may have  had
           a material impact on the judge's assessment."

Decision and reasons

Legal framework & guidance

4.     The  Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and  Sensitive   Appellant   Guidance
      (Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of 2010) sets out guidance on dealing
      with vulnerable witnesses in the Tribunal. The guidance was  developed
      to assist judges to identify vulnerable witnesses and to consider  the
      nature and extent of any vulnerability as part of their assessment  of
      the evidence. Paragraph 3 of the guidance states:

           "The consequences of such vulnerability differ according to  the
           degree to which an individual is affected. It is  a  matter  for
           you to determine the extent of an identified vulnerability,  the
           effect on the quality of the  evidence  and  the  weight  to  be
           placed on such vulnerability in assessing  the  evidence  before
           you, taking into account the evidence as a whole."

5.    The guidance sets out several potential  factors  that  might  lead  a
      judge to identify a  person  as  a  vulnerable  witness,  which  might
      include  (i)  mental  health  problems;  (ii)   social   or   learning
      difficulties;   (iii)   religious   beliefs   or   practices,   sexual
      orientation, ethnic social and cultural background; (iv) domestic  and
      employment circumstances; or (v) a physical disability  or  impairment
      that might affect the giving of evidence.  The  guidance  goes  on  to
      identify reasonable adjustments that might need to be made to the  way
      in which the hearing is conducted depending on the nature  and  extent
      of a person's vulnerability.

6.    In AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ the Court  of  Appeal  gave
      guidance on the general approach to be adopted in law and practice for
      the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal to fairly determine "claims
      for asylum from children, young  people  and  other  incapacitated  or
      vulnerable  persons  whose  ability  to  effectively  participate   in
      proceedings may be limited." The Court of  Appeal  considered  several
      pieces  of  guidance  from  various  sources,  including  the   Child,
      Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance. The Court of Appeal
      was required to determine whether the Tribunal had power to appoint  a
      litigation  friend.  It  concluded  that  the  procedure  rules   were
      sufficiently flexible to do so. However, in  considering  the  various
      pieces of guidance and case law on procedural fairness, the  Court  of
      Appeal cautioned against "an  over  elaborate  interpretation  of  the
      Guidance Note."

Background

7.    The appellant entered the UK with entry clearance as a visitor  on  28
      July 2012. The appellant was 14 years old. She entered the UK with her
      mother and elder sister. She says that, following her  father's  death
      in 2009,  her  mother  suffered  from  depression  and  mental  health
      problems. They stayed with the appellant's maternal cousin, Mr S,  for
      four weeks before staying with other maternal cousins in  London.  The
      appellant says that her mother and sister returned  to  Bangladesh  in
      2012 abandoning her here. The appellant says that she stayed with  her
      mother's maternal cousins until August 2014, when she returned  to  Mr
      S's home. In September 2014, an application was made on her behalf for
      leave to remain on human rights grounds. The application  was  refused
      with no right of appeal on 23 December 2014.

8.    On 13 May 2015, aged 16 years old, the  appellant  made  a  protection
      claim on the ground that she would be at risk on return to  Bangladesh
      as a lone woman. The interview records indicate that the appellant was
      interviewed under the  procedures  for  child  asylum  seekers  on  29
      October 2015. A legal representative  was  present  at  the  interview
      although the record indicates that he was late. It is unclear  whether
      the interview began without him. However, Mr  S  is  recorded  as  the
      responsible adult. It is reasonable to  infer  that  he  attended  the
      interview  with  the  appellant  and  was  with  her  throughout   the
      interview.

9.    After the asylum interview the respondent referred  the  case  to  the
      National Referral Mechanism (NRM) to investigate whether the appellant
      might be a potential victim of trafficking.  The  Competent  Authority
      found that there were 'reasonable grounds' to consider that she  might
      be a victim of trafficking, but in the 'conclusive grounds'  decision,
      concluded that the appellant was not a victim of trafficking.

10.   The respondent refused the protection claim in  a  decision  dated  23
      May 2017. It is unclear why it took so long  to  take  a  decision  in
      relation to a child asylum  seeker.  I  note  that  by  the  time  the
      decision was made the appellant was 18 years old. The respondent noted
      the background to the case and the evidence that had been produced  by
      her  relatives  relating  to  her  mother's   medical   treatment   in
      Bangladesh, as well as her father's death certificate. The  respondent
      noted that the evidence indicated that she continued  to  have  family
      members in Bangladesh and that she would not return as a lone woman.

Findings

11.   The appellant was 18 years old at the date of the First-tier  Tribunal
      hearing in July 2017. Her evidence  remained  the  same  as  the  Home
      Office interview i.e. that she had no contact with family  members  in
      Bangladesh or knowledge of their whereabouts. Mr S also gave evidence.



12.   No evidence has been produced to indicate that  the  appellant  had  a
      particular vulnerability which needed to be  catered  for  by  way  of
      special measures at the hearing. The fact that  the  appellant  was  a
      child when she entered the UK meant that her evidence would need to be
      considered in that context. However, she was 18 years old at the  date
      of the hearing. There is no evidence to suggest that she had any other
      vulnerabilities, apart from her relatively young age, which would need
      to be addressed by way of special arrangements. There was no  evidence
      to indicate that the appellant suffered  past  trauma  or  abuse.  The
      Competent Authority concluded that there was insufficient evidence  to
      show that she was a victim of trafficking or modern slavery. There was
      no evidence of mental health problems and no evidence of any  learning
      or other cognitive difficulties.

13.   The fact that the appellant was a young woman who  was  reliant  on  a
      male family member for support in the  UK  was  a  matter  that  might
      explain why she had little knowledge of the current situation of other
      family members in Bangladesh. To this extent  the  judge  should  have
      taken into account the fact that Mr S was  the  person  who  contacted
      relatives in Bangladesh and  who  obtained  evidence  on  her  behalf.
      Perhaps the appellant was aware of these efforts, but it is  at  least
      plausible that she may not have been told much about the circumstances
      of her remaining family members in Bangladesh.

14.   In light of her young age, her gender and reliance of male  relatives,
      the judge  could  and  should  have  placed  the  credibility  of  the
      appellant's evidence in the correct  cultural  context.  However,  any
      perceived error in this respect was not material to the outcome of the
      appeal. Even if the judge failed to consider those matters as part  of
      his assessment of the credibility of the appellant's evidence, clearly
      it was open to him to take into account the evidence given by Mr S.

15.   Although the appellant's evidence in interview suggested that she  did
      not want to live with her mother, and may have refused  to  return  to
      Bangladesh with  her,  there  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
      appellant was harmed or abused by her mother in the past. No doubt  it
      was difficult dealing with her mother's mental health issues, but very
      little detail was provided about the appellant's  life  in  Bangladesh
      before coming to the UK. The  evidence  before  the  judge  indicated,
      whether the appellant knew it or not, that she still had relatives  in
      Bangladesh to whom she might be able  to  turn  to  for  support.  The
      appellant has a mother and older sister in  Bangladesh.  The  evidence
      indicated that there was  a  male  relative  who  was  supporting  the
      appellant's mother. There was no evidence to show that Mr A would  not
      be willing to provide the  appellant  with  similar  support.  Mr  S's
      evidence was  that  he  contacted  "a  number  of  family  members  in
      Bangladesh" to find out about her  mother's  situation.  The  evidence
      before the First-tier Tribunal indicated a  wider  family  network  in
      Bangladesh.

 16.  Nothing in the arguments put forward at the hearing persuaded me  that
      any vulnerability that the appellant might have had as a  young  adult
      woman impaired her understanding of the proceedings or her ability  to
      give evidence. Although the judge should have taken into  account  the
      appellant's  young  age,  her  gender  and  the  cultural  context  in
      assessing whether it was credible that she did not  know  the  current
      circumstances of family members  in  Bangladesh,  any  error  was  not
      material to the outcome of the appeal. It seems that Mr S was open  in
      stating his knowledge of  the  family  circumstances.  The  judge  was
      entitled to rely on that evidence even if the appellant was  genuinely
      unaware of those circumstances.

17.   It was open to the judge to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
      appellant's mother and two sisters lived in Bangladesh. He  took  into
      account the fact that, even if the appellant's mother was  too  unwell
      to support the appellant, there were other relatives, such  as  Mr  A,
      who might be able to do so. Given the support that Mr S  has  provided
      to the appellant in the UK, no doubt he would continue to support  her
      as best he can if she returned to Bangladesh with  the  assistance  of
      their extended family members.

18.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      decision did not involve the making of a material error  of  law.  The
      decision shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  of
      law
The decision shall stand
Signed   [pic]   Date 06 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
