
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/05771/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 April 2018                          | On 27 April 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    E. S.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Albania, who entered the  UK  illegally,
    and then claimed asylum on  16  May  2016.  Her  protection  claim  was
    refused on 7 June 2017.  The  refusal  followed  consideration  by  the
    National Referral Mechanism (NRM), of the Appellant's  account  of  how
    she had been trafficked from  Albania  to  Belgium,  then  returned  to
    Albania, and then later re-trafficked from Albania to the UK.  The  NRM
    conclusion was that the Appellant had not told the truth, and that  she
    was not a victim of trafficking, or modern slavery.  The  NRM  decision
    was reviewed by the Respondent, and taken into account in reaching  her
    own decision on the protection claim - bearing in  mind  that  the  two
    decisions required the application of a different  standard  of  proof.
    Thus the NRM decision was reached on the balance of probabilities,  and
    the Respondent's decision was made on the applicable lower standard  of
    a reasonable likelihood.

 2. The Appellant did not challenge the NRM decision  by  way  of  judicial
    review.  She  did  however  lodge  a  statutory  appeal   against   the
    Respondent's refusal of her protection  claim  which  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal at North Shields on 10 October 2017,  when  it  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Caskie. That appeal was dismissed on
    all grounds  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  24  November  2017.  The
    Appellant's  application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by
    Designated Judge Shaerf on 13 December 2017.

 3. Before me Ms Brakaj confirmed that the  grounds  advanced  a  complaint
    that the Judge had given  inadequate  reasons  for  his  decision.  The
    grounds do contain such a complaint [#3], but they go on to argue  that
    the Judge's conclusions were wrong and not open to him on the  evidence
    [#4-9]. Those latter arguments do not use the term perversity, but  the
    reality is that this is what the grounds, as drafted, amount to.

 4. The Appellant's first complaint faces the difficulty that  this  was  a
    lengthy decision, which is  perfectly  intelligible.  The  standard  by
    which the adequacy of reasons is to be measured, is  not  that  of  the
    counsel of perfection; MD (Turkey) [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1958.  Nor  is  a
    reasons challenge the opportunity to mount a disguised  re-argument  of
    the decision on its merits. If the losing party can see why they  lost,
    as the Appellant can undoubtedly see in this case, then the reasons are
    adequate for that purpose. It is  not  suggested  before  me  that  the
    decision demonstrates that any relevant and material evidence was  left
    out of account,  or,  that  any  irrelevant  material  was  taken  into
    account. The complaint does not in my judgement meet the guidance to be
    found in VV (grounds of appeal) Lithuania [2016] UKUT 53. Ms Brakaj did
    not advance her complaint on the basis that the Judge either completely
    failed to deal with a disputed issue of substance, or, that his reasons
    were so unclear that they could conceal an error of law.

 5. The Appellant's second complaint faces the different but no less  fatal
    difficulty that there is a very high hurdle  to  the  establishment  of
    perversity; Miftari [2005] EWCA Civ 481. It is a demanding concept that
    is not likely to be met in a case in which the author  of  the  grounds
    has felt unable to make the charge with clarity. This was not a case in
    which Ms Brakaj could identify any finding  of  fact  that  was  wholly
    unsupported by evidence; in reality her case was simply that the  Judge
    had reached the wrong decisions upon the  disputed  issues  of  primary
    fact given the evidence that was before him.

 6. In this case the Judge was entitled to find that the Appellant had  not
    established any risk of harm at the hands of her family,  because  that
    was never her case. She faced significant credibility problems  because
    of (a) the inconsistency between her different accounts  of  where  she
    was  supposedly  living  when  she  conceived  her   child,   (b)   the
    inconsistency between her different accounts of when she  was  said  to
    have been forced into prostitution by her lover, (c) the  inconsistency
    between her different accounts of the manner in which she was  said  to
    have left Albania in 2016, (d) the inconsistency between her  different
    accounts of how her travel from Albania to the UK  was  undertaken  and
    funded, and, (e) the information that the Respondent had obtained  from
    the British Embassy in Tirana, upon the records held  by  the  Albanian
    authorities of her travel using her own Albanian  passport.  There  was
    ample evidence  to  support  the  conclusion  that  she  had  not  been
    truthful, and that she had not been trafficked into  prostitution,  and
    that she faced no risk of harm from the man she had identified  as  her
    lover/pimp/trafficker.

 7. During the hearing I raised with the parties the decision of the  Upper
    Tribunal, and latterly  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MS  (Trafficking  -
    Tribunal's powers - Art 4ECHR: Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  226,  and,
    [2018] EWCA Civ 594, to which no reference appeared to have  been  made
    to the Judge, or in the grounds, and of which Ms  Brakaj  was  unaware.
    The matter was stood down to allow  the  representatives  to  read  and
    consider the latter decision.

 8. When the hearing resumed, Ms Brakaj confirmed that it had not been  the
    Appellant's  case  before  the  Judge  that  the  "conclusive  grounds"
    decision of the NRM was perverse. She did not seek to argue  before  me
    that the Judge was wrong to have reference to  either  the  "reasonable
    grounds" or the "conclusive grounds" NRM decisions,  and  she  accepted
    that it was plain from the decision that the Judge had  not  taken  the
    latter decision as determinative of  the  issues  before  him.  He  had
    formed his own conclusions, and given reasons  for  those  conclusions,
    upon the issues of disputed fact before him; even though her  case  was
    that those conclusions were wrong, and the  reasons  offered  for  them
    inadequate.

 9. I agree that the Judge did not take the NRM decision  as  determinative
    of his role. Moreover it is quite plain in my judgement that the  Judge
    appreciated the need to  form  his  own  decision,  and  that  he  gave
    adequate reasons for the findings he made on  the  issues  of  disputed
    fact.

10.  Ms  Brakaj  concluded  by  arguing  in  response  to  Ms   Petterson's
    submissions that the Judge  had  failed  to  assess  the  position  the
    Appellant would face upon return. That complaint was not well  founded.
    The Judge had accepted that on the face  of  the  unchallenged  medical
    evidence the Appellant  had  been  significantly  traumatised  at  some
    stage, and in circumstances that he was unable to identify, beyond  the
    rejection of her account of when and how this had occurred.  The  Judge
    was also quite clearly well aware that she was the mother  of  a  young
    daughter. Those matters were not however, of themselves, sufficient  to
    entitle the Appellant to international protection. Although  the  Judge
    did not perhaps spell this  out,  I  am  satisfied  that  any  Tribunal
    properly directing itself would be bound to conclude that the Appellant
    had not established that she would be  unable  to  access  any  medical
    treatment she required in Albania because the evidence did  not  permit
    such a conclusion. Moreover, that she was  unable  to  argue  that  she
    would refuse the financial assistance packages available to  those  who
    return voluntarily, so as to render herself destitute upon return. Thus
    in reality, even if she were telling the truth about a lack of  support
    from her family in Albania, support was available to her.

11. In the circumstances, and notwithstanding the terms in which permission
    to appeal was granted, I therefore dismiss the  Appellant's  challenge,
    and confirm the decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

12. The anonymity direction previously made is continued.


Notice of decision

The decision promulgated on 24 November 2017 did not involve the  making  of
an error of law sufficient to require the decision  to  be  set  aside.  The
decision of the First tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appeal  is  accordingly
confirmed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 25 April 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

