

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/05048/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7th September 2018                   | On 8th October 2018              |
|                                        |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                                   Ms P M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle from Elder Rahimi Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq whose date of birth is recorded as 10th
May 1997.  She made application for international protection as a refugee
but on 28th March 2018 a decision was made to refuse the application.  The
Appellant appealed.  On 18th May 2018 her appeal was heard by Judge of the
First-tier Tribunal NMK Lawrence.  Judge Lawrence made favourable findings
but in the mistaken belief that this was an academic exercise he did not go
on to make the declaration as to whether or not the Appellant was in fact a
refugee within the Convention.  The judge was concerned that because the
Appellant had been granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the
basis of her relationship with her child that he could not deal with the
matter.  He was wrong about that.

Not content with that decision, by notice dated 15th June 2018 the
Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and on 29th
June 2018 Judge Buchanan granted permission.

Both parties agreed that the judge was in error but the fact that there was
some leave did not mean in respect of an international protection claim in
which refugee status had been sought that the matter could not continue to
resolution.  I have to consider whether I can remake the case or whether it
should be remitted.  There are findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal.
 Although the judge has made favourable findings the issue of internal
relocation has not been considered.

In reality, this is an unfinished decision in which it appears to the Upper
Tribunal that the judge was minded to allow the appeal but it is not
sufficiently clear.  It seems to me right and proper therefore to remit the
matter to Judge Lawrence to finish off this matter and if necessary hear
further evidence.

Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  For the  avoidance  of  doubt,
the findings of fact made by the First-tier  Tribunal  are  preserved.   The
matter is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  Judge
Lawrence.  If that is not practicable  then  further  directions  should  be
made by the Resident Judge at  Hatton  Cross,  noting  that  the  favourable
findings are to be preserved, and I will deal with the  anonymity  order  in
the ordinary way when it comes to me.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 8 October 2018




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
