
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05938/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated    |
|On  2nd June 2017                     |On 9th June 2017                     |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     A A
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs A Sobande, instructed by OA Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS




   1. The appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  [  ]  1978  and  she
      appeals, with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
      Hutchison, against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  J  McMahon
      dismissing her appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal of  her
      asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights claim.


   2. The permission recorded that  it  was  arguable  that  the  Judge  had
      misdirected himself by finding at paragraph 31  of  his  Decision  and
      Reasons that the Appellant is bisexual but then  contradicted  himself
      by  finding  at  paragraph  50  that  she  is  not  bisexual  and   is
      heterosexual.   It  was  noted  that   whether   the   appellant   was
      heterosexual or not could make a difference to the weight to be placed
      on other aspects of the appellant's evidence such 'as the  appellant's
      skeleton argument' (sic) and her private life in terms of Article 8.


   3. At the hearing before me, Mrs Sobande also referred to the grounds for
      permission to appeal which referred to the error in  not  applying  an
      anonymity direction. I am not persuaded that permission was granted in
      this respect and the judge granting permission merely  re-applied  the
      anonymity direction which I maintain. This is not a specific ground of
      error and indeed it was  open  to  the  judge,  bearing  in  mind  his
      findings, to choose not to make an anonymity direction.  This is not a
      ground as to the substance of the decision under appeal and indeed was
      not and could not be part of the grounds of appeal before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge.


   4. I considered that no grant had been made  in  respect  of  the  ground
      cited at 2.4 of the permission grounds in that  the  judge  failed  to
      apply the test in the case of Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL  39.   It
      was argued that the family and friends of the appellant were 'victims'
      of any such decision to remove the appellant from the UK.   I  refused
      an application to renew that ground before the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
      judge addressed the issue of Article 8, such as it is in his decision,
      Article 8 was not specifically a ground of appeal  before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge although it was noted in the skeleton argument and
      the evidence placed before the First-tier Tribunal Judge disclosed  no
      close family or friends in the UK such  that  the  judge  should  have
      particularly addressed this issue.  On the evidence I am not persuaded
      the judge could have done more.


   5. In relation to the ground of appeal which was granted  permission  and
      as identified  above,  there  was  no  contradiction  in  the  judge's
      finding.  As set out clearly by Mr Nath and the Rule 24 response  from
      the  Secretary  of  State  the  judge  made  cogent  findings  on  the
      appellant's sexuality and this can be discerned from the judgment as a
      whole. At [31] the judge merely  identified  that  'in  my  assessment
      there is an aspect of the appellant's claim which has been  maintained
      on a consistent basis'.  The judge does not indicate that  he  accepts
      this assertion in the claim at this juncture but fairly sets out  that
      account in which the appellant has been consistent.   The  judge  does
      not accept her sexuality he accepts that she had  been  consistent  in
      this regard and there is a difference between accepting a  consistency
      and accepting a particular fact.

   6. The judge directed himself appropriately on the standard of proof  and
      gave sound reasons at [37] [38] and [39] for not  accepting  that  the
      appellant was anything other than heterosexual.  She did  not  produce
      any  statement  from  a  female  friend  with  whom  she   claimed   a
      relationship between 2009 and  2016,  and  more  importantly  did  not
      produce evidence of trying to make contact to  attain  such  evidence.
      She failed to demonstrate that she had made attempts to  put  evidence
      of her sexuality before the tribunal and there was no  information  as
      to the appellant's sexual orientation in the letters from her friends.
      The judge directed himself appropriately appreciating that it is not a
      requirement that an appellant provided confirmatory evidence but found
      there  was  a  reasonable  expectation  that  where  evidence  may  be
      available that an appellant would take  reasonable  steps  to  put  it
      before the Tribunal. The judge found she did not.

   7. There is no error of law in the judge's findings in  relation  to  the
      appellant's sexuality.  There is,  therefore,  no  error  which  would
      infect the findings in relation to Article 8.   In  that  respect  the
      judge made relevant and pertinent findings in relation  to  Article  8
      not least that the appellant's private life was established at a  time
      when she was in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  On  the  evidence  the
      judge's conclusions that the decision of the Secretary  of  State  was
      proportionate was lawfully made.

   8. There is no error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge and that decision will stand.





   Signed         Helen Rimington                  Date   2nd June 2017

   Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

