
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05991/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC via Skype    |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8 October 2020                    |On 14 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     RA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Ms Butler, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.



      1. The appellant has appealed against a decision  made  by  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Craft, sent on 23 December 2020 in which his
         appeal was dismissed on protection grounds  and  allowed  on  human
         rights (Art 8)  grounds.   The  SSHD  has  not  cross-appealed  the
         decision to allow the Article 8 appeal.

      2. At the beginning of the hearing before me, Mr Bates  accepted  that
         the FTT decision contains errors of law for the reasons set out  in
         the grounds of appeal, such that the decision of the  FTT  must  be
         set aside.  For the reasons I set out below Mr Bates was correct to
         make this  concession.   Both  representatives  accepted  that  the
         findings as to Article 8 are preserved, as they are not infected by
         any material error of law  but  the  findings  on  the  appellant's
         asylum claim need to be remade.

      3. The FTT's conclusion at [52] that the appellant's  "evidence  still
         leaves unexplained the contradiction  that  he  was,  from  records
         examined by the respondent, in Greece when the raid  in  which  his
         father was shot took place" is a clear error of  law.   There  were
         two witness statements from the appellant (dated 4 October 2018 and
         15 July 2019) explaining the apparent contradiction in detail. Over
         the course of several paragraphs the appellant explained that  when
         he arrived as a lonely and scared 17 year old he was encouraged  by
         members of the UK Kurdish community to conceal the time he spent in
         Greece.  Although this is summarised by the FTT at  [14],  the  FTT
         has not engaged with this evidence when making its findings of fact
         from [49].  The FTT has also failed to engage with  the  submission
         in  the  appellant's  skeleton  argument   that   the   appellant's
         vulnerability and claimed sexual abuse in Greece was an  additional
         explanation for  the  apparent  contradiction.   The  FTT  has  not
         engaged with this submission or given reasons for rejecting it.  Mr
         Bates was therefore entirely correct to concede ground 1.

      4.  In  concluding  at  [51]  that  the  extent  of  the   appellant's
         vulnerability before the 2015 FTT remains uncertain, the FTT failed
         to  take  into  account  relevant  evidence  or  give  reasons  for
         rejecting that evidence.  Ground 2 is therefore made out.  Although
         the FTT noted that there was important new evidence before  it  not
         available to the 2015 FTT, it failed  to  fully  engage  with  this
         evidence when determining whether or not to depart from the earlier
         adverse credibility findings.  This new evidence  was  clearly  and
         comprehensively set out in the skeleton argument  before  the  FTT.
         It was crucial to consider whether there was  evidence  to  support
         the submission that the appellant was  sufficiently  vulnerable  at
         the 2015 hearing, such  that  little  weight  should  be  given  to
         findings that were made in the absence of adjustments  as  to  that
         vulnerability.  After all, it was agreed that by the  time  of  the
         FTT hearing in October 2019 (four years later) that  the  appellant
         was so vulnerable that he should not be called  to  give  evidence,
         and the FTT also accepted the medical  evidence  and  the  evidence
         from Sutton social services when allowing the appeal on  Article  8
         grounds.

      5. The FTT summarised Dr Oyebode's report in detail at  [20]  to  [23]
         and records Dr Oyebode's opinion (at [3.11] to [3.16] and [3.46] of
         his report) that the appellant's experiences in  Iran  and  reasons
         for leaving together with his experience of sexual abuse in  Greece
         led to  symptoms  of  generalised  anxiety  disorder.    Yet,  when
         considering the extent of the appellant's vulnerability before  the
         2015 FTT, this FTT  did  not  clearly  or  expressly  address  this
         evidence.  Although Dr Oyebode's report was considered at [50], the
         FTT failed to  engage  with  the  specific  psychological  evidence
         relevant to 2015.  In particular  the  FTT  failed  to  address  Dr
         Oyebode's observations regarding the appellant's limited  cognitive
         abilities at [2.47] of his report and the  extent  to  which  those
         might have impacted upon his ability to give  evidence  before  the
         2015 FTT.  It would have been much more helpful if the  appellant's
         solicitors had included a specific question to Dr Oyebode regarding
         the appellant's psychological state in 2015.  Nonetheless, when  Dr
         Oyebode's report is read as a whole, there is  no  suggestion  that
         the appellant's  presentation  and  accompanying  diagnosis  is  of
         recent vintage.  In the premises, the FTT was obliged to  carefully
         consider this evidence when determining the nature  and  extent  of
         any vulnerability at the time of the 2015 FTT hearing.

      6. The FTT was aware that the 2015 FTT did not have the  documentation
         from the London Borough of Sutton [9].  This included  a  2012  age
         assessment report  which  accepted  the  appellant  to  be  broadly
         credible and recorded that he presented with symptoms of PTSD,  who
         was struggling to cope with separation from his father -  see  [17]
         of the FTT's decision.  This is consistent with Ms Reynolds' letter
         dated 12 July 2019.  Ms  Reynolds  is  the  Team  Manager  for  the
         Leaving Care Team at Sutton.  She has  known  the  appellant  since
         2014.  She described the appellant as requiring significant support
         from the  leaving  care  team  and  mental  health  services  since
         arriving in the UK, as a result of the  trauma  in  his  life.   Ms
         Reynolds' evidence clearly corroborates the  appellant's  claim  to
         have been vulnerable at the time of the 2015 FTT hearing, yet  when
         addressing that issue, the FTT  made  no  clear  findings  on  this
         important evidence.

      7. In addition, as Mr Bates noted, the FTT missed an entirely  obvious
         matter when assessing the nature  and  extent  of  the  appellant's
         likely vulnerability before the 2015 FTT.  It was  not  in  dispute
         that the appellant arrived in the UK as an unaccompanied  minor  in
         July 2012 when he was only 16.  Although he was no longer  a  minor
         before the 2015 FTT he was only 19 and continued  to  be  a  person
         without any family members  who  was  looked  after  by  the  local
         authority.

      8. Mr Bates also correctly accepted that as contended in ground 3  the
         FTT made a mistake of fact when dealing with the appellant's  claim
         as to the level of his father's political involvement.

Disposal

      9. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the  relevant  Senior  President's
         Practice Statement  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
         findings required in remaking the decision  on  protection  grounds
         only, and I have decided that this is an appropriate case to  remit
         to the FTT.  This is because completely fresh findings of fact  are
         necessary.

     10. It would be helpful if the FTT holds a directions hearing in  order
         to address issues arising in relation to the appellant's  past  and
         present vulnerability, with a  view  to  narrowing  the  issues  in
         dispute.



Decision

     11. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error  of
         law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.  The decision  on
         protection grounds shall be remade in the FTT,  by  a  judge  other
         than Judge Craft.


Signed:     UTJ Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated: 8 October 2020

