
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05756/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd November 2018                         |On 15 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                     FA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood, Counsel instructed by Fisher Jones
                    Greenwood (Newcomen Way)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt whose date of birth is recorded  as
    17th March 1999.  He made application for international protection as a
    refugee.  That was refused by the Secretary of State on 2nd  June  2017
    against which decision he appealed.  The appeal  was  heard  at  Taylor
    House on 15th  December  2017  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Cameron.  Judge Cameron dismissed  the  appeal  on  all  grounds.   Not
    content  with  that  decision  by  Notice  dated  29th   January   2018
    application was made for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The application was refused in the first instance by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Saffer on 14th May 2018.

 2. There was then a renewed  application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   That
    application came before Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson on 24th  September
    2018.  She granted permission.  She found it arguable that  there  were
    inconsistent findings at paragraphs 94 to 97  compared  to  that  which
    appears at 101; that the judge  had  failed  to  take  account  of  the
    Appellant's risk as a member of his family being  a  particular  social
    group; that the risk to those associated with  the  Muslim  Brotherhood
    being at the core of the Appellant's claim did not require  high  level
    activity to trigger risk; that too much weight had been placed  on  the
    timing of events; and in general, that it was not probative of the case
    against the Appellant that although there was  evidence  of  widespread
    ill-treatment, he was not personally ill-treated whilst  in  detention.
    In other words, Judge Gleeson came to the view  that  it  was  arguable
    that the entirety of the decision was flawed.  In the event I  need  go
    no further than looking to paragraph 94 compared to 101.

 3. It was the Appellant's case  that  he  was  at  risk  from  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood through imputed political opinion because of  his  father's
    activities, it being part of the Appellant's case that his  father  was
    arrested in July 2015.  That was part of the core of the case.

 4. At paragraph 94 of the decision the judge says:

         "I do take note  of  the  fact  that  the  appellant's  father  was
         arrested in July 2015 and that the family visited him in presumably
         August 2015 at the prison. ..."

    At paragraph 104 the judge states:

         "Taking into account all the evidence available I do not  find  the
         appellant's account to be credible.  It is not  credible  that  the
         authorities would arrest his father in  July  2015  and  allow  the
         family to visit in August 2015 yet then seek to find out where  the
         appellant's father and brothers were  in  November  2015  when  the
         authorities had shown no interest whatsoever in the family  in  the
         intervening months".

 5. Mr Avery invited me to find  that  what  the  judge  meant  to  say  at
    paragraph 94 was that he, that is to say the judge, had  taken  account
    of what the Appellant was saying in relation to the arrest.

 6. It is not possible in my judgment to reconcile paragraph 94  with  104,
    and in any event, it is not clear what  the  judge  is  saying.   Those
    circumstances go to the very core of the Appellant's case.   Mr  Avery,
    though he did not concede the appeal,  very  reasonably  accepted  that
    there was on the face of the decision the inconsistency  which  I  have
    identified.

 7. For the avoidance of doubt, I find that there is a  material  error  of
    law because it is not clear what the judge was saying.  If in fact  the
    judge was accepting that the Appellant's father was arrested  in  2015,
    then it was necessary for the judge to go on to consider why there  was
    that arrest and what flowed from it.   The  decision  is  fundamentally
    flawed.

Decision

 8. In the circumstances the appeal is allowed. The decision is  set  aside
    to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal,  that  being  the  course  of
    action which both parties agree is appropriate and which I  also  agree
    is appropriate given  that  the  case  is  beyond  cure  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 9. This matter therefore shall be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    be heard at Taylor House by a  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cameron or First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer.  There  will  be  an
    Arabic (Middle Eastern) interpreter and  the  case  will  have  a  time
    estimate of four hours unless otherwise directed by the Resident Judge.




Signed                              Date 9 November 2018





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

