
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05658/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 January 2019                      |On 14 March 2019                 |
|                                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                  MEHDI [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett of Counsel instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cary promulgated on 8  August
    2018 is set aside for material error  of  law.   The  decision  in  the
    appeal is to be remade before the First-tier Tribunal with  all  issues
    at large by any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Cary.


2.   Given the basis of my conclusion in these proceedings today  I  do  not
    propose to rehearse in any detail the background circumstances  of  the
    Appellant and his asylum claim.  Suffice to say  for  present  purposes
    that he is a national of Iran who has  claimed  asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of his conversion from Islam to Christianity.   As
    an aspect of his narrative account he referred to  having  written  and
    recited poems whilst in Iran.


3.   Permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McWilliam on 3 December 2018.  The grant  of  permission
    sets out the narrow basis for that grant in the following terms:

         "The grounds assert that the appellant recited a poem  in  evidence
         before the judge.  It is arguable that the judge  erred  in  saying
         that the appellant had not been able to recite  poems  in  evidence
         (see [42]).  He arguably attached weight to this."


4.   In context I note that paragraph 42 of the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal states in part:

         "If the Appellant wrote them  and  recited  them  as  regularly  as
         claimed, I do not understand why he was  not  able  to  recite  the
         poems  in  evidence  or  at  least  given  me  significantly   more
         information about their content."


5.   Mr Tufan on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  has  very  fairly  and
    properly produced a copy of an attendance note prepared by Counsel  who
    appeared on behalf of the Respondent before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    In material part the note includes the following:

         "This was demonstrated by long and confusing evidence  given  about
         the poems which ended up with the poems being  recited  and  placed
         before the court in writing ..."


6.   In the circumstances Mr Tufan does not dispute that the  Appellant  did
    indeed recite one or more of his poems before the First-tier  Tribunal.
    As such it is acknowledged that there is a fundamental misconception of
    fact apparent at paragraph 42.


7.   It is also plainly the case that the Judge  speaks  critically  of  the
    Appellant's evidence in this context such  that  the  misconception  of
    fact appears material to the 'in the round' evaluation of his evidence.


8.   In this latter context  I  note  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    expressed difficulties in accepting  and/or  understanding  many  other
    aspects of the Appellant's evidence - it was not the  single  point  in
    respect of which the Respondent now acknowledges  error  that  informed
    the Judge's overall adverse assessment of the Appellant's  credibility.
    However, as Mr Tufan again very fairly and properly acknowledges, it is
    difficult to  separate  out  the  individual  strands  of  the  overall
    assessment,  or  otherwise  to  conclude  that  the   Judge's   overall
    assessment has not been coloured at least in some material  respect  by
    his error.


9.   On this basis the Secretary of  State  does  not  seek  to  resist  the
    challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


10.  In all the circumstances I accept the common position  of  the  parties
    that there was a material error of law. It is also common ground, and I
    accept, that in such circumstances the decision in the appeal  requires
    to be remade with a fresh hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

11.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  for  material
error of law.


12.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cary,  with
    all issues at large.


13.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 11 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
