
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05818/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 January 2020                            |On 13 February 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   Mrs T N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Smith, Counsel instructed by Kent Immigration &
                    Visa Advice
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe born on 29 September 1965.  She
    claims to have entered the UK on 27 February 2004 and claimed asylum on
    15 January 2009. This application was refused, her appeal was dismissed
    on 26 November 2009 and she became appeal rights exhausted on 8 January
    2010. The Appellant made a number of further  submissions,  which  were
    rejected. The most recent submissions were made on 16 April 2019, which
    were refused on 29 May 2019 with the right of appeal. The  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana for hearing on 4  October  2019.
    In a decision and reasons promulgated on  11  October  2019  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal.

 2. The Appellant's asylum claim was based  on  the  deteriorating  country
    situation and economic situation and her political activity in the  UK.
    The Appellant is married to a Zimbabwean national aged 66 years of  age
    who has indefinite leave to remain in the UK.  It was accepted  by  the
    judge at [53] of the decision that the Appellant has family  life  with
    her husband.  Thus any removal of  the  Appellant  from  the  UK  would
    interfere with that family life. The Appellant's husband is unwell,  he
    has been suffering  from  cancer  which  was  currently  in  remission,
    accepted by the judge at [55], having been diagnosed  and  treated  for
    lung cancer in 2017.  However, there were concerns of reoccurrence  and
    he  continues  to  have  regular  scans  and  appointments,  he   takes
    medication, has recurrent chest infections as a result of  his  surgery
    and resulting radiotherapy treatment,  and  there  is  a  prognosis  of
    reoccurrence in terms of months to a couple of years, as a  consequence
    of which the Appellant is his carer and  supports  him  physically  and
    emotionally.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal against the Judge's  decision
    essentially on three grounds: firstly, that the judge  failed  to  make
    findings on relevant issues, the ability of the Appellant's husband  to
    use his UK state pension to pay for medical care in  Zimbabwe,  failing
    to find whether the ongoing monitoring and  treatment  the  Appellant's
    husband needs now and may need in the future  would  be  accessible  in
    Zimbabwe, and whether treatment is available and affordable was clearly
    relevant  to  any  consideration  of   the   proportionality   of   the
    Respondent's decision; secondly, that the judge failed to take  account
    of relevant considerations and that is whether the Appellant's  husband
    would return to Zimbabwe in light of his evidence that  he  was  afraid
    that he would not receive appropriate care and treatment and  therefore
    could not return, and the judge erred in failing  to  consider  whether
    his fear of return amounts to either an insurmountable  obstacle  or  a
    compelling circumstance: see  CL  (India)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  748;  and
    thirdly, the judge's approach to section 117B of the NIAA 2002 and  the
    balancing exercise was erroneous in light of the judgment  in  Rhuppiah
    [2018] UKSC 58 at [49] and the failure by the judge to consider whether
    in the particular circumstances the public interest in removal could be
    outweighed by the Appellant's husband's health problems.  No  challenge
    was  brought  regarding  the  Judge's  findings  in  respect   of   the
    Appellant's asylum claim.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Coker  in  a
    decision dated 19 December 2019 on the basis that:

         "For the reason given in the grounds relied  upon  it  is  arguable
         that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana on  Article  8
         and Section 117B of the NIAA 2002 are infected by error of law such
         that the decision on Article 8 should be set  aside  and  re-made".





     Hearing

5.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Everett acknowledged  that
there was a   Rule 24 response but submitted it did not  take  matters  much
further.  Ms Smith     sought  to  rely  on  the      judgments  in  Agyarko
[2017] UKSC 11 and CL (India) [2019]    EWCA Civ  1925.   The  parties  were
agreed that the grant of permission to appeal    appeared to  encompass  all
three grounds of challenge.

6.   In respect of ground 1, Ms Smith submitted that Judge Chana's  decision
was not  particularly lengthy and it was apparent she  had  failed  to  take
account of relevant     considerations  and  took  into  account  immaterial
considerations,  e.g.  her  findings  in     respect  of   the   Appellant's
husband's pension do not go far enough.  The judge failed       to  complete
her reasoning in reaching her conclusions,  which  were  at  odds  with  the
evidence that she had set out in the earlier decision, given that she  found
at [58] to    [61] that there was a shortage of drugs and medical  staff  in
Zimbabwe; that cancer  drugs were  expensive  and  that  screening  services
were available for most forms of    cancer but prohibitively  expensive  for
most people and that there were shortages of     chemotherapy drugs even  in
the private sector.  She also found  the  Appellant's    husband  would  not
receive  free  treatment  if  his  cancer  returned  or  he  needed  further
ongoing medical assistance.  However, the judge went on to find  that  there
was no   evidence before her that the medical  treatment  and  equipment  he
required  were  not       available,  they  were  available  but  expensive,
however this finding does not reflect   the very precarious nature of  their
availability and is inconsistent with her record of   the evidence, e.g.  at
[60].  The test, which the judge  did  not  correctly  apply,  was   whether
removal of the Appellant would  lead  to  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
for her and in particular for her husband.

7.   In relation to the manner in which the judge treated the issue  of  the
Appellant's   husband's pension, it was submitted that she  did  not  manage
this issue correctly. The  level of the pension was not specified but  given
that the Appellant's husband has    only been in the UK  since  2006,  there
could at best only be fourteen years' worth of   pension.  The  judge  found
there was no evidence  that  he  would  be  unable  to  access    this  from
Zimbabwe or be able to live from his  income  in  Zimbabwe,  but  there  was
no consideration of the costs of his likely medical treatment.

8.   Ms Smith submitted in response to a question from  the  Upper  Tribunal
that there    was no evidence as to any other form of income apart from  the
pension income    which was modest at best and that the judge had failed  to
properly analyse the   affordability issue.  Ms  Smith  reminded  the  Upper
Tribunal that this was not an   Article 3 case, the  argument  simply  being
whether removal of  the  Appellant  would   result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
consequences.

9.   In relation to ground 3, Ms Smith submitted this was a technical  point
based on      Rhuppiah (op cit). She submitted that the  judge  had  made  a
straightforward   misdirection  and  had  failed  to  take  account  of  the
judgment in Rhuppiah, which was a   material error  because  the  judge  had
failed to properly conduct a balancing  exercise   or  consider  the  issues
cumulatively and against  the  background  of  ill  health.     Notably  the
Appellant's   husband   had   previously   had   cancer    in    2010.    No
consideration was given to the fact he has  been  in  the  UK  for  fourteen
years.  He has    returned to Zimbabwe because his first wife  died  and  he
needed to deal with her    burial.  He has adult children  in  both  the  UK
and Zimbabwe but no consideration   was given to his private life  with  his
UK based children.  His lung  cancer  diagnosis     in  2017  postdates  his
trips to Zimbabwe.

10.  Also material is the fact that the Appellant has endeavoured  a  number
of times to   regularise her stay but there was a five  year  delay  by  the
Respondent in deciding her      application.  Ms Smith also sought  to  rely
on the case of CL (India) (op cit)  which      found  that  subjective  fear
could not be taken into account at [37] but was analogous      in  light  of
[68] given the Appellant's husband's fear of  a  recurrence  of  his  cancer
based on the objectively based previous experience and information: see  the
     Appellant's bundle at page 42.   The  Appellant's  husband  would  like
continuity of     care and fears that he may not receive  this  in  Zimbabwe
in light of the healthcare      system there and bearing  in  mind  that  he
has been given a diagnosis that there is a   real likelihood his cancer  may
return.

11.  In her submissions, Ms Everett dealt with the  last  ground  first  and
submitted that    whilst it had been put to  the  Upper  Tribunal  that  the
judge had misdirected herself   at [53] in relation to section  117  of  the
NIAA 2002 it was not straightforward and  it   was  not  accepted  that  the
judge had     fettered her ability to place weight on the      decision  and
that  the  assertions   made   were   not   borne   out   by   the   ensuing
considerations made by the First tier Tribunal Judge.

12.   In relation to ground 1, Ms Everett submitted the  judge  was  clearly
aware that    medical treatment in Zimbabwe was not going to  be  comparable
to the medical    treatment the Appellant's husband has been  receiving  but
it was fair of her to find       that  there  is  treatment  available.   Ms
Everett submitted there was no suggestion from   the findings the judge  had
not taken that point on board and grappled with it, nor   that her  findings
are perverse.  She invited the Upper Tribunal to resist the ground      that
the judge had failed to complete the reasoning in relation  to  the  medical
evidence.  It was  clearly  not  possible  for  the  judge  to  formulate  a
treatment plan for     the Appellant's husband but she did grapple with  the
shortages and availability of   treatment in the form of chemotherapy.

13.  In respect of ground 2, Ms Everett submitted that this  was  a  nuanced
consideration,    that the judge is making findings of  fact  based  on  the
evidence but this is not going  to    be  determinative.   However,  it  was
incumbent upon the judge to make findings of     fact  and  this  ground  of
challenge was not made out.

14.  In reply, Ms Smith addressed Ground 1 and submitted that  she  was  not
seeking to    argue that there was no treatment available,  but  whether  or
not it was accessible and  the Judge had failed to consider this.

15.  I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

     Findings and reasons

16.   I have concluded that the First tier Tribunal Judge  erred  materially
in law for the    reasons set out in Ground 3. There  is  no  or  no  proper
consideration by her of the      statutory  public  interest  considerations
set out at section 117A-D of the NIAA 2002   except for the  fact  that  the
Appellant's immigration status has always been    precarious.  In  fact  she
has had no leave at all and has  been  an  overstayer  since  8      January
2010; albeit she has made regular attempts to resolve her status by  way  of
further submissions and the was a five year delay by the Secretary of  State
in   deciding submissions made on 15 November 2012, which were  not  refused
until 10      August 2017.

17.  The Judge at [53] expressly accepted  that  the  Appellant  has  family
life with her     partner. However, she failed to reach her decision on  the
proportionality of     removal with regard to the material jurisprudence  in
respect of family life and the  statutory public interest considerations  as
set out in Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58, their    Lordships held  as  follows  at
[49]  as  to  the  limited  degree  of  flexibility  inherent  in    section
117A(2)(a) when considering a  precarious  immigration  status  pursuant  to
section  117B(5).   Further  consideration  was  recently   given   to   the
application of    section 117B to family life where  immigration  status  is
precarious in GM (Sri Lanka)    [2019] EWCA Civ 1630 and CL  (India)  [2019]
EWCA Civ 1925, which provides inter     alia as follows at [66]-[67]:

     "66. Our conclusion on this point accords with the recent decision of
the Court of Appeal    (Green and Simler LJJ) in GM (Sri Lanka) v Secretary
of State for the Home  Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1630, where the tribunal
judge was held to have erred in law     by treating the "little weight"
provisions of section 117B(4) and (5) as relevant to family life   as well
as private life created when the appellant's immigration status was
precarious, with  the result that the tribunal "wrongly discounted the
weight to be attached to the family rights   relied on in the
proportionality assessment" (para 37).

     67. ...The Court of Appeal clearly held that the weight attached to
all the family rights relied    on had been wrongly discounted. In the same
way we are satisfied that the Upper Tribunal     judge in this case erred
in law in so far as he treated the fact that Ms Lal's immigration status
was precarious when her relationship with her husband was formed as
requiring him to attach    little weight to their right to respect for
their family life.

  18.    I further find that the Judge erred materially in law in  that  she
failed to apply  the     correct  legal  test  when  considering  Article  8
outside the Rules ie whether refusal    would result in unjustifiably  harsh
consequences for the Appellant or her partner,    despite  making  reference
to Agyarko at [51]. The Court of Appeal in CL (India) (op cit)      held  as
follows at [68]-[69]:


     "68. In considering, however, whether there are "exceptional
circumstances", the applicable  test is whether refusing leave to remain
would result in "unjustifiably harsh consequences"    for the applicant or
their partner, such that refusal would not be proportionate: see the
passage from the Secretary of State's instructions to officials quoted at
paragraph 11 above     and the Agyarko case at paras 54-60. The essential
difference (reflected in the word   "unjustifiably") is that the latter
test requires the tribunal not just to assess the degree of    hardship
which the applicant or their partner would suffer, but to balance the
impact of     refusing leave to remain on their family life against the
strength of the public interest in such      refusal in all the
circumstances of the particular case.

     69.    The Upper Tribunal did not undertake such an assessment. This
was another error of   law which flowed from the errors already identified.
From the judge's point of view, the     question of proportionality had in
effect already been answered by his mistaken     understanding that he was
required by law to attach little weight to the couple's relationship   and
his previous finding that there were no insurmountable obstacles to Ms Lal
continuing    family life with her husband outside the UK. As a result of
those errors, the judge failed to   assess the factors relevant to the
question of proportionality in the circumstances of this case."

19.  I am not persuaded that  Ground  2  -  the  failure  to  make  findings
relevant to Article 8  of ECHR and Ground 3  -  the  failure  to  take  into
account relevant considerations  are      made  out,  but  in  light  of  my
findings above as to the failure by the  First  tier  Tribunal     Judge  to
apply the correct legal tests in respect  of  the  Appellant's  family  life
with her      partner and the statutory public interest  considerations  and
to consider whether    removal of the  Appellant  would  have  unjustifiably
harsh consequences for the       Appellant  or  her  partner,  the  decision
cannot stand as the Judge's findings are      infected  by  the  failure  to
apply the correct tests.

20.  The decision and reasons of First tier Tribunal  Judge  Chana  contains
material errors   of law and  is set aside, for the reasons set  out  above.



























Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent  that  the  appeal  is  remitted  for  a
hearing de novo in respect of Article 8 only.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 10 February 2020


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
