
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05136/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 April 2018                             |On 23 April 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                souleman [d]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Mitchell, Counsel instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal from the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Carroll promulgated on 21 December 2017.   The  case  concerns  the
         appellant, a national of Guinea, whose claim in relation to asylum,
         humanitarian protection and under human rights  considerations  was
         rejected by the Secretary of State.  It has  a  lengthy  procedural
         history dating  from  a  decision  of  Immigration  Judge  Hart  in
         December of 2010.

      2. When this matter came before the First-tier Tribunal in December of
         last year it was already fairly stale.  No  criticism  is  made  by
         Miss Mitchell, who acts  for  the  appellant,  in  respect  of  the
         approach  adopted  by  the  judge,  in  particular  taking  as  the
         appropriate starting point the findings of fact and credibility  as
         set out at paragraph 9 in the form of  an  extensive  quotation  of
         nearly 30 paragraphs  of  the  earlier  decision.  The  judge  then
         appropriately deals with the reasons the Secretary  of  State  gave
         for refusing the application before  proceeding  to  summarise  the
         hearing which took place on 5 December 2017 leading to the decision
         now under appeal.

      3. The judge's assessment is full and carefully reasoned.   It  begins
         at paragraph 23 of the decision where there is  assessment  of  the
         appellant's case, starting with the reference back to Judge  Hart's
         earlier decision.

      4. The difficulty, however, begins in paragraph  32  where  the  judge
         says this:

             "In the light of all of the evidence referred to above and the
             2011 findings, I find that the appellant  has  fabricated  his
             account of his political affiliation  and  membership  of  the
             UFDG in order to mount a fresh claim for asylum.  The evidence
             demonstrates that the  appellant  has  not  been  involved  in
             politics in either Guinea or the United Kingdom."


      5. The judge then proceeds to consider  other  material  including  at
         paragraph 41 the testimony of Dr Monica Carter  dealing  with  both
         physical and psychological trauma. The judge  states  at  paragraph
         42:

             "The doctor's assessment of the  appellant's  scars  is  based
             entirely upon the appellant's fabricated account".


         Then at paragraph 51, in coming to overall conclusions,  the  judge
         says;

             "In the light of all of the evidence and for the reasons given
             above, in the determination of 2011 and for the reasons  given
             by the respondent, I do not find the appellant credible as  to
             the circumstances in which he claims he was compelled to  flee
             Guinea or as to his claimed fear of return.  I find  that  the
             appellant's  case  does  not  engage  the   United   Kingdom's
             obligations under the Protection Regulations and  that  return
             would not give rise to  a  risk  of  treatment  in  breach  of
             Articles 2 or 3 of the 1950 Convention."


      6. The grounds which were settled by Counsel were somewhat lengthy but
         the short point is simply that the judge in this  instance  adopted
         an approach which on its face indicated a departure from the  clear
         authority that fact-finding and credibility finding  should  be  in
         the round and not compartmentalised.  Reference in  particular  was
         made to HE (DRC - credibility and psychiatric reports)  DRC  [2004]
         UKIAT 00321 at paragraph 22:

             "Where the report  is  specifically  relied  on  as  a  factor
             relevant to credibility, the Adjudicator should deal  with  it
             as an integral part of the findings on credibility rather than
             just as an add-on, which does not undermine the conclusions to
             which he would otherwise come."


         In addition there is reference to the oft-cited passages in Mibanga
         to like effect.

      7. Ms Ahmad, who acts for the Secretary of State, has resisted it with
         some tenacity.  She has taken  me  in  particular  to  HH  (medical
         evidence; effect of Mibanga) Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 00164, and  made
         particular reference to paragraphs 20 and 21 of that decision.

             "[20]     In  the  present  case,  it  is  manifest  that  the
             Immigration  Judge  has  arrived  at  his  conclusions  as  to
             credibility by looking  at  the  evidence  in  the  round.  At
             paragraph 16 of the determination, he reminded himself that 'I
             must look at the case  in  the  round  in  light  of  all  the
             relevant circumstances'.   At paragraph  20,  the  Immigration
             Judge  confirmed  that  he  had  'considered  the  appellant's
             evidence in the round together with  the  background  evidence
             and her interview record'. Plainly,  the  medical  report  was
             part of the appellant's evidence.


             [21] The Tribunal considers that there is a danger of  Mibanga
             being misunderstood.    The judgments in  that  case  are  not
             intended to place judicial fact-finders in a form of  forensic
             straightjacket.  In particular, the Court of Appeal is not  to
             be regarded as laying down any rule of law as to the order  in
             which judicial fact-finders are  to  approach  the  evidential
             materials before them.   To take Wilson  J's  'cake'  analogy,
             all its ingredients cannot be thrown together  into  the  bowl
             simultaneously.   One has  to  start  somewhere.    There  was
             nothing illogical about the process by which  the  Immigration
             Judge in the present case chose  to  approach  his  analytical
             task."


      8. What Ms Ahmad submits  is  that  the  same  can  be  said  of  this
         decision.  On  two  or  more  occasions  the  judge  makes  express
         reference  to  drawing  conclusions  "in  the  light  of  all   the
         evidence".  This may well be what the judge intended to do, but the
         Upper Tribunal must consider with care what appears on the face  of
         the decision.

      9. Looking at the totality of the First-tier Tribunal decision of  the
         impression is given that the judge first made credibility  findings
         in relation to this appellant, resting that conclusion very heavily
         on what had been said by Judge Hart in the earlier decision. Having
         made adverse those credibility  findings,  the  judge  proceeds  to
         dismiss  the  medical  evidence  as  "based   entirely   upon   the
         appellant's fabricated account".  It may  be  that  the  judge  did
         consider the mix of the ingredients in the round,  but  regrettably
         the impression given by the way in which  this  decision  has  been
         crafted is that the judge dealt with the matter in the improper and
         compartmentalised deprecated in Mibanga and other authorities.

     10. I cannot be confident that the proper approach was followed in this
         case and it must therefore follow that the decision of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal is set aside.

     11. The proper course is to remit the matter for a de novo decision  by
         a different judge and I do so order. It is,  of  course,  perfectly
         perfectly possible that the judge rehearing the matter will come to
         precisely the same conclusion, but justice requires that  in  doing
         so the approach to the evidence and  credibility  findings  follows
         the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga  and  repeated
         elsewhere.

Notice of Decision

      1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


      2) The matter is remitted to Taylor House for a  fresh  hearing  by  a
         judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll.


      3) No findings of fact are preserved.


      4) No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     20 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


