
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05541/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 December 2019                   |On 16 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     V L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Mr R Rashid, instructed by Binas Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an anonymity direction.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
    court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the claimant.



 2. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Foudy promulgated on 3 October 2019 dismissing  the
    protection claim but allowing on human rights  grounds  the  claimant's
    appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 4  June  2019
    to refuse  his  protection  claim  made  on  8  November  2018  and  an
    application for leave to remain  on  human  rights.   This  followed  a
    deportation decision made on 5 November 2018.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Manuell granted permission to  appeal  on  23
    October 2019.

 4. For the reasons I will set out below I am satisfied that there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such as to require the decision to be set aside and remade.

 5. There was not a copy in the file, but Mr Rashid handed up his  Rule  24
    response, comprising three pages and  ten  paragraphs  contending  that
    there was no material error of law in the decision.

 6.  In  granting  permission  to  appeal  on  all  grounds  Judge  Manuell
    considered  it  arguable  the  judge's  approach  and   reasoning   was
    perfunctory and ignore the relevant Immigration Rules.  In  particular,
    in light of the deportation decision the judge failed to  identify  any
    very compelling circumstances and in the view of Judge Manuell no  such
    circumstances were obvious in the facts of the case, "it's not easy  to
    see why the appeal was allowed on family life Article 8  ECHR  grounds,
    particularly as the only child in  existence  is  the  stepchild  of  a
    recent and short lived relationship."

 7. The relevant background is  that  the  claimant  was  convicted  of  an
    offence and deemed by the respondent to have  caused  serious  harm  so
    that, as he was advised on 4 June 2019, it was conducive to the  public
    good to deport him from the UK.

 8. The first point made by Mr Tan was that nowhere in  the  decision  does
    the judge make an assessment  of  the  seriousness  of  the  claimant's
    offending behaviour.  The Secretary of State  considered  that  he  had
    committed an offence which caused serious harm, but the judge  made  no
    assessment of that issue at all.  Mr Rashid accepts this.

 9. In relation to the protection claim the  judge  found  the  claimant  a
    thoroughly incredible witness and therefore  dismissed  his  protection
    and humanitarian protection claims.  As Mr Tan has pointed  out,  there
    has been no cross-appeal on that finding and therefore that part of the
    decision must stand as made.  In other words the  protection  claim  on
    both asylum and humanitarian protection grounds remains dismissed.

10. In relation to human rights,  as  a  foreign  criminal  falling  within
    paragraph 398(c) it was for the claimant to bring  himself  within  the
    exceptions under paragraph 399 or 399A or failing that  to  demonstrate
    that there were  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  the
    "unduly harsh" test in  relation  to  family  life  with  his  partner.
    However it is difficult to see that the judge made any such assessment.
     The closest that one comes is in paragraph 29 of the  decision,  where
    the judge states that she has taken into consideration all the  Section
    117 factors:

         "I have considered carefully the public interest in the removal  of
         foreign  criminals  especially  one  who's  been  involved  in  the
         wholesale production of drugs.  However, I reluctantly find in  the
         particular circumstances of this appeal that the best interests  of
         the child R outweigh the public interest."

11. The judge did not mention Section 117C of the 2002 Act, or any  of  the
    tests or factors relevant, and it is not clear that the  judge  had  in
    mind Section 117C, rather than 117B.

12. At paragraph 24 of the decision, the judge began the Razgar  assessment
    of the human rights claim, following the stepped approach  to  conclude
    at paragraph 30 that the claimant had established a private life in the
    UK and that Article 8 would be breached by his removal and at paragraph
    31 that the removal was not proportionate.

13. At the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal,  the  partner  was
    expecting a child, but an unborn child  is  not  considered  under  the
    Rules.  However, the partner  has  another  child,  R,  said  to  be  a
    toddler, whom the claimant  allegedly  looks  after  while  the  mother
    works.  There  was  expert  social  work  evidence  that  removing  the
    claimant would have a serious  and  negative  impact  on  that  child's
    wellbeing and would not be in her best interests.  The judge dealt with
    this at paragraph 28 before concluding at paragraph 29  as  said  above
    that the best interests of that child outweighed the public interest in
    his removal.

14. It is clear that  the  judge  has  entirely  omitted  to  consider  the
    requirements of paragraphs 398 to 399A and failed  to  consider  either
    the "unduly harsh" test or  whether  there  were  any  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above the tests for the exceptions.  This  is  a
    clear error of law  that  unfortunately  undermines  the  entire  human
    rights decision so that that part of the decision cannot stand and must
    be set aside and remade.

15. Where a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside  Section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions  or  it
    must be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  The  scheme  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of primary
    fact-finding to the Upper Tribunal.  Where the facts are unclear  on  a
    crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, as  they  are  in  this  case,
    effectively there has not been a valid determination of  those  issues.
    In this particular case the judge  has  omitted  to  make  an  adequate
    assessment of the public interest  in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
    subject to deportation proceedings.

16. In all the circumstances and at the  invitation  and  request  of  both
    parties I relist this appeal for a  fresh  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on  the  basis  that  it  falls  squarely  within  the  senior
    president's practice statement at paragraph 7.2.   The  effect  of  the
    error has been to deprive the Secretary of State of a fair hearing  and
    the nature and  extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  that  will  be
    necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is  appropriate
    to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to determine the  appeal  afresh
    in relation to the human rights part of the decision only.

17. As stated above there is no error and no challenge to the dismissal  of
    the protection claim, so that part of the decision must stand.

Decision

18. The making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside, but only insofar as it related to the human rights grounds.

                    I set aside the human rights decision.

                    I preserve the findings and decision in relation to  the
                    asylum and humanitarian protection claim.

                    I remit the human rights appeal to be decided afresh  in
                    the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with the  attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
                  Signed
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 6 December 2019

Consequential Directions

   1.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
      Manchester.

   2. It may be heard by any judge other than Judge Foudy and Judge Manuell.

   3. The decision and the findings in relation to  the  protection  appeal,
      both asylum and humanitarian protection are preserved.  The appeal  is
      confined to the human rights issues only.

   4. The estimated length of hearing is three hours.

   5. An interpreter will be required in Vietnamese.

   6. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further  alternative  directions
      as are deemed appropriate.
     [pic]
                  Signed
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 6 December 2019

To the Respondent
Fee Award

I make no fee award as the outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.





                  Signed
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 6 December 2019
