
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05452/2018
                                                               PA/05454/2018
                                                               PA/05455/2018
                                                               PA/05458/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd January 2019                          |On 15th April 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                 AB & OTHERS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. A Jones, instructed by Connaughts
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Although an anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier
      Tribunal ("FtT"), as this a protection claim and includes children, it
      is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless and until a Tribunal
      or Court directs otherwise, the appellants are granted anonymity. No
      report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify the
      appellants or any member of their family. This direction applies
      amongst others to all parties. Failure to comply with this direction
      could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


   2. The appellants are all nationals of Pakistan.  AB was born on 5th July
      1977.  The remaining three appellants, are the children of AB.  FA was
      born on 8th November 2003 and was 14 when she arrived in the UK.  She
      is now 15.  AA was born on 23rd May 2005 and was 11 when he arrived in
      the UK.  He is now 13.  UA was born on 26th January 2007 and was 10
      when he arrived in the UK.  He is now 12.


   3. The appellants all arrived in the UK on 4th April 2017 having been
      granted leave to enter the UK as visitors.  The appellants intended to
      visit AB's daughter HA, who is also a Pakistani national, but married
      to a British Citizen and living in the UK.  The appellants made a
      claim for asylum on 13th October 2017.  The claim was refused by the
      respondent for the reasons set out in a decision dated 13th April
      2018.  Their appeals were dismissed by FtT Judge Rowlands for the
      reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 28th June 2018.   The
      appeal before me is an appeal against the decision of FtT Judge
      Rowlands.


The decision of the FtT Judge


   4. At paragraph [4] of the decision, the FtT Judge refers to the witness
      statement of AB and adopts the summary of the appellants claim as set
      out in the respondent's decision.  At paragraphs [5] to [9] of the
      decision, the Judge refers to AB's evidence in cross examination and
      the answer given by AB in response to a question from the Judge.  At
      paragraphs [10] to [13] of the decision, the Judge refers to the
      evidence provided by AB's daughter, HA, and by AB's son-in-law (the
      husband of HA).  The Judge sets out the submissions made by the
      parties at paragraphs [20] to [26] of the decision.  The Judge's
      findings and conclusions are to be found at paragraphs [27] to [37] of
      the decision.


   5. The Judge accepted, as the respondent had, that the appellants are
      nationals of Pakistan and that they had arrived in the UK on 4th April
      2017, with the benefit of a visit visa granted on 23rd February 2017
      to visit AB's daughter and son-in-law.  Insofar as FA, AA and UA are
      concerned, the Judge notes at paragraphs [28] of the decision as
      follows:


             "..Whatever their mother has claimed to have happened does not
             affect them and there is no threat to them from their father's
             family or their mothers family. They simply rely on the fact
             that they should stay with their mother and that she needs
             protection from her family and/or her in-laws in Pakistan."


   6. Insofar as the core of the claim made by AB is concerned, the Judge
      states at paragraphs [29] to 32] of the decision as follows:


             "29. The first appellant claims that she has had a sexual
             encounter with her distant cousin, a man called [MA]. She
             claims to have met him on three occasions, the last time being
             1st August 2017. She has claimed that he forced himself on her
             but changed her evidence and said that what happened was
             consensual. This lack of consistency is something I find that
             damages her credibility. I do not accept her claim of
             interpreting difficulties and believe that she probably
             changed her claim in that respect to make it more credible
             that her family and her husband's family would be against her.
             If it were true that he had forced her to have sex, i.e. raped
             her, then it would be unlikely that her family would go
             against her and, having realised this, she now claims that she
             consented. This damages her credibility. I am not satisfied
             that there ever was any sexual encounter between them.


             30.  She claimed that [MA]'s daughter caught them in bed
             together and that they got dressed and he took her home.  She
             then claims that his daughter, who had never met her before,
             somehow found out who she was and, despite being a distant
             second cousin, phoned the appellant's family in Pakistan and,
             within hours, her family and her in-laws knew what had
             happened and had within days disowned her and called for her
             to be stoned to death.


             31.  I do not find it credible that [L], who did not to know
             her, would have the ability to contact her family and I am not
             satisfied that this part of the claim is true. It follows that
             I do not accept that there have been any threats towards her
             from within her family or her in-laws nor that they have been
             made directly to her or indirectly via her daughter.


             32.  I have also noted the newspaper articles served with a
             bundle only one day before the hearing with insufficient time
             to be authenticated despite being published in 2017. I have
             noted reports from the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada
             confirming that there can be fraudulent documents including
             newspaper articles and that Pakistan journalists have advised
             the FAT that people can publish false stories in newspapers
             for a fee. I have also noted that one statement from her
             family claims that she had committed adultery or a sexual act
             today being 10th August and that that is inconsistent with her
             claim that it all happened on the 1st August. I am not
             satisfied that the newspaper articles are reliable documents.
             I am not satisfied, as a consequence, that any threats have
             been made to her. I have also noted that the appellant claimed
             at first that her father was dead and changed this when she
             realised that she had claimed that there were threats from him
             and her claim that she was disowned by him, this further
             damages her credibility. I am not satisfied that she has told
             the truth and the two witnesses are backing her up to meet her
             case. I do not believe anything happened between her and [MA]
             and I do not accept that she and her children cannot safely
             return to Pakistan."


   7. The Judge concluded that the appellant is not in need of protection
      and is not at any risk of persecution because of adultery laws in
      Pakistan. At paragraph [33] of the decision the Judge states ".. I
      believe that nothing has happened...".  At paragraph [34] of the
      decision of the Judge states:


             "Having regard to the totality of the evidence both oral and
             documentary I am not satisfied that the appellant has shown
             that there is a real risk of harm and has not demonstrated to
             the standard set out in Sivakumaran that she has a well-
             founded fear that she will be persecuted for a Convention
             reason if she is now at the date of my decision returned to
             Pakistan and accordingly I dismiss her appeal."


The appeal before me


   8. The appellant claims that the Judge failed to make findings on
      material evidence and that failure undermines the Judge's overall
      finding as to the credibility of AB and her account of events.  The
      appellant refers to the evidence given by AB's daughter and son-in-
      law, and claims that the failure of the Judge to consider all the
      evidence of the two witnesses, render the credibility findings made by
      the Judge, unsafe.  It is said that the Judge erred in law, in failing
      to analyse the evidence of the witnesses and make findings with regard
      to their evidence.  Furthermore, the appellants claim that the adverse
      credibility finding based on the niece never having met AB previously,
      is based on a false premise and disregards the cultural norm of
      extended family relationships in which family members are identifiable
      from family photographs.   Finally, in reaching the decision, the
      Judge failed to have regard to the objective material which shows that
      extra marital affairs are looked upon with extreme shame, and that
      AB's initial reluctance to admit to a consensual relationship, was in
      the circumstances, to be expected.  The appellants point to the
      decision of the Court of Appeal in HK -v- SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037.


   9. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 16th
      November. The matter comes before me to consider whether or not the
      decision of FtT Judge Rowlands involved the making of a material error
      of law, and if the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


  10. Ms Jones submits that both AB's daughter, HA, and her son-in-law, had
      knowledge of what had happened, because of the telephone conversation
      between HA and her father.  The Judge refers to the evidence of HA and
      her husband at paragraphs [10] to [13] of the decision, but the only
      consideration of that evidence in the findings is the passage at
      paragraph [32] of the decision, in which it is said that ".. her
      witnesses are backing her up to meet her case...".  Ms Jones submits
      that there has not been a proper consideration of the evidence of the
      witnesses. She submits that the Judge could only have found that the
      evidence of AB regarding the relationship was not credible, if there
      was also a finding that AB's daughter and son-in-law were lying. Ms
      Jones submits that the Judge's failure to adequately consider the
      evidence of the two witnesses and whether that evidence lends support
      to the claim made by the appellant, discloses a material error of law.




  11. I remind myself of the observations made by Mr. Justice Hadon-Cave  in
      Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);


           It  is  generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for   First-tier
           Tribunal judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a
           case. This leads to judgments becoming overly long and  confused
           and is not a proportionate approach to deciding  cases.  It  is,
           however, necessary  for  judges  to  identify  and  resolve  key
           conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and  brief  terms
           their reasons, so that the parties can understand why they  have
           won or lost.


  12. I have also had regard to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Shizad
      (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 IAC where it was
      stated in the head note that:


             "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of
             the conclusions on the central issue on which  the  appeal  is
             determined,  those  reasons  need  not  be  extensive  if  the
             decision makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted
             by the judge."


  13. Dealing first with the Judge's overall assessment of the claim and the
      credibility of the appellant, in HK -v- SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037, the
      appellant's account had been rejected at first instance simply because
      the facts he described were so unusual as to be thought, unbelievable.
       The Court of Appeal held that that was not a safe basis upon which to
      reject the existence of events that were said to have occurred  within
      an environment and culture that were wholly outside the experience  of
      the decision-maker.  At paragraph [28] of his  judgment  Neuberger  LJ
      stated:


         "Further, in many asylum cases, some, even most, of the appellant's
         story may seem inherently unlikely but that does not mean  that  it
         is untrue. The ingredients of the story, and the story as a  whole,
         have to be considered against the available  country  evidence  and
         reliable expert evidence,  and  other  familiar  factors,  such  as
         consistency with what the appellant has said before, and with other
         factual evidence (where there is any)."


  14. The assessment of credibility is always a highly fact sensitive  task.
      The FtT Judge was required to consider the evidence as  a  whole.   In
      assessing the credibility of AB and the claim  advanced  by  her,  the
      Judge was required to consider a number  of  factors.   They  include,
      whether the account given by AB was of sufficient detail, whether  the
      account is internally consistent  and  consistent  with  any  relevant
      specific and general country information, and whether the  account  is
      plausible.  Clearly, some of those factors may be more relevant in  an
      individual case than others.  If an account is littered with  internal
      inconsistencies that may be enough for a Judge to dismiss the evidence
      of an appellant as incredible.  It does not follow  that  a  Judge  is
      entitled to dismiss an account in the  same  way  simply  because  the
      account is simply implausible.


  15. In Y -v- SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223, Keene LJ stated:


         "25 There seems to me to be very little dispute between the parties
         as to the legal principles applicable  to  the  approach  which  an
         adjudicator, now  known  as  an  immigration  judge,  should  adopt
         towards issues of credibility.  The  fundamental  one  is  that  he
         should be cautious before  finding  an  account  to  be  inherently
         incredible, because there is a considerable risk that  he  will  be
         over influenced by his own views on what is or  is  not  plausible,
         and those views will have inevitably been  influenced  by  his  own
         background in this country and by the customs and ways of  our  own
         society. It is therefore important that he should seek to  view  an
         appellant's account of events, as Mr Singh rightly argues,  in  the
         context of conditions in  the  country  from  which  the  appellant
         comes. The dangers were well described in an article by Sir  Thomas
         Bingham, as he then was, in 1985 in a passage quoted by the IAT  in
         Kasolo v SSHD 13190, the passage being taken  from  an  article  in
         Current Legal Problems. Sir Thomas Bingham said this:


                       "'An English judge may have, or think that he has,  a
                  shrewd  idea  of  how  a  Lloyds  Broker  or   a   Bristol
                  wholesaler, or a  Norfolk  farmer,  might  react  in  some
                  situation which is canvassed in the course of a  case  but
                  he may, and I think should, feel very much more  uncertain
                  about the reactions of a Nigerian merchant, or  an  Indian
                  ships' engineer, or a Yugoslav banker. Or even, to take  a
                  more  homely  example,  a  Sikh  shopkeeper   trading   in
                  Bradford. No judge worth his salt could possibl[y]  assume
                  that men of different nationalities,  educations,  trades,
                  experience, creeds and temperaments would act as he  might
                  think he would have done or even  -  which  may  be  quite
                  different - in accordance  with  his  concept  of  what  a
                  reasonable man would have done."


             26. None of  this,  however,  means  that  an  adjudicator  is
             required to take at face value an account of  facts  proffered
             by an appellant, no matter how contrary to  common  sense  and
             experience of human behaviour the account may be. The decision
             maker is not expected to suspend his own judgment, nor does Mr
             Singh contend that he should.  In  appropriate  cases,  he  is
             entitled to find that an account of events is  so  far-fetched
             and contrary to reason as to be incapable of belief. The point
             was well put in the Awala case by Lord Brodie at paragraph  24
             when he said this:


                       "... the tribunal of fact need not necessarily accept
                  an  applicant's  account  simply   because   it   is   not
                  contradicted at the relevant hearing. The tribunal of fact
                  is  entitled  to  make  reasonable   findings   based   on
                  implausibilities, common sense and  rationality,  and  may
                  reject  evidence  if  it  is  not  consistent   with   the
                  probabilities affecting the case as a whole".


                   He then added a little later:


                       "... while a decision on credibility must be  reached
                  rationally, in doing so the decision maker is entitled  to
                  draw on his common sense and his ability, as  a  practical
                  and informed  person,  to  identify  what  is  or  is  not
                  plausible".


             27.   I agree. A decision  maker  is  entitled  to  regard  an
             account as incredible by such standards, but he must take care
             not to do so merely because it would not seem reasonable if it
             had happened in this country. In essence, he must look through
             the spectacles  provided  by  the  information  he  has  about
             conditions in the country in question.  That  is,  in  effect,
             what Neuberger LJ was saying in the case of HK and  I  do  not
             regard Chadwick LJ in the passage referred to  as  seeking  to
             disagree."


  16. Here, at paragraph [27], the Judge confirms that he has considered all
      the evidence in the case, including evidence  to  which  he  does  not
      specifically refer to.  At paragraph [34] of his decision,  the  Judge
      confirms that he had "..regard to the totality of  the  evidence  both
      oral and documentary".  Having made that clear, there is no reason for
      me to believe that he did not do so.


  17. At paragraph [28] of his decision the Judge refers to the matters that
      were not in issue.    What follows at  paragraphs  [29]  to  [33]  are
      findings that, in my judgement, arise from a combination of  a  number
      of inconsistencies in the account, a  lack  of  detail  or  sufficient
      explanation,  and  matters  that  appeared  to  the   Judge,   to   be
      implausible.  In reaching his decision, the Judge plainly  had  regard
      to the various strands of  evidence  including  the  evidence  of  the
      appellant's witnesses, the newspaper article, and the  statement  from
      the AB's father dated 10th August 2017 in which it is claimed that  AB
      "..has committed a sin today, dated 10th August 2017..".


  18.  At  paragraph  [29]  of  the  decision,  the  Judge  considered   the
      inconsistencies in the account of AB as to her relationship with [MA].
       The Judge considered the explanation provided by AB as to  how  those
      inconsistencies arose.  The appellant had  made  a  witness  statement
      dated 25th May 2018.  The appellant relied upon that witness statement
      as is set out at paragraph [4] of the decision.  At paragraph  [3]  of
      her witness statement, the  appellant  claimed  that  the  interpreter
      "..did not do a good job of interpreting the questions  to  me.  Where
      the interviewer has asked questions in respect of rape, the  same  was
      not translated to me by the  translator  and  therefore  there  was  a
      miscommunication as to the event which had  occurred..".    The  Judge
      rejected the appellant's explanation for the inconsistencies.


  19. When properly read, in my judgement, the Judge reached his decision as
      to whether the appellant was involved in a  sexual  encounter  with  a
      distant cousin by reference to the evidence as a whole.   In  reaching
      his decision as to the credibility of  the  appellant's  account,  the
      Judge did not disregard the evidence of AB's daughter and her  son-in-
      law.  The Judge was plainly aware  of  that  evidence.   As  Ms  Jones
      accepts, the evidence is referred to at paragraphs [10] to [13] of the
      decision.  The Judge carefully considered the account advanced  by  AB
      and how that  had  been  developed,  and  considered  the  documentary
      evidence relied upon by the appellant  in  the  form  of  a  newspaper
      article and a statement from AB's father.  The Judge was not satisfied
      that the newspaper articles are reliable documents.   Having  rejected
      AB's own account, and the documents that she relied upon, it was in my
      judgement open to the Judge to simply state that she was not satisfied
      that AB has told the truth and that her witnesses (i.e. AB's  daughter
      and son-in-law) are backing her up to meet  her  case.   At  paragraph
      [31] of the decision, the Judge had rejected the claim that there  had
      been threats towards AB  either directly to her, "..or indirectly  via
      her daughter.".  The weight that the Judge attached to the evidence of
      the witnesses in light of the findings regarding the  appellant's  own
      evidence and the documents relied upon, was in  the  circumstances,  a
      matter for him.


  20. As Brooke LJ observed in the course of his decision in R (Iran) v The
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982,
      "unjustified complaints" as to an alleged failure to give adequate
      reasons are all too frequent.  The obligation on a Tribunal is to give
      reasons in sufficient detail to show the principles on which the
      Tribunal has acted and the reasons that have led to the decision.
      Such reasons need not be elaborate, and do not need to address every
      argument or every factor which weighed in the decision.  If a Tribunal
      has not expressly addressed an argument, but if there are grounds on
      which the argument could properly have been rejected, it should be
      assumed that the Tribunal acted on such grounds.  It is sufficient
      that the critical reasons to the decision, are recorded.


  21. In my judgment, the FtT Judge reached his overall findings by
      reference to a combination of inconsistencies in the account given by
      AB, the documents relied upon by AB, and matters that appeared to the
      Judge, to be implausible. On appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not
      overturn a judgment at first instance, unless it really cannot
      understand the original Judge's thought process when he was making
      material findings. In my judgement, the Judge identified and resolved
      key conflicts in the evidence, and gave a brief explanation of the
      conclusions on the central issue on which the appeal was determined.
      The findings made by the Judge were findings that were properly open
      to the Judge on the evidence before the FtT.  The findings cannot be
      said to be perverse, irrational or findings that were not supported by
      the evidence.  The appeal was dismissed after the Judge had carefully
      considered the facts and circumstances of the claim, and all the
      evidence before him.


  22. In my judgment, the appellant is unable to establish that there was  a
      material error of law in the decision of the FtT and it  follows  that
      the appeal is dismissed.


 Notice of Decision


  23. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date          15th February 2019


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


No fee is payable and there can be no fee award.




Signed                                       Date         15th February
2019


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



