

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05419/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 11 September 2019                       |on 18 September 2019          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SRZ
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Fraczyk instructed by Staffordshire North CAB
For the Respondent: Mr D Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Juss promulgated on the 23 July 2018  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.



Background


     2. It was accepted before the Judge the appellant  is  a  national  of
        Iran of Kurdish ethnicity.
     3. At [15] the Judge writes:


             15.  The essential  criticism  made  of  the  Appellant,  with
                  respect to his claim of smuggling alcohol, is that he  was
                  (i) vague with respect to the smuggling  route,  and  (ii)
                  lacked credibility when he said the  mules  were  able  to
                  transport the alcohol. The Skeleton Argument observes that
                  he  "was  giving   a   rough   recollection   of   precise
                  measurements  in  which  scope  for  degree  of  (limited)
                  accuracy existed" (at para 6(iii)). Whereas  this  may  be
                  so, three things, on  the  lower  standard,  do  not  lack
                  credibility. First, the  Appellant  said  he  resorted  to
                  alcohol smuggling in  order  to  provide  for  his  ailing
                  mother so she could have the necessary medicines.  Second,
                  the description of the  'smuggling  route'  was  tolerably
                  clear and credible once it  was  remembered  that  he  was
                  referring to 'Nokan'  and  not  to  'Dokan'.   Third,  the
                  SSHD's scepticism of alcohol being smuggled  is  dispelled
                  by evidence produced that in the  document,  "Meeting  the
                  Human Mules of Iraq" which shows how contraband goods  are
                  smuggled into Iraq. Accordingly, I am  satisfied  that  he
                  was  engaged  in  alcohol  smuggling.  This  engaged   the
                  Smuggling CPIN on corporal punishment (para 5.3.2).  I  am
                  also satisfied that a raid took place on his  store  which
                  exposed him to a risk that led to his having to  be  moved
                  out of the area.


     4. The Judge was not satisfied the appellant  was  involved  with  the
        PJAK for the reasons set out at [16 - 17]. When assessing  risk  to
        the appellant in light of the findings the Judge writes  at  [18  -
        20]:


             18.  The question then is whether the return of the  Appellant
                  to  Iran  exposes  him  to  a  risk  of  ill-treatment  or
                  persecution. I am not satisfied that it does. I have taken
                  account of the case of SSH and HR  (illegal  exit:  failed
                  asylum seekers) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 308 at [34]  where  it
                  was  stated  that  it  was  not  been  suggested  that  an
                  individual-based risk on return on the sole basis of being
                  Kurdish but it was agreed that being Kurdish was  relevant
                  to how a returnee will be treated by the  authorities.  It
                  was noted that the operational guidance note  referred  to
                  the  government  disproportionately   targeting   minority
                  groups including Kurds  for  arbitrary  arrest,  prolonged
                  detention and physical abuse, but it was also stated  that
                  no  examples  had  been  provided  of   ill-treatment   of
                  returnees with no relevant adverse interest factors  other
                  than their Kurdish ethnicity. The Upper Tribunal concluded
                  that the evidence did not show risk of ill-treatment  such
                  returnees, although they accepted  that  it  might  be  an
                  exasperating factor of a returnee otherwise of interest.


             19.  Having found that the Appellant is not a refugee  because
                  he had not established a well-founded fear of persecution,
                  by analogy, I find that the Appellant cannot  qualify  for
                  humanitarian protection either.


             20.  I must  consider  the  Appellant's  human  rights  claim.
                  However, as I have found that  the  Appellant's  have  not
                  established  a  well-founded  fear  of   persecution,   by
                  analogy, I find that the claim does not engage  Article  3
                  of the Human Rights Convention either.


     5. The appellant sought permission to appeal asserting the Judge erred
        by failing to  take  into  account  properly  or  at  all  material
        consideration namely the particular risk posed to an  Iranian  Kurd
        who had been caught smuggling alcohol, and erred in failing to give
        adequate reasons and arriving  at  irrational  conclusions  on  the
        facts for the reasons set out in the application of 1 August 2018.
     6. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-Tier
        Tribunal, the operative part of the grant being  in  the  following
        terms:


             3.   The grounds content failure  adequately  to  address  the
                  argued risk to the  Kurdish  Appellant  arising  from  his
                  smuggling activities and failure  properly  to  take  into
                  account the Respondent's CPIN in this respect - which  the
                  Judge at paragraph 15 except it was engaged. The  relative
                  brevity  of  the  judge's  reasoning  in  the  absence  at
                  paragraph 18 of any mention of smuggling in the context of
                  risk, renders the grounds arguable.




Error of law


     7. The Judge accepted the appellant was involved in smuggling alcohol,
        that the Iranian authorities raided  the  secret  store  where  the
        alcohol was kept exposing the appellant to a risk that led  to  him
        leaving the area. The appellant asserts that on the basis  of  such
        findings  there  is  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the   Iranian
        authorities are now aware that the appellant was smuggling alcohol.
     8. As noted above it, was  not  disputed  that  the  appellant  is  an
        Iranian Kurd or that those of this  ethnic  group  are  subject  to
        discrimination and abusive conduct by the authorities  even  though
        such discrimination of itself cannot  give  rise  to  a  protection
        claim - see HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430.
     9. The Judge finds the  CPIN  on  corporal  punishment  was  therefore
        engaged meaning that even if the appellant was not engaged in  PJAK
        activities there was still a risk of ill-treatment.
    10. The current CPIN Iran:  Smuggling,  August  2019,  in  relation  to
        alcohol reads:


        4.2 Alcohol


        'Article 702- Anyone who produces or buys or sells or  proposes  to
        sell or carries or keeps alcoholic beverages or provides to a third
        person,  shall  be  sentenced  to  six  months  to  one   year   of
        imprisonment and up to 74 lashes and a fine five times as  much  as
        the usual (commercial) value of the aforementioned object.

         'Article 703- Importing alcoholic beverages into the country  shall
        be considered as smuggling and  the  importer,  regardless  of  the
        amount (of the beverages), shall be sentenced to six months to five
        years' imprisonment and up to 74 lashes and a  fine  ten  times  as
        much as the usual (commercial) value of the aforementioned  object.
        This crime can be tried in the General Courts.

         'Note 1- In respect to articles 702 and 703,  when  the  discovered
        alcoholic beverages are more than twenty liters, the  vehicle  used
        for its transport, if its owner is aware of the  matter,  shall  be
        confiscated in favor of  the  government;  otherwise  the  offender
        shall be sentenced (to a fine) equal to the value of  the  vehicle.
        Tools and equipments used for producing or facilitating the  crimes
        mentioned in the said articles, as well as the money gained through
        the transactions, shall be confiscated in favor of the government.

         'Note 2- When civil servants or employees of governmental companies
        or companies  or  institutes  dependant  to  government,  councils,
        municipalities or Islamic revolutionary bodies, and  basically  all
        the three powers and  also  members  of  armed  forces  and  public
        service officials, commit, or participate, or aid and abet  in  the
        crimes mentioned in articles  702  and  703,  in  addition  to  the
        punishments provided, they shall be sentenced to one to five years'
        temporary suspension from civil service.

         'Note 3- The court,  under  no  circumstances,  shall  suspend  the
        execution of the punishment provided in articles 702 and 703.'


    11. It is not disputed that corporal punishment contravenes  article  3
        ECHR - see  Tyrer  v  United  Kingdom  (Application  no.  5856/72).
        Lashes in an  Iranian  prison  would  meet  the  minimum  level  of
        severity required.
    12. Mr Mills in his submissions argued it was  not  clear  whether  the
        Judge had actually found the appellant faced a real risk on  return
        as a result of the discovery of the alcohol especially in light  of
        the finding at [17] relating to the  PJAK  materials,  although  he
        accepted that to follow such a line of argument it would have  been
        necessary to read into the findings inferences that  had  not  been
        expressly stated.
    13. The difficulty with this submission on behalf of the respondent  is
        the Judge clearly states in the final sentence of [15] "I  am  also
        satisfied that the raid took place on his store which  exposed  him
        to a risk that led to his having to be  moved  out  of  the  area".
        There is therefore a clear  finding  by  the  Judge  to  the  lower
        standard applicable in appeals of this nature  that  the  appellant
        will face a real risk from the authorities in Iran as a  result  of
        the alcohol having been found which the appellant claimed  to  have
        smuggled in, a fact accepted by the Judge too.
    14. There is merit in the appellant's submission that in light  of  the
        Judge's own findings and the treatment  of  those  found  smuggling
        alcohol  on  return  to  Iran  the  appellant  faces  a  real  risk
        sufficient to engage an entitlement to  a  grant  of  international
        protection. A lot of the discussion at the hearing revolved  around
        the nature of that protection.
    15. On behalf of the appellant it  is  argued  he  is  entitled  to  be
        recognised as a refugee placing reliance upon the decision  of  HB,
        the head note of which reads:



    (1)  SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016]
        UKUT 308 (IAC) remains valid country guidance in terms of the
        country guidance offered in the headnote. For the avoidance of
        doubt, that decision is not authority for any proposition in
        relation to the risk on return for refused Kurdish asylum-seekers on
        account of their Kurdish ethnicity alone.

    (2)  Kurds in Iran face discrimination. However, the evidence does not
        support a contention that such discrimination is, in general, at
        such a level as to amount to persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.



    (3)  Since 2016 the Iranian authorities have become increasingly
        suspicious of, and sensitive to, Kurdish political activity. Those
        of Kurdish ethnicity are thus regarded with even greater suspicion
        than hitherto and are reasonably likely to be subjected to
        heightened scrutiny on return to Iran.

    (4)  However, the mere fact of being a returnee of Kurdish ethnicity
        with or without a valid passport, and even if combined with illegal
        exit, does not create a risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-
        treatment.

    (5)  Kurdish ethnicity is nevertheless a risk factor which, when
        combined with other factors, may create a real risk of persecution
        or Article 3 ill-treatment. Being a risk factor it means that
        Kurdish ethnicity is a factor of particular significance when
        assessing risk. Those "other factors" will include the matters
        identified in paragraphs (6)-(9) below.

    (6)  A period of residence in the KRI by a Kurdish returnee is
        reasonably likely to result in additional questioning by the
        authorities on return. However, this is a factor that will be highly
        fact-specific and the degree of interest that such residence will
        excite will depend, non-exhaustively, on matters such as the length
        of residence in the KRI, what the person concerned was doing there
        and why they left.

    (7)  Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are at risk
        of arrest, prolonged detention and physical abuse by the Iranian
        authorities. Even Kurds expressing peaceful dissent or who speak out
        about Kurdish rights also face a real risk of persecution or Article
        3 ill-treatment.

    (8)  Activities that can be perceived to be political by the Iranian
        authorities include social welfare and charitable activities on
        behalf of Kurds. Indeed, involvement with any organised activity on
        behalf of or in support of Kurds can be perceived as political and
        thus involve a risk of adverse attention by the Iranian authorities
        with the consequent risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

    (9)  Even 'low-level' political activity, or activity that is perceived
        to be political, such as, by way of example only, mere possession of
        leaflets espousing or supporting Kurdish rights, if discovered,
        involves the same risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.
        Each case however, depends on its own facts and an assessment will
        need to be made as to the nature of the material possessed and how
        it would be likely to be viewed by the Iranian authorities in the
        context of the foregoing guidance.

   (10)  The Iranian authorities demonstrate what could be described as a
        'hair-trigger' approach to those suspected of or perceived to be
        involved in Kurdish political activities or support for Kurdish
        rights. By 'hair-trigger' it means that the threshold for suspicion
        is low and the reaction of the authorities is reasonably likely to
        be extreme.


    16.  It  is  accepted  Kurdish  ethnicity  is  capable  for  forming  a
        Particular Social Group,  but  the  case  law  clearly  shows  that
        discrimination experienced as such will not amount  to  persecution
        or be sufficient to engage article 3.
    17. The appellant's case is based upon the consequences of a conviction
        for alcohol smuggling but it was not made out before the  Judge  or
        today  that  any  sentence  the  appellant  will  receive  will  be
        sufficient to amount to persecution in that it might  be  increased
        disproportionately as a result of  his  ethnicity  as  compared  to
        somebody who is not a Kurd.
    18. It is also the case that the Judge's finding that  the  appellant's
        claim to have been involved with the PJAK was not  believed.  There
        is no credible evidence that the appellant  has  been  involved  in
        opposition political activities of a type that may give rise  to  a
        real risk on return as a result of  either  an  actual  or  imputed
        adverse opinion to the Iranian regime.
    19. I do not find it made out that the  appellant  has  established  an
        entitlement to be recognised as a refugee. I  do,  however,  accept
        the Judge erred in law in dismissing the appeal on all grounds  and
        substitute a decision allowing the appeal  pursuant  to  article  3
        ECHR on the basis the appellant has established that  any  sentence
        he will receive on  return  to  Iran  as  a  result  of  his  known
        activities  and  objectively   well-founded   real   risk   arising
        therefrom, which will  include  lashes,  is  sufficient  to  engage
        article 3 ECHR.

Decision

    20. The First-Tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed on article 3 ECHR grounds only.


   Anonymity.


    21. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 in light of the Presidential Guidance Note, para  5(iv)
as requested by the appellant's representative.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 11 September 2019












