
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05440/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st January 2017                  |On 30th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                     R.A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M. Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Halliday
Reeves Law Firm.
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. The appellant in the First-tier Tribunal proceedings is the  one  who  is
   appealing to the Upper Tribunal. Consequently, the parties are  named  as
   before.

2. He made a claim to protection in December 2015 stating he  was  an  Iraqi
   Kurd from Mosul. He was not married and worked as a farmer. He is a Sunni
   Muslim.

3. He said his paternal uncle was killed in 2003. He was  a  member  of  the
   Baath  party  and  had  enemies  because  of  his  involvement   in   the
   mistreatment of Kurds and Arabs.

4. He said that after ISIS bombed his village in August 2014 he  decided  to
   leave. He went to Turkey where he remained for almost a year and  a  half
   and then paid an agent to come to the United Kingdom. He said he would be
   at risk on return from ISIS and also from Kurds and Arabs because of  his
   association with his uncle. He said he had no documentation.

5. His claim was refused in May 2016. His identity was accepted. It was  not
   accepted he was at risk from any of the sources he identified. It was not
   accepted his uncle was involved with the Baath party and it  was  pointed
   out that on his own account he  had  lived  for  many  years  unhindered.
   Inconsistencies were noted about the claimed attack  on  his  village  by
   ISIS and it was not accepted he had encountered problems.

6. Given where he was from the  respondent  considered  the  possibility  of
   relocation, stating the Iraqi government respected freedom  of  movement.
   Reference was made to the country guidance decision of AA (article 15 (c)
   Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 where  the  question  of  identity  documentation
   necessary to enter and live in the country was considered. Whilst in  the
   United Kingdom  he  could  approach  the  Embassy  in  London  to  obtain
   replacement documentation. The appellant had said he previously  held  an
   identity card. The country information indicated that  a  returnee  could
   attend at the Iraqi Ministry of  Displacement  and  Migration  which  has
   several offices in Baghdad  and  obtain  replacement  documentation.  The
   information was that they held records which would enable documents to be
   issued.

7. He could return  to  the  Kurdish  region  of  Iraq  which  is  virtually
   violence free and there is no article 15 (c) risk. The  country  guidance
   decision stated that  the  information  was  that  a  Kurd  who  did  not
   originate from the Kurdish region can obtain  entry  for  10  days  as  a
   visitor and this could be renewed for a further 10 days. If they  secured
   employment they could remain longer. An assessment would be needed as  to
   the likelihood of the individual securing  employment  and  consideration
   given to the availability of assistance. There was no evidence  that  the
   authorities pro actively remove Kurds. The  practicalities  of  returning
   from Baghdad to the Kurdish region  would  be  fact  sensitive  with  the
   possibility of travel to Irbil by air.

8. The respondent also felt relocation to Baghdad or another region  in  the
   south of Iraq was viable. In  Baghdad,  the  cost  of  living  was  lower
   compared to the Kurdish region and there were a  considerable  number  of
   Sunnis.



The First tier Tribunal

9. The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Judge  Myers  at  Bradford
   in  September  2016.The  judge  did  not  find  the  appellant's  account
   credible. The judge did not accept he was  without  family  in  Iraq  and
   rejected his claim he was at risk by  reason  of  his  uncle.  The  judge
   accepted he originated from Ninewah, a contested area and that  it  would
   be unsafe for him to return there. The judge noted that the situation was
   ever-changing but accepted there would be a 15 (c) risk in his home area.

10. The judge considered the issue of relocation: either to Baghdad  or  the
   Kurdish region. The judge concluded that he  would  not  be  at  risk  in
   Baghdad but it would be unduly harsh to expect him to locate there or  to
   the south of the country. This was because there was no evidence  he  had
   any family or support available there. Furthermore, as a  Sunni  Kurd  he
   would be in a minority.

11. The judge  concluded  it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
   appellant to relocate to the Kurdish region. He would be able  to  obtain
   temporary admission and to remain if he could find employment.  He  would
   be able to obtain employment and the evidence was  that  the  authorities
   were not removing Kurds who had relocated. He could travel  from  Baghdad
   to Erbil by air.

12. The judge accepted that the appellant did  not  have  documentation  and
   would not be able to supply sufficient  information  to  the  Embassy  in
   order to obtain a laissez passer and concluded that his  return  was  not
   currently feasible.



The Upper Tribunal

13. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis the judge materially  erred
   in law in the application of the country guidance decision in  concluding
   the appellant could relocate to the Kurdish region. The country  guidance
   decision referred to returning a Kurd to the IKR whose identity had  been
   pre-cleared with the  Kurdish  authorities.  Those  authorities  did  not
   require an expired or current  passport  or  a  laissez  passer.  It  was
   suggested that the judge erred in law in concluding the  appellant  could
   travel to the Kurdish region as he had no documentation  to  confirm  his
   identity and so arguably could not be pre-cleared.

14. It was suggested that  the  judge  was  speculating  in  concluding  the
   appellant could find employment in the Kurdish region given the high rate
   of unemployment there.

15. It was also argued  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  account  of  the
   problems of travel  within  the  Kurdish  region  without  documentation.
   Reference was made to expert evidence heard in the country guidance  case
   to the effect that displaced persons were not permitted to travel  within
   the Kurdish region and so could not seek work.

16. It was also contended, based on  the  country  guidance  decision,  that
   someone return to Baghdad would  not  be  allowed  to  exit  the  airport
   without production of documentation or, if  admitted,  could  not  access
   services.

17. Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  having  found  the
   appellant was undocumented and unable to supply sufficient information to
   obtain a laissez passer it was arguably an error of law  to  conclude  he
   could travel from Baghdad to Erbil or that he could obtain employment  in
   the permitted timescale.

18. At  hearing  the  arguments  advanced  on  the  leave  application  were
   referred to. Mrs Cleghorn argued that  relocation  was  not  viable.  She
   pointed out the appellant was from the  contested  area  of  Ninewah  and
   could not return there .The only issue was whether he could  relocate  to
   the Kurdish region .To return to Baghdad and seek documentation  was  not
   possible as she said   the  offices  are  now  closed.  Furthermore,  she
   submitted he could not gain entry to the Kurdish region. In response  the
   presenting officer said there were flights to the Kurdish region and that
   Kurds were accepted there. In response, Mrs Cleghorn submitted that there
   was no reason to believe the appellant could  secure  employment  in  the
   Kurdish region as he had no family or support.



Consideration

19. Permission to appeal has been granted on the basis it  is  arguable  the
   judge incorrectly applied AA (article 15 (c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT  544  in
   concluding it would not be unduly harsh for him to relocate to  the  IKR.
   In considering this question it is first necessary to  note  the  judge's
   findings which have not been challenged.

20. Firstly, the underlying claim was not found to be  credible.  His  claim
   that he was at risk because of a family association  through  his  father
   with the Baathists was rejected as untrue. His claim about ISIS attacking
   his village was rejected. His claim he had no family alive was  rejected.
   The judge found that he had family members  living  in  Mosul  who  could
   help.

21. At paragraph 29 the judge found that there was no evidence he  ever  had
   a passport or a laissez passer. There was  no  evidence  he  had  a  CSID
   (civil status identity card)  or  would  be  able  to  supply  sufficient
   information to  the  embassy  to  obtain  a  laissez  passer.  The  judge
   concluded therefore that his return to Iraq was not currently feasible.

22. The judge nevertheless went on to consider the question of  return.  The
   judge accepted that he was from Ninewah,  a  disputed  territory  and  in
   accordance with AA (article 15 (c) Iraq could not be returned there.  The
   judge then went on to consider  the  question  of  relocation  either  to
   Baghdad or to the I KR.

23. Regarding Baghdad, the judge concluded  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
   expect him to go there or further south. This was on the basis  that  (a)
   he had no CSID or the necessary information to obtain one;(b) he  had  no
   family support in Baghdad; and, (c) as  a Sunni he was in a minority.

24. The judge did conclude he could reasonably  relocate  to  the  IKR.  The
   judge at paragraph 31 stated that he  could  obtain  temporary  admission
   because he was Kurdish and if able to find employment could  remain,  the
   authorities were not actively removing Kurds whose permits had come to an
   end. He could  travel  from  Baghdad  to  Erbil  by  air.  As  a  healthy
   resourceful young man able to live in Turkey and travel through Europe he
   would be able to obtain employment. It is  these  conclusions  which  are
   said to be contrary to the country guidance.

25. The decision of the  judge  indicates  that  the  different  aspects  of
   return set out in AA (article 15 (c)  Iraq  were  considered.  The  judge
   first of all considered where the appellant was from and recognised it as
   a contested area and in  accordance  with  the  case  law  could  not  be
   returned. There were then two alternatives, Baghdad or the  IKR.  It  was
   open to the judge to  find  the  appellant  could  relocate  to  Baghdad.
   However,  the  judge  accepted  the  appellant's   evidence   about   his
   documentation and the difficulties he would have obtaining  it.  Although
   the judge acknowledged he had family the judge felt he would not be  able
   to avail of their support in Baghdad. Finally, the judge  took  the  view
   that as a Sunni he would be part of a minority group in Baghdad. The case
   law would not indicate the latter alone would suffice. However the  judge
   clearly had in mind the cumulative  effect  of  these  three  factors  in
   concluding it would be unduly harsh.

26. The judge then progressed to the final option, relocation  to  the  IKR.
   At this point I would refer to what was said in AA (article 15  (c)  Iraq
   rather than just the head note. Before doing  so  it  was  noted  by  the
   presenting officer that the quotation from the case about returns to  the
   IKR at paragraph 11 of the application  for  leave  is  referring  to  an
   extract from the appellant's skeleton argument quoted  in  the  judgement
   rather than something said by the court.

27. At paragraph 24 of AA (article 15 (c) Iraq  the  court  said  there  are
   flights to the IKR from Baghdad every second  day  and  flights  directly
   from London. At paragraph 87 it was pointed out that the burden of  proof
   rests upon the appellant, albeit the standard of proof is low in relation
   to article 15 (c). Paragraph 113  recorded  that  the  evidence  did  not
   establish an article 15 (c) risk to an ordinary citizen in  the  IKR  and
   their ethnicity, religion or sex did not increase the risk.  The  Kurdish
   region is virtually violence free.

28. In the present case the issue is the ability of a Kurd who is  not  from
   there to enter and remain. Specific guidance is  contained  at  paragraph
   171 where the Upper Tribunal said:

      ... The position of Iraqi Kurds not from the I KR  is  that  they  can
      gain temporary entry to the I KR, that formal permission to remain can
      be obtained if employment is secured; and that the authorities in  the
      I KR do not proactively remove Kurds whose permits  have  come  to  an
      end. Whether this state of affairs is such as to  make  it  reasonable
      for an Iraqi Kurd to relocate to the I KR is a question that may  fall
      to be addressed by judicial fact finders if it is established that  on
      the particular facts permanent relocation to Baghdad would  be  unduly
      harsh. In such circumstances the person concerned might reasonably  be
      expected to relocate to the I KR.

29. Judge Myer included this quotation in  the  decision.  She  clearly  had
   this in mind at paragraph 31 where she said he will be able to remain  if
   he can find employment. She took the view he  would  be  able  to  obtain
   employment.

30. The final part of paragraph 171 which is also recorded at  paragraph  20
   of the guidance reads;

      In this scenario, whether such further relocation would be  reasonable
      will  itself  be  fact  sensitive,  being  likely  to  involve(a)  the
      practicality of travel from Baghdad to the I KR such as  to  Irbil  by
      air ): and (b) the  likelihood  of  securing  employment;  and(c)  the
      availability of assistance from friends and family in the I KR.



Conclusions

31. Although the judge has correctly  focused  on  the  issues  I  find  the
   decision does not adequately deal with the issues in para 30  above.  For
   instance, the judge simply states at paragraph 31 of her decision he will
   be able to obtain temporary admission and there was no evidence he  could
   not fly from Baghdad to Irbil by  air.  She  then  premises  his  gaining
   employment upon the fact he is young and healthy and has survived outside
   his home country.

32. The country guidance decision indicates that someone  who  is  not  from
   the I KR cannot be returned directly from the United  Kingdom  to  there.
   Instead, they have to go to Baghdad and then travel from there to  the  I
   KR. It is not apparent if there are any exceptions whereby they  can  fly
   directly. The Upper Tribunal found the expert evidence of Dr Fatah to  be
   impressive and authoritative. His evidence recorded at  paragraph  24  of
   the Country guidance decision was that the entry requirements for  the  I
   KR were arbitrary and the ability to renew entry clearance  to  become  a
   permanent  was  dependent  on  the  particular  officer  considering  the
   application.

33. The situation in the country is ever-changing and there  may  have  been
   material quoted to the judge not reflected in the decision.  However,  it
   was incumbent upon the judge to set out more specifically her reasons  in
   relation to the feasibility of relocation on a basis beyond  the  initial
   entry period. As the reasonableness of the relocation is central  to  the
   appeal more specific findings had to be made. I find this is  a  material
   error of law.



Error of law.

34. For the reasons set out above the decision of  First  tier  Judge  Myers
   dismissing the appellant's appeal contained a material error of  law  and
   is set aside. I would reserve the facts found as set out below.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly



An Anonymity Direction is  made.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  them.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.



Disposal

35. I would preserve  the  unchallenged  findings  of  the  judge  that  the
   underlying claim about past events is untrue. It is not disputed that  he
   is Kurdish and from what is currently a disputed area.

36.  Because  the  remaining  issues  will  require  factual  findings,  for
   instance, in relation to where his family are and how they can  help  him
   and; his ability to enter and remain in  the  I  KR  long-term  the  most
   appropriate course, given the extent of the fact-finding necessary is  to
   remit the matter to the first-tier Tribunal to make those  findings.  The
   tribunal is directed to apply the relevant country guidance.

37. Country conditions do change. As things stand the focus should  be  upon
   the practicalities of the appellant's relocating to the IKR .  This  will
   involve consideration of whether he can fly there  directly  from  United
   Kingdom and be granted entry without documents or whether he  would  have
   to go via Baghdad. If the latter, information about travel  to  Erbil  by
   air would need to be considered. It would also be helpful  to  have  some
   information about the availability of employment in the IKR on the  basis
   the  appellant  is  a  manual  worker.  Although  the  judge   considered
   relocation to Baghdad would be unduly harsh I would leave  this  open  to
   further argument  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dependent  upon  country
   conditions when the appeal is relisted.

Deputy Judge Farrelly


Directions

   1. Relist in the first-tier Tribunal for a rehearing on the question of
      relocation within Iraq .
   2. The findings made in the First-tier Tribunal whereby the underlying
      claim was found not to be credible are preserved.
   3. The parties are to focus upon the practical issues involved in
      relocation to the IKR. The should include providing country
      information about the feasibility of return including the following:
           (a) whether the appellant can fly directly from United Kingdom
           to the IKR.
           (b) if not, whether the appellant can fly from the United
           Kingdom to Baghdad and from there travel onwards to the IKR.
           Information about the possibility of his travel by air to Irbil
           should be provided.
           (c) some information should be provided about the availability
           of unskilled work in the KDI.
   4. Since preparing this decision the further country guidance of BA
      (return as to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 was promulgated. This
      guidance is dealing with a comparatively narrow issue which did not
      directly affect the present appeal. Consequently, there was no
      requirement to hear from the parties on this. However between now and
      the relisting of the appeal the alternative of a return to Baghdad may
      become an issue dependent upon country conditions.

Deputy Judge Farrelly

