
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05152/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st February 2019                          |On 6th February 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     PR
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Rothwell of Counsel, instructed by Theva
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Walker promulgated on 31 October 2018, in which the Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse her protection and human  rights  claims
    dated 20 March 2018 (served on 4 April 2018) was dismissed.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on two grounds, first, that the First-
    tier Tribunal had failed to attach sufficient  weight  to  the  medical
    evidence available and in particular failed to give valid  reasons  for
    reducing the weight  to  be  attached  to  the  report  of  Dr  Dhumad.
    Secondly, the First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to  attach  sufficient
    weight to the evidence of sur place  activities  and  selectively  used
    such evidence to undermine the medical evidence.

 3. At the oral  hearing,  after  hearing  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, Mr Walker appropriately conceded that there was  a  material
    error of law on both grounds of appeal for the reasons set out  in  the
    grounds of appeal and oral submissions.  For the same reasons, I find a
    material error of law on both grounds such that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal must be set aside and the hearing remitted  for  de
    novo consideration of the appeal

 4. The parties consented to a decision without reasons  pursuant  to  Rule
    40(3)(b) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and
    therefore no further reasons are given in writing for this decision.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Taylor  House  hearing
centre,  transferred  from  Hatton  Cross  to  allow  Counsel  to   continue
representing the Appellant who is in any event nearer to  Taylor  House)  to
be heard de novo by any Judge except Judge Walker.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
Signed   [pic]         Date         1st February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

