


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/05418/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                        | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2019                         | On 16 July 2019                   |
|                                        |                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                KARWAN AHMEDI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Cosgrove, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT Judge Fox  heard  the  appellant's  appeal  on  22  June  2018  and
    dismissed it by a decision promulgated on 22 February 2018.

 2. The decision should have said why there was such a long delay, but does
    not mention the matter.

 3. The unexplained delay is not by itself a reason  to  set  the  decision
    aside, but it is a contributing factor.

 4. The Judge said that the appellant's injuries were at  level  B  on  the
    Istanbul Protocol, when at least one injury was at level C.  He  refers
    to a report from a psychiatrist, when it was from a psychologist.

 5. Further country guidance, issued during the period of delay, might have
    impacted on the outcome.  The possibility should  at  least  have  been
    considered.

 6. The grounds of appeal to the UT raise other  challenges,  which  it  is
    unnecessary to resolve.  The respondent conceded, fairly and correctly,
    that the grounds showed that the decision could not safely stand.   The
    following outcome was agreed.

 7. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

 8. The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate under section  12
    of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to the  FtT
    for an entirely fresh hearing.

 9. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Fox.

10. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            11 July 2019
            UT Judge Macleman




