
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05239/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:    Columbus House,    |      Determination Promulgated |
|Newport                         |                                |
|On:              30 April 2018  |      08 May 2018               |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     AQH
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr D Paxton, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
                    Project
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Woolley in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a citizen of
    Iraq, against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse  asylum  and
    issue removal directions.


 2. The application under appeal was refused on 18 May 2017.  The Appellant
    exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  This is  the
    appeal which came before Judge Woolley on  5  September  2017  and  was
    dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The application was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J
    M Hollingworth on 8 November 2017 in the following terms

         "The Judge has encapsulated the essence of the issue in relation to
         the Appellant's protection claim at paragraph 25 of  the  decision.
         The Appellant's claim for refugee protection in Iraq  was  that  he
         was at risk on account of his political opinion. He feared ISIS and
         the family of Ghalib for his actions in  reporting  Ghalib  to  the
         authorities in Chamchamal.  The  Judge  found  the  account  to  be
         credible. The Judge found that the Appellant was at current risk of
         persecution in his home area of  the  IKR  namely  Chamchamal.  The
         Judge reached a global conclusion  on  the  Appellant's  protection
         claim. The Judge considered the question of internal relocation  at
         paragraph 39 of the decision. The area the Appellant would have  to
         avoid would be Chamchamal since this was  the  only  location,  the
         Judge stated, that ISIS or the  Ghalib  family  had  for  him.  The
         options for relocation would  be  for  the  Appellant  to  relocate
         either to Baghdad city or to another part of the IKR. At  paragraph
         42 of the decision the Judge refers to the telling  point  made  by
         the Respondent that  if  the  Appellant's  full  address  had  been
         disclosed no good reason had been shown  as  to  why  ISIS  or  the
         Ghalib  family  had  not  sought  the  Appellant  out   personally.
         Nevertheless, the Judge had  earlier  in  the  decision  found  the
         Appellant to be at risk of persecution in his home area. The  Judge
         at paragraph 42 of the decision  states  that  the  Judge  did  not
         accept that even with this limited information as the Judge  refers
         to this that ISIS or the Ghalib family could not have  tracked  the
         Appellant down in the time he spent in Chamchamal. It  is  arguable
         that the Judge  in  approaching  the  question  of  relocation  has
         departed from the essence of the earlier finding that the Appellant
         was  at  risk  of  persecution.  The  Judge  accepted  the  country
         information that ISIS can and do infiltrate IKR territory and  that
         the  presence  of  Ghalib  in  Chamchamal  was   perhaps   a   good
         illustration of that point.  The  Judge  refers  to  the  Appellant
         having moved with his family to Rania.  The  Judge  has  noted  the
         expert report of Professor  Ruth.  The  Judge  found  that  if  the
         Appellant was returned to the  IKR  that  he  could  reasonably  be
         expected to relocate to avoid any risk in Chamchamal as  stated  at
         paragraph 48 of the decision. The Appellant could  safely  relocate
         to a different part of the  IKR.  The  Judge  found  as  stated  at
         paragraph 48 of  the  decision  that  the  Appellant  could  regain
         contact with his family and even if they had now  moved  away  from
         Rania there would be neighbours who could tell him where  they  had
         gone. It is  arguable  that  given  this  finding  in  the  overall
         circumstances appertaining in the IKR that the persecutors  of  the
         Appellant would be able to find him by doing the same thing  as  is
         pointed out in the permission application. It is arguable that this
         facet of the Judge's findings in conjunction with the  dilution  of
         the essence of the finding as to persecution has led the Judge into
         error. It is arguable that the Judge in this context  has  attached
         insufficient weight to the  conclusions  of  Professor  Bluth  with
         regard to the operational efficiency of ISIS  in  the  IKR  in  the
         context of targeting individuals. It is further arguable given  the
         nature of ISIS that the potential diversion of resources within the
         organisation liberated  by  the  yielding  of  territory  would  be
         expended  on  exacting  revenge  in  the   circumstances   of   the
         Appellant's case."

    In a rule 24 response dated 5 December 2017 the Respondent opposed  the
    Appellant's  appeal   arguing   that   the   Judge   directed   himself
    appropriately. The Respondent notes  that  the  Judge  found  that  the
    Appellant could relocate to a different part of the IKR and found  that
    the Appellant had family members who could support him.




Background

 3. The history of this appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Iraq born on [ ] 1986. He  left  Iraq  on  25  October  2016
    travelling via Turkey and France before arriving in the United  Kingdom
    on 12 December 2016 and claiming asylum. The basis of his claim was his
    fear of persecution on the grounds of his political opinion because  he
    had  given  information  about  a  terrorist  called  Ghalib   to   the
    authorities. Ghalib was an armed member of ISIS. As  a  result  of  the
    information given by the Appellant,  Ghalib  was  arrested,  tried  and
    sentenced to death. In  consequence  of  this  the  Appellant  received
    threats on his life by telephone and text.


 4. The Judge found the Appellant's account to be  credible  and  that  the
    repeated threats made amounted to persecution. The Judge found that the
    Appellant  was  at  current  risk  of  persecution  in  his  home  area
    concluding

         "if ISIS or the Ghalib family were to find him in Chamchamal I find
         that there will be a risk of serious harm or persecution".

 5. Having found that the Appellant was at risk of persecution in his  home
    area the Judge went on  to  consider  internal  relocation.  The  Judge
    concluded (at paragraph 48) that  the  Appellant  could  reasonably  be
    expected to relocate to avoid any risk in his immediate home  area  and
    noted that there were large metropolises where he would not be at risk.
    On this basis the appeal was dismissed.




Submissions


 6. For the Appellant Mr Paxton referred to his written skeleton  argument.
    He said the difficulty  in  the  decision  is  the  disconnect  between
    finding that the Appellant is at risk in his home area and the  finding
    on internal relocation. If there was a period of time when  he  was  in
    his home area and not found and that was not  sufficient  to  undermine
    the credibility of his claim why should it mean that it  was  safe  for
    him to relocate. He was in Rania from August to October 2016. Professor
    Bluth comments that ISIS are active in the IKR and have the ability  to
    pursue people. If the Appellant  could  locate  his  family  by  asking
    neighbours in Rania ISIS could do the same. Why is it  that  the  Judge
    accepted Professor Bluth's opinion about the danger to the Appellant in
    his  home  area  but  did  not  accept  his  opinion  when  considering
    relocation. The only reasons given by the Judge seem to  undermine  his
    own assessment of risk in the home area.  In  this  respect  the  Judge
    speaks in glowing terms about the Appellant's credibility yet does  not
    accept his word about his difficulties in finding his family. So far as
    the Appellant's family is concerned there is  no  evidential  basis  to
    support the Judge's findings. If  the  Appellant  can  simply  ask  the
    whereabouts of his family it undermines the Judge's finding on risk  of
    persecution in his home area.


 7.  For  the  Respondent  Mr  Mills  said  that  the  Judge  accepted  the
    Appellant's account and found that he would be  at  risk  in  his  home
    town. He gave evidence against  Ghalib  and  his  address  was  on  the
    witness statement and Ghalib's family came to know of the address.  The
    risk was limited to the home area because of the specific  address.  It
    was always about that. ISIS never approached the Appellant at his  home
    address, the threats made were on the  telephone  and  these  continued
    when he relocated to Rania. There is no evidence that ISIS would  scour
    the entire region. The Judge was not  bound  to  agree  with  Professor
    Bluth's conclusions and at paragraph 48 he  explains  why  he  takes  a
    different view. The influence of ISIS was rapidly  waning.  So  far  as
    contact with his family is concerned there is nothing  wrong  with  the
    Judge's conclusion that he would be able to  regain  contact  with  his
    family by speaking to neighbours who knew them.



 8. I reserved my decision.



Decision


 9. This appeal is confined to the issue of internal relocation. The  Judge
    found  at  paragraph  58  of  his  decision  that  the  Appellant   had
    established a well-founded fear of persecution in his home area of Iraq
    but that it would not be unduly harsh to expect him to  relocate  to  a
    different area of the IKR to avoid persecution. In the rule 24 response
    the Respondent does not take issue with  the  primary  finding  and  Mr
    Mills raised no issue in submissions. It is the Respondent's case  that
    the  Judge  directed  himself  appropriately  essentially  reaching   a
    sustainable decision.


10.  The  two  errors  of  law  asserted  by  Mr  Paxton  are  based   upon
    irrationality rather than adequacy of reasoning. As an approach this is
    no doubt the only one that could be adopted  because  the  Judge  gives
    detailed reasons for reaching his decision on the question of  internal
    relocation. The challenge to his rationality is based upon what is said
    to be a disconnect between his conclusion that  the  Appellant  was  in
    danger in his home area but would not be in danger elsewhere in the IKR
    region of Iraq. In some ways it is a submission that carries a risk for
    the Appellant because whereas the Respondent does not suggest that  the
    conclusion that the Appellant would be at risk  in  his  home  area  is
    wrong it is implicit in Mr Paxton's submission of disconnect  that  one
    or other of the Judge's conclusions must be wrong.


11. The nature of the assertion therefore makes it necessary to look at the
    unchallenged conclusion as well is that of internal relocation  to  see
    if there truly is a disconnect  amounting  to  irrationality.  In  this
    respect the Judge's conclusion that the Appellant was at  risk  in  his
    home area of Chamchamal was based upon an acceptance of the credibility
    of his account. The Appellant's witness  statement  shows  that  having
    assisted the Asayish in the detention  and  conviction  of  Ghalib  the
    Appellant  began  to  receive  threats  in   about   July/August   2016
    (paragraphs 29 and 30). The threats came by  telephone.  The  Appellant
    relocated to Rania at the end of August 2016. His family came with him.
    He continued to receive threats by telephone. The Appellant left  Rania
    on 25 October 2016 and travelled to the United Kingdom where he  sought
    international protection.



12. In assessing risk of persecution in his home area  the  Judge  accepted
    that the repeated calls and texts  the  Appellant  received  themselves
    amounted to persecution because they were threats upon his life and  as
    such a severe violation of a basic human  right.  The  finding  of  the
    continued risk was informed by but not based on the persecution already
    sustained, although the Judge does not specifically say it is  implicit
    that  the  telephone  threats  can  be  eliminated  by  a   change   of
    telephone/number, it was based on the possibility of ISIS or the Ghalib
    family finding him (paragraph 31 of the decision).


13. The Judge  explains  at  paragraph  25  that  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement in the proceedings against Ghalib  would  have  revealed  his
    telephone number and address in Chamchamal. This  informs  the  Judge's
    decision as to why he would be at risk in Chamchamal. The Judge  refers
    to this again at the start of his consideration of internal  relocation
    noting that Chamchamal is the only location that ISIS  and  the  Ghalib
    family have for him. There can in  my  Judgement  be  irrationality  or
    disconnect at this point. It is quite clear that the  Judge  bases  his
    finding of risk of persecution in the home  area  on  his  persecutor's
    knowledge of  the  Appellant's  whereabouts.  This  is  rational.  Past
    persecution was for the reasons given by the Judge  manifested  in  the
    telephone  calls  and  texts  received.  Well-founded  fear  of  future
    persecution was based on those threats being carried  out  because  his
    persecutors knew his address.


14.  The  Judge  explains  his  conclusions  on  internal   relocation   in
    significant detail from paragraphs 39 to 48. As noted above  there  can
    be no doubt as to the adequacy of reasoning. The Judge notes once  more
    at paragraph 42 and accepts that ISIS and the Ghalib  family  have  the
    Appellant's address in  Chamchamal  and  telephone  number.  The  Judge
    comments that the Appellant  could  have  been  tracked  down  at  this
    address. This does not in my Judgement detract from the Judge's finding
    that the Appellant would have  a  real  and  well-founded  fear  if  he
    remained at this address. His persecutors may not have taken  immediate
    action but with threats to kill continuing and his address being  known
    he would have remained open to physical confrontation at a time  chosen
    by his persecutors. It is however clear that from the time the  threats
    started the Appellant only remained at this address  for  a  matter  of
    weeks (July/August 2016). Before the end of August, he moved  to  Rania
    for his own protection remaining there for two months with his  family.
    The telephone threats continued but this, as the Judge  notes,  is  not
    surprising as he kept the same telephone.


15. The Judge goes on to note the expert  report  of  Professor  Bluth  and
    gives clear reasons why he does not agree with the conclusion that  the
    Appellant would be considered to be an IDP.  At  paragraph  48  of  his
    decision the Judge gives his conclusion on internal relocation  finding
    that the Appellant can reasonably be expected to relocate to avoid  any
    risk in Chamchamal. There is in my Judgement nothing irrational in this
    conclusion and there is no disconnect with the earlier finding that the
    Appellant would be at risk in his home area. The clear  thread  running
    through the decision is that once the telephone has been  discarded  or
    the number changed the risk to the Appellant depends  solely  upon  his
    persecutors' knowledge of  his  location.  They  knew  his  address  in
    Chamchamal but once he left that address  and  its  immediate  vicinity
    there is no indication either that his persecutors were  aware  of  his
    whereabouts or that they were seeking to find his  whereabouts.  It  is
    pertinent in this  respect  that  the  Judge  making  his  decision  in
    September 2017  notes  the  changing  country  conditions  showing  the
    rapidly waning influence of ISIS, a conclusion to  which  there  is  no
    challenge.


16. Turning finally to the Appellants knowledge of his family's whereabouts
    there is in my Judgement nothing  irrational  or  inconsistent  in  the
    conclusion that he could ask neighbours  in  Rania  for  assistance  in
    locating them. The Appellant knows where he and his family were  living
    in Rania. There is no indication that ISIS or the  Ghalib  family  have
    this information. It is entirely reasonable to expect the Appellant  to
    make those enquiries and there is nothing  irrational  in  the  Judge's
    finding that he could do so.


17. My conclusion from all of the above is that the Judge did not fall into
    legal error. The Judge very carefully analyses the Appellant's evidence
    and his overall credibility, the risk to the Appellant in his home area
    and the possibility of internal relocation. The  analysis  is  detailed
    and fully reasoned and does not disclose anything that could be said to
    amount to irrationality. This appeal is dismissed.


  Summary

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law. I dismiss the appeal. The decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands.






Signed:                                                       Date: 2 May
2018

[pic]

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
