
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05233/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Teams             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 May 2021                       |On 27 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AMS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 9 March 2021, I set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal. My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born  in  1992.  He
         appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of  the
         Secretary of State refusing his claim for international protection.
         The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on  9  September
         2019,  dismissed  the  appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
         permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   At the remote initial hearing in the Upper Tribunal, Mr Bates,
         who  appeared  for  the  Secretary  of  State,  told  me  that  the
         respondent did not oppose the appeal and accepted  that  the  judge
         had erred in law such that his decision fell to be  set  aside.  He
         accepted that (as  Judge  Lindsley  had  stated  in  her  grant  of
         permission at [5]) the judge had ignored the appellant's conversion
         to Christianity when assessing [72]  whether  the  appellant  could
         enlist the assistance of male family members in Iraq to enable  him
         to  obtain  replacement  identity  documents.  It  had   been   the
         appellant's  evidence,  supported  by  expert  evidence   detailing
         discrimination and hostility  to  Christians  in  Iraq,  that  such
         support would not, as a consequence of his conversion  from  Islam,
         be forthcoming.

         3.   In the circumstances, I set  aside  the  decision.  I  do  not
         consider that the Tribunal's findings of fact  on  the  appellant's
         account of past events [45, 49-56] need be revisited.  The  judge's
         findings in respect of the ability of the appellant to obtain fresh
         identity documents  are  set  aside.  The  issue  remaining  to  be
         determined is whether the appellant may safely be  returned  either
         to his home area of Iraq  or,  if  he  cannot  be  returned  there,
         whether he may avail himself of  the  option  of  internal  flight,
         having regard to such identity and other necessary documents he may
         be able to obtain either before returning or on  arrival  in  Iraq.
         Findings on that issue will  be  informed  by  the  fact  that  the
         appellant is a genuine convert to Christianity. The decision may be
         remade in the Upper Tribunal. Additional evidence may be adduced by
         both parties provided copies of such  evidence  (including  witness
         statements) are sent to the other party and to the  Upper  Tribunal
         no less than 10 days prior to the resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  Findings  of
         fact are set aside/preserved as detailed at [2] above. The decision
         will be remade in the Upper Tribunal at a resumed hearing"

 2. At the resumed hearing on 26 May 2021, Mr McVeety, who appeared for the
    Secretary of State, told  me  that  the  respondent  accepts  that  the
    appellant should succeed on Article  3  ECHR  grounds  because,  as  an
    individual  from  Kirkuk,  he  cannot  obtain  the  necessary  identity
    document (now an Iraqi National Identity Card or  INID)  without  being
    exposed to a real risk of harm following return via Baghdad.

 3. Mr Hussain, who appeared for the appellant, agreed  with  Mr  McVeety's
    submission but argued that the appellant should also succeed on refugee
    grounds. The appellant is a genuine convert to Christianity although it
    is not claimed that he would actively proselytise his faith on  return.
    Mr Hussain submitted that the evidence of the  appellant's  expert  (Dr
    Pargetter) indicated (albeit by reference to the previous CSID identity
    document) that the Iraqi authorities would not countenance an applicant
    for an identity card claiming Christianity  as  his/her  religion.  The
    expert gives an example of an individual who argued in  court  in  Iraq
    that he should be recorded as a Christian being denied  that  right  by
    the judge. In conclusion, Dr Pargetter [7.2] wrote:

         "In  summary,  as  a  Christian  convert,  it  would  be  extremely
         challenging for Mr Saleem to return to his own area of  Kirkuk,  or
         to try to settle elsewhere,  including  in  the  KRI.  Were  he  to
         practice his faith openly  he  would  likely  face  social  stigma,
         ostracism and potential abuse; were he  to  proselytise,  he  could
         find himself at real risk of serious harm from non-state actors."

    Mr Hussain acknowledged that  there  is  no  current  country  guidance
    concerning Christian converts returning to predominantly Kurdish  areas
    of Iraq. However, he submitted there is sufficient evidence of risk  in
    the passage of the expert's report quoted above and (by reference to HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31) on account of the  inability  of  the  appellant
    properly to express his true faith in  his  application  for  the  most
    significant record of his citizenship of Iraq,  that  is  his  national
    identity document.

 4. Although Mr  Hussain's  submissions  were  skilfully  made,  I  am  not
    satisfied that, on the current evidence, the appellant  has  discharged
    the burden of proof in his asylum appeal.  Dr Pargetter considers  that
    any 'serious harm from non-state actors' is  likely  to  occur  if  the
    appellant were to proselytise his faith, which Mr Hussain  acknowledged
    is not likely. The phrase 'potential abuse' lacks adequate  explanation
    and detail to meet the criterion of real risk whilst Mr Hussain did not
    argue that a risk of 'social stigma, and ostracism'  per  se  would  be
    enough to meet that criterion. Moreover, the expert's  account  of  the
    individual 'who tried to change the religious  designation  on  his  ID
    card' is, in my opinion, an indication that asserting one's  non-Muslim
    faith even before a court of law is relatively without risk;  there  is
    no  indication  that  the  individual  acted  rashly  by  bringing  the
    challenge or that he suffered adversely as  a  result  of  the  court's
    decision. It is difficult to see how the principles of  HJ  (Iran)  are
    engaged in circumstances where someone openly asserts his/her Christian
    faith but a court insists that the applicant is recorded as  a  Muslim.
    In any event, as Mr McVeety submitted, the appellant  has  not  adduced
    any evidence as to the contents of the current application form for  an
    INID; the appellant's arguments on this issue and the comments  of  the
    expert are largely speculative.

 5. Accordingly, I dismiss the asylum appeal. As I told Mr Hussain, if,  at
    some time in the future, the current problems  of  returnees  acquiring
    identity documents are overcome and  the  appellant  is  faced  with  a
    decision to remove him to Iraq but at that time he  has  evidence  that
    his Christian faith will expose him to risk on return, then he will  no
    doubt make further representations to the Secretary of State.

 6. Mr Hussain also argued that the appellant should succeed on  Article  8
    ECHR grounds on the basis that his current documentation problem  shows
    that there would be 'very significant  obstacles'  to  his  integration
    into Iraq (see paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) of HC 395  (as  amended)).  Mr
    McVeety did not challenge that submission, save  that  he  pointed  out
    that the period of leave to remain which the appellant would be awarded
    is less than that which his success on  Article  3  ECHR  grounds  will
    attract. Accordingly, I allow the  appeal  on  Article  3  and  8  ECHR
    grounds.






    Notice of Decision

    I have remade the decision. The appellant's appeal against the decision
    of the Secretary of State dated 8 May 2019 is allowed on  human  rights
    grounds (Articles 3 and 8  ECHR).  The  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  is
    dismissed.




         Signed                              Date 26 May 2021
        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.









