
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/05847/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2019                            |                              |
|                                              |On 19 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                               mr Mojammil [K]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Miah of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  His date of birth is 6 April
    1966.

 2.  The  appellant  appealed  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  his
    protection and human rights claim dated 6 April 2018.

 3. The appeal was dismissed by Judge S Meah in a decision  promulgated  on
    29 November 2018.  The judge  did  not  find  the  appellant  to  be  a
    credible witness.  The judge found the appellant would not be  at  risk
    on return to Bangladesh.

 4. The grounds claim various errors of law  on  the  part  of  the  judge.
    Firstly, that "he closed his mind on  credibility  at  the  outset  and
    allowed that to cloud  and  fetter  his  judgment  in  respect  of  the
    evidence."  Further, that the incorrect  standard  of  proof  had  been
    applied in the assessment of the appellant's  credibility  and  in  any
    event,  the  judge  gave  insufficient  reasons   for   rejecting   the
    appellant's evidence.

 5. Judge S P J Buchanan granted permission on 28 December 2018 inter  alia
    as follows:

         "2.  The grounds of appeal [GOA] contend  that  the  FTTJ  arguably
         erred because

                  '(2) ... the IJ closed his  mind  on  credibility  at  the
                  outset and allowed that to cloud and fetter  his  judgment
                  in respect of the evidence.'

             There is a  series  of  challenges  thereafter  including  the
             contention at (9) that 'the incorrect standard  of  proof  has
             been  applied   in   the   assessment   of   the   appellant's
             credibility.'

         3.   There is a heading between  paragraphs  [8]  and  [9]  of  the
             decision which reads;

                  'Burden of Proof'.

             Paragraph [9] sets out  the  burden  without  mention  of  the
             standard of proof to be applied.   At  paragraph  [38]  it  is
             concluded by the FTTJ that 'the appellant has failed  to  show
             to the  requisite  burden  of  proof  that  he  qualifies  for
             asylum.'  It is arguable that the FTTJ  has  conflated  burden
             with standard of proof as contended in GOA (9)."

 6. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Mr Miah relied upon the grounds although they had not been prepared  by
    him.  Mr Miah submitted that the judge  had  closed  his  mind  on  the
    appellant's credibility at the outset and allowed  that  to  cloud  and
    fetter his judgment in respect of the evidence.  That was shown by  the
    judge's approach to the evidence, in particular  at  [20].   The  judge
    started his analysis on credibility with a finding that the  claim  was
    incredible which showed he had made up his mind before he had commenced
    his analysis on credibility.  Further, the judge  had  imposed  a  much
    higher burden of proof upon the appellant.  This was a protection claim
    and the judge had clearly not adopted the lower standard.

 8. Mr Lindsay submitted that the judge had not  erred  in  the  manner  in
    which he approached the evidence and that I should find that he had not
    erred.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 9. I find the grounds are nothing more  than  a  complaint  regarding  the
    judge's findings and conclusion rather than raising any error of law.

10. The permission to appeal granted by Judge Buchanan says that at [9] the
    judge set out the burden without  mentioning  the  standard  of  proof.
    Further, at [38] the judge had arguably conflated the burden  of  proof
    with standard of proof such that the incorrect standard  of  proof  had
    been applied in the assessment of the appellant's credibility.   It  is
    worth setting out paragraphs [9] and [38]:

         "[9] The burden is on the appellant to show there  are  substantial
             grounds to believe he meets the requirements of the Protection
             Regulations and that he is entitled to be granted humanitarian
             protection in accordance with paragraph 339C of the Rules  and
             that his return to Bangladesh will  cause  the  UK  to  be  in
             breach of the 1950 Convention.

         ...

         [38] In totality, and having considered all of the evidence  placed
             before me in the round, I find that the appellant  has  failed
             to show to the requisite burden of proof that he qualifies for
             asylum or any kind of international protection in the  UK.   I
             therefore find that his appeal must fail.   I  find  the  RFRL
             contained a fully reasoned decision in this  appellant's  case
             and I uphold the conclusions reached in this."

11. I do accept that the judge did not set out the  standard  of  proof  at
    [9].  I also accept that at [38] he refers  to  "......  the  requisite
    burden of proof ......" in error for the requisite standard  of  proof.
    I have carefully considered the decision as a whole and have taken into
    account what Mr Miah has put to me as  well  as  the  contents  of  the
    grounds.  There is nothing in this  carefully  reasoned,  comprehensive
    decision to suggest that the judge was unaware of the appropriate lower
    standard of proof and that he failed to apply the same.

12. It is true that the judge commenced his substantive  findings  at  [20]
    with a wholesale adverse credibility finding  but  the  judge  was  not
    obligated to order his findings in any particular way.   He  had  heard
    the evidence.  He was recording  his  findings  and  conclusions.   The
    judge did not believe the whole of the appellant's claim.  He  did  not
    err by stating at the outset that he did not accept that the  appellant
    was a truthful witness.  The judge set out in almost five pages  of  A4
    from [20] - [36] exactly why it was that he  considered  the  appellant
    had fabricated his claim and the background to  it  merely  to  achieve
    regularised status in the UK.  Those were findings that the  judge  was
    clearly entitled to reach on the evidence before him.  The  judge  gave
    extremely strong and cogent reasons  for  his  decision.   He  made  no
    material error of law in his findings or conclusion.

Notice of Decision

13. The judge did not materially err in his decision which shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 25 January 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
