
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05602/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 23 November 2018                         |On 18 December 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes, instructed by Central England Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer

                               Anonymity Order

Having had regard to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 and the Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  1  of  2013:  Anonymity
Orders, and given that the appellant is a minor and that the appeal  relates
to a claim for international protection, I consider it appropriate  to  make
an order in the following terms:

    Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants
    are granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
    or indirectly identify  the  appellant.   This  direction  applies  to,
    amongst others, both the appellant  and  the  respondent.   Failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born in August 2004. Having
    arrived in the United Kingdom in April 2016  (aged  12)  the  appellant
    claimed asylum approximately  2  months  later.  This  application  was
    refused by the SSHD on 18 April 2018.

 2. The appellant appealed this decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    appeal was heard in the appellant's absence on the 31 May 2018 by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Fox and dismissed on  all  grounds  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 July 2018.

 3. The FtT rejected the truth of the  appellant's  evidence,  inter  alia,
    placing reliance on inconsistencies and treating adversely the fact  of
    appellant's failure to claim asylum en route to the UK.

 4. On 6 September  2018,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keane  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal -  observing  that
    the FtT had only  referred  to  the  appellant's  age  in  the  opening
    paragraph of its judgment and concluding that it was arguable that  the
    FtT had failed to take proper  account  of  the  appellant's  age  when
    undertaking its credibility assessment. It  was  further  found  to  be
    arguable that the FtT had failed  to  give  adequate  consideration  to
    expert evidence relied upon by the appellant.

 5. At the outset of the hearing before me on  the  23  November  Mr  Mills
    conceded that (i) the FtT's decision contained  significant  errors  of
    law of the type identified in the grant of permission,  (ii)  that  the
    FtT's decision should, as a consequence, be set aside; and, (iii)  that
    any rehearing of the appeal should be de novo  and  undertaken  by  the
    FtT.

 6. Mr Vokes agreed with the SSHD's position.

 7. I also concur. The FtT's decision is manifestly  inadequate  in  almost
    every respect. I do not  intend  to  waste  any  further  judicial  ink
    identifying with greater precision than that set above why  I  conclude
    this to be so. For the reasons set out in the grant  of  permission,  I
    set aside the FtT's decision. The appeal must be determined afresh. The
    scale of the necessary fact finding is such that it is appropriate  for
    this to be carried out by the FtT. I, therefore, remit  the  appeal  to
    the FtT for this purpose.

Decision

The decision of the FtT is set aside,

The appeal is remitted to the FtT to be determined afresh.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 23 November 2018
