
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
pa/05143/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 March 2018                             |On 1 May 2018                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE EDIS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     BA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G. Loughran, Counsel instructed on behalf of
the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq.

 2. We make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008.   Unless  and  until  a
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise the Appellant is granted anonymity.
     No report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify
    him.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  to   the
    Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The Appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who, in a determination  promulgated  on  the  6th
    July 2017, dismissed his claim for protection.

 3. In this case it is correctly accepted on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State that the  decision  of  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 6 July 2017 contains an error of law, that is  that  the
    judge departed from the relevant country guidance  case  AA  without  a
    sufficient evidential justification and  without  adequately  reasoning
    that course.  It therefore follows that that ground of appeal  succeeds
    and that decision is set aside.  We do  not  however  accept  that  the
    error to which we have referred infects the findings of primary fact by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge in which he rejected the evidence  of  BA
    about his personal circumstances in Kirkuk.   Those  findings  of  fact
    appear to us to be properly reasoned and not in any way to depend  upon
    the evidence about  the  security  climate  in  Kirkuk.   We  therefore
    preserve those findings of fact.

2.   Clearly the decision in relation to the situation  in  Kirkuk  and  its
    impact on the removal of BA will have to be reconsidered.  We take  the
    view that the appropriate forum in which  that  should  happen  is  the
    First-tier Tribunal and we therefore remit the case to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a reconsideration of the case on the basis of the  primary
    findings of fact already made by Judge Greasley. Any secondary findings
    of fact will be made on the basis of any further evidence  provided  by
    the parties. They are of course at liberty to rely  upon  such  further
    evidence as to the current security climate in Kirkuk as they  see  fit
    and we direct that the case should  be  considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for directions to be given as to the way in which the  hearing
    is to be conducted.  If the Secretary of State is  intending  to  argue
    anything new about the possibility of a  relocation  internally  within
    Kirkuk or Iraq of the appellant on removal then that needs  to  be  set
    out in a written argument which should be prepared and  served  on  the
    Tribunal and on the appellant within twenty one days  of  the  decision
    being served so that it is before the First-tier Tribunal when the case
    is considered for the purpose of directions.

3.   We are satisfied that the correct  course  is  for  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in  accordance  with  the  Practice
    Direction.  One of the reasons for not retaining the case in the  Upper
    Tribunal is that that course would deprive the appellant of a route  of
    appeal against the decision which now has to be made in respect of  the
    security and humanitarian situation in Iraq and we consider that it  is
    desirable that the outstanding primary facts should  be  found  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and that any right of appeal against such a finding
    should be preserved.


Decision:

 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and is set aside and the appeal is remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for  a  hearing  on  a  date  to  be  fixed  in
    accordance  with  Section  12(2)(b)  of  the  Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act and paragraph 7.2 of the  practice  statement  of  10th
    February 2010 (as amended).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Edis
