
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05553/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2018                            |On 13 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Dipnarain of Duncan Lewis Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the respondent (SN).  A failure to  comply  with
    this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iran of Kurdish ethnicity.  He  was  born
    on 20 May 2000.  On 5 November 2016, he arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    and on 22 December 2016 he claimed asylum.  The basis of his claim  was
    that  his  father  had  worked  for  the  KDPI  (a  Kurdish   political
    organisation in Iran) and had been publicly  executed  by  the  Iranian
    authorities.  The appellant feared that he would be associated with his
    father's political activities and would, himself, be at risk  from  the
    Iranian authorities.

 4. On 25  May  2017,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Trevaskis on 8 August 2017.  Central to the  appellant's
    claim before the judge was his credibility which had not been  accepted
    by the Secretary of State.  Judge Trevaskis found the appellant's claim
    to be credible and accepted that, as a  consequence,  he  had  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason if he  returned  to
    Iran.  Judge Trevaskis, therefore, allowed the  appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum grounds.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The single ground of appeal was that the judge had failed to
    give adequate reasons for accepting the appellant's claim and rejecting
    the respondent's case that his claim was not credible.

 7. Permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge C  A
    Parker) on 7 November 2017.  However, on 10  January  2018,  the  Upper
    Tribunal (UTJ K�kic) granted  the  Secretary  of  State  permission  to
    appeal.

 8. On 17 October 2018, the appellant filed a rule 24 response  seeking  to
    uphold the judge's positive credibility finding  and  his  decision  to
    allow the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

The Submissions

 9. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Howells  submitted  that  there
    had been a strong  credibility  challenge  to  the  appellant's  asylum
    account in the Reasons for Refusal Letter at paras 18-31.   There  were
    inconsistencies in his account, there  were  inconsistencies  with  the
    background evidence and  part  of  his  account  was  implausible.   Mr
    Howells submitted that before the judge,  the  Presenting  Officer  had
    relied upon the Reasons for Refusal  Letter  together  with  additional
    supplementary submissions.  Mr Howells submitted that the  judge  dealt
    with the respondent's reasons in a couple of sentences in  para  34  of
    his determination.  He rejected those reasons stating that:

         "I would characterise those inconsistencies as minor,  trivial  and
         not damaging to the central core of the appellant's claims".

10. Mr Howells submitted that these reasons were not adequate, in the sense
    that they did not explain to the losing party (here  the  Secretary  of
    State) why  the  appellant's  claim  had  been  accepted.   Mr  Howells
    referred me to, and relied  upon,  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in
    Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) at [14] that
    it was:

         "necessary for First-tier Tribunal judges to identify  and  resolve
         the key conflicts in the evidence and explaining  clear  and  brief
         terms their reasons for preferring one case to the  other  so  that
         the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

11. Mr Howells submitted that the very brief  reasons  of  the  judge  were
    insufficient to meet that requirement.

12. Mr Howells accepted that the Secretary of State's case was a  "reasons"
    challenge.  He quite properly accepted that the initial grounds in  the
    application to the First-tier Tribunal had gone too far  in  suggesting
    that the brevity of the judge's reasons suggested that he  had  already
    made his mind up and he closed his mind to the evidence such  that  the
    hearing was unfair.

13. On behalf of the appellant,  Ms  Dipnarain  relied  upon  the  Rule  24
    Notice.  She submitted that the judge had complied with the requirement
    as  set  out  in  [14]  of  Budhathoki.   She  submitted  that  he  had
    sufficiently set out the issues at paras 31-34  of  his  determination.
    The  judge  acknowledged  that  he  had  the  benefit  of  hearing  the
    appellant's oral evidence (at para 31).  Further, he had  assessed  the
    appellant's credibility in the light of his age,  namely  that  he  was
    only 16 years old when he left Iran and only 17 years at  the  date  of
    his asylum interview and had received "little  or  no  education"  (see
    para 33  of  his  determination).   Ms  Dipnarain  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State had accepted the appellant's lack  of  knowledge  at
    para 17 of the refusal letter but nevertheless went on to  accept  that
    he was Iranian and Kurdish.  She submitted that the judge had  referred
    to the background evidence (at paras 17 and 18  of  his  determination)
    and that his  reason  for  rejecting  the  inconsistencies  as  "minor,
    trivial and not  damaging  to  the  central  core  of  the  appellant's
    claims",  together  with  appropriate   allowance   being   given   for
    shortcomings in his evidence due to his education and age, and that his
    claim was  consistent  with  the  background  evidence,  were  adequate
    reasons to support his positive credibility finding  and  finding  that
    the appellant was at real risk of persecution on return to Iran.

Discussion

14. A "reasons" challenge to a judge's decision may take one of two  forms.



15. First, a judge must provide adequate reasons for any findings  of  fact
    or determination of issues of law.  Sometimes that is couched in  terms
    that there must be sufficient and adequate reasons so that the  parties
    understand why they have won or lost a case (see  Budhathoki  at  [14])
    or, sometimes, so as to  permit  an  Appellate  Court  or  Tribunal  to
    understand why the judge reached the decision.

16. The latter is set out in  the  well-known  passage  of  Bingham  LJ  in
    English v Emery Reimbold & Strick Ltd [2002] 1 WLR 2409 at  p.2418  D-E
    as follows:

         "[I]f the Appellate process is to work satisfactorily, the judgment
         must enable the Appellate Court to understand why the judge reached
         his decision.  This does not mean that every factor  which  weighed
         with the  Judge  in  his  appraisal  of  the  evidence  has  to  be
         identified and explained.  But the issues the resolution  of  which
         were vital to the Judge's conclusion should be identified  and  the
         manner in which he resolved them explained.  It is not possible  to
         provide a template for this process.  It need not involve a lengthy
         judgment.  It does require the Judge to identify and  record  those
         matters which were critical to his decision.  If the critical issue
         was one of fact, it may be enough  to  say  that  one  witness  was
         preferred to another because  the  one  manifestly  had  a  clearer
         recollection of the material facts or the other gave answers  which
         was demonstrated that his recollection could not be relied upon."

17. As will be clear from that passage, the issue of  whether  the  reasons
    are "adequate" requires an evaluation of whether the explanation  given
    by the judge for his decision sufficiently engages with the  issues  in
    dispute between  the  parties  and  offers  a  basis  for  the  judge's
    conclusion on those issues (see  in  the  administrative  law  context,
    South Bucks District Council v Porter (No. 2)  [2004]  1  WLR  1953  at
    p.1964 D-G per Lord Brown).

18. In Budhathoki the UT, in the context of a judgment  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, said this:

         "We are not for a moment suggesting that judgments have to set  out
         the entire interstices of the evidence presented or  analyse  every
         nuance between the parties.  Far from it.  Indeed, we  should  make
         it clear that it is generally unnecessary, unhelpful and  unhealthy
         for First-tier Tribunal judgments to seek to rehearse every  detail
         or issue raised in the case.   This  leads  to  judgments  becoming
         overly long and confused.   Further,  it  is  not  a  proportionate
         approach in deciding cases.  It is however,  necessary  for  First-
         tier Tribunal judges to identify and resolve the key  conflicts  in
         the evidence and explain in clear and brief terms their reasons for
         preferring one case to the other so that the parties can understand
         why they have won or lost."

19. That is, in essence, the issue in this appeal.  Has the judge  provided
    "adequate" reasons in his determination to explain the basis upon which
    he has reached his positive adverse credibility finding in the light of
    the "issues" raised by the respondent.

20. The second type of "reasons" challenge is somewhat distinct.  That is a
    challenge which does not raise the "adequacy" of reasons in  the  sense
    used in the first type of challenge but rather challenges  the  reasons
    actually  given  for  a  finding  of  fact.   That  is,  in  effect,  a
    rationality challenge to the actual reasons given.   The  parties  know
    why they have won or lost but contend that the reasons are not  legally
    sound.  In the context of a factual finding, that is likely to  require
    an enquiry into the rationality of those reasons.

21. That is not the challenge brought by the Secretary  of  State  in  this
    appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  do  not  challenge  the
    rationality of any reasons given by the judge but rather  contend  that
    he has not given sufficient reasons to explain his positive credibility
    finding given the matters raised by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
    refusal letter.

22. In his determination, the judge set out the evidence and at paras 19-24
    and 25-30 respectively he set out the parties' submissions as follows:

         "Respondent's Submissions

         19.  Ms Arnesen for the Respondent  relied  upon  the  reasons  for
             refusal letter.

         20.  The Appellant is now over 17; he was  16  when  he  fled  from
             Iran, yet claims that he did not know what his father did  for
             a living.  He has given inconsistent  accounts  regarding  his
             neighbours, when his father left and returned home and how  he
             discovered his father was dead.

         21.  He has claimed that his solicitors failed to give full details
             of his claims in his witness statement, but he has  not  given
             notice  to  those  solicitors  of  his   intention   to   make
             allegations of inadequate professional services.

         22.  He has given an implausible account that, on a single day,  he
             went to his neighbours, was told that  his  father  was  dead,
             sent for his brothers, gave the family home to a smuggler  and
             left the country.

         23.  In his interview he stated that his father  and  two  brothers
             were in Iran; although his social  worker  sought  to  correct
             this answer, it is submitted that it was in fact true; he  has
             never before said that his neighbour offered to look after his
             brothers after he left  the  country;  he  has  provided  very
             little detail of the journey.  When he  arrived  in  Italy  he
             gave a false name.  He has provided very little information to
             the Red Cross to assist in locating his family.

         24.  He has limited leave until 20 November 2017.  He does not face
             risk on return and will therefore be returned after he becomes
             an adult.

         Appellant's Submissions

         25.   The  appellant's  representative  relied  upon  his  skeleton
             argument.

         26.  The assessment of the credibility of the appellant  must  bear
             in mind that his experiences in Iran were up to the age of 16,
             and that he was only 17 years old at the date  of  his  asylum
             interview.  He has given a consistent account,  and  the  only
             matters raised by the respondent are minor.  It  is  plausible
             that his father would not have wanted him to  know  about  his
             activities with KDPI for his  own  protection;  the  character
             references describe the  appellant  as  being  respectful  and
             honest, and it is therefore plausible that he would  not  have
             questioned his father about his activities.

         27.  The appellant denies that he ever claimed that his father  was
             out at night, and has always said that he was out  during  the
             day.  There is background evidence that members  of  KDPI  are
             publicly executed.

         28.  His account of  his  flight  from  Iran  is  credible  in  the
             circumstances existing in that country.  He has also  provided
             a plausible explanation for the  apparent  alias  recorded  in
             Italy; that allegation is contradicted by the  CID  notes  and
             should therefore be disregarded.

         29.  The Appellant has engaged with Red Cross because he is anxious
             to find his brothers.

         30.  The appellant has been in the United  Kingdom  since  November
             2016, and has established private life in this  country  which
             engages article 8."

23. Then, at paras 31-34 the judge made his findings, including a  positive
    credibility finding in favour of the appellant as follows:

         "Findings (international protection)

         31.  The appellant's claim depends upon a finding  of  credibility.
             I have had the  benefit  of  hearing  him  give  evidence  and
             undergo cross examination.  The respondent accepts that he  is
             an Iranian national.  There is no apparent  challenge  to  his
             claim to be of Kurdish ethnicity but, if there is, I find as a
             fact that he is of Kurdish ethnicity,  on  the  basis  of  his
             unchallenged evidence to that effect.

         32.  I have considered the claim by the  appellant  that  he  fears
             persecution because of his father's activities  on  behalf  of
             KDPI.  His case, taken at its highest,  is  that,  unknown  to
             him, his father was working for KDPI; he only became aware  of
             this after his father had been missing for two days,  and  the
             appellant was informed by a neighbour that his father had been
             executed by the authorities, an event which had been  reported
             and  possibly  photographed  in  a  newspaper;  the  neighbour
             advised the appellant that he should  flee  the  country,  and
             assisted him to  do  so,  after  the  appellant  informed  his
             younger brothers and handed over the family home to a smuggler
             as payment for helping him to escape.

         33.  In assessing the credibility  of  the  appellant's  claims,  I
             remind myself that he was 16 years old when he  says  that  he
             left Iran, and  17  years  old  at  the  date  of  his  asylum
             interview; I also accept that it is likely, as he claims, that
             he received little or no education,  and  would  therefore  be
             likely to be somewhat vague about the details of  his  journey
             outside Iran.

         34.  I recognise that the burden of proof on  the  appellant  is  a
             very low  one,  namely  a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood;
             however, such a claim must contain elements  of  internal  and
             external   consistency,   in   the   absence   of   compelling
             corroboration.  There were a number of inconsistencies in  the
             appellant's account, which have been identified in the reasons
             for refusal and in the  respondent's  submissions  above,  and
             which is not necessary for  me  to  rehearse  here.   I  would
             characterise those inconsistencies as minor, trivial  and  not
             damaging to  the  central  core  of  the  appellant's  claims.
             Suffice to say, having  made  what  I  regard  as  appropriate
             allowance for the  claimed  shortcomings  in  the  appellant's
             education and his age, I am satisfied that he has presented  a
             claim which is sufficiently consistent with  itself  and  with
             background information to persuade me to the required standard
             that  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for   a
             Convention reason."

24. To an extent, the judge does give reasons for his positive  credibility
    finding.  As Ms Dipnarain submitted, he noted that he had  the  benefit
    of hearing the appellant give evidence orally and be subject to  cross-
    examination.  He also noted the appellant's age and lack  of  education
    as being relevant to, in particular, the fact  that  he  was  "somewhat
    vague about the details of his journey outside Iran".

25. The bulk of the judge's reasons, however, are in para 34 and  they  are
    very brief indeed.  Without setting out the "number of  inconsistencies
    in the appellant's account" relied on in the refusal letter, the  judge
    explained that they were: "minor,  trivial  and  not  damaging  to  the
    central core of the appellant's claim". The  judge  again  referred  to
    making "appropriate allowance" for the appellant's  lack  of  education
    and his age and  that  his  claim  was  "sufficiently  consistent  with
    itself" and  also  "with  background  evidence"  such  that  the  judge
    accepted the appellant's account.

26. During the course of argument, I enquired of Mr Howells why it was that
    the Secretary of State contended why he did not  know  the  basis  upon
    which the judge had found in the appellant's favour  on  the  issue  of
    credibility.   Referring  to  the  judge's  characterisation   of   the
    inconsistencies as "minor, trivial and not damaging to the central core
    of the appellant's claims", I enquired whether Mr Howells was  not,  in
    effect, requiring the judge to give  'reasons  for  his  reasons'.   Mr
    Howells' response was that the brief reasons  were  not  "adequate"  as
    they did not engage with the matters  relied  upon  by  the  respondent
    before the  judge,  namely  that  there  were  inconsistencies  in  his
    evidence about the involvement of his neighbours,  whether  his  father
    worked at nights or returned home at night having worked in the day and
    as to how he discovered that his father was dead.  Further,  the  judge
    had not engaged with the claimed implausibility of his account that  in
    a single day, when his father did  not  return,  he  went  to  see  his
    neighbours, was told that his father was dead, they had  sent  for  his
    brothers and he gave away the family home to a smuggler  that  day  and
    left the country.

27. This case is not on 'all fours' with that of Budhathoki.  As  is  clear
    from the UT's judgment, which at [4] sets out  the  First-tier  Judge's
    reasoning in that case, the judge effectively gave no  reasons  of  any
    kind to support her  findings  of  fact.   That  was  a  quintessential
    failure to provide "adequate" reasons allowing the parties and, indeed,
    an Appellate Tribunal to know the basis upon which  the  judge  reached
    her findings of fact and decision to allow that appellant's appeal.

28. Here, by contrast, the judge has, as Miss  Dipnarain  submitted,  given
    some reasons.  However, even bearing in mind the "caveat" of the  Upper
    Tribunal in Budhathoki at [14] that a judge  need  not  "analyse  every
    nuance between the parties", the judge was  still  required  to  engage
    sufficiently with the issues in dispute and to provide, albeit  perhaps
    brief, reasons for preferring the appellant's account on  those  issues
    which would then sustain a rational factual finding in his favour.   Mr
    Howells began his submissions by pointing out that  there  had  been  a
    strong credibility challenge both in the refusal letter and, not  least
    through its reliance at the hearing, before the judge.  That is, in  my
    judgment, an entirely fair characterisation of the issues raised by the
    Secretary of State at paras 18-31 of the refusal  letter.   There  were
    marked inconsistencies in the appellant's account, including how he had
    engaged with his neighbours and discovered that  his  father  had  been
    executed which was reported in one, or perhaps more than one, newspaper
    and whether his father worked during the day for the KDPI or  at  night
    (see especially paras 18-27).  Likewise, it was a live issue  that  the
    appellant's account that all this transpired  on  a  single  day  which
    included making arrangements with a smuggler to whom the appellant gave
    the family home.

29. The nature of these inconsistencies is  not  entirely  clear  from  the
    judge's recitation of the  respondent's  submissions  at  paras  19-24.
    Although the judge refers to there being "a number of  inconsistencies"
    set out in the refusal letter at para 34 of his determination, his only
    engagement with them is to say that they are "minor,  trivial  and  not
    damaging to the central core of the appellant's claims".  That,  in  my
    judgment, does not adequately engage  with  the  "issues"  raised,  and
    relied upon, by the respondent before the judge.  Whilst the  Secretary
    of State (and indeed the Upper Tribunal) has  some  grasp  of  why  the
    judge found in the  appellant's  favour,  it  is  the  very  barest  of
    understandings amounting to no  more  than  an  overarching  conclusion
    applied to a range of  points  raised  by  the  respondent.   Even  the
    cautiously curious reader is left unclear what was the substance of the
    judge's reasoning on the critical issues which had to  be  resolved  in
    order to make a finding in respect of the appellant's credibility.   In
    addition, there is no reference to the 'implausibility' issue raised by
    the respondent.

30. The judge has, in my judgment, failed to "resolve the key conflicts  in
    the evidence and explain in clear and  brief  terms"  his  reasons  for
    preferring the appellant's case to that of the respondent.

31. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge materially erred in  law  in
    reaching  his  adverse  credibility  finding  and   in   allowing   the
    appellant's appeal.

Decision

32. Thus, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law.   That  decision  cannot
    stand and is set aside.


33. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and having regard
    to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement,  the  proper
    disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo hearing before a judge other than Judge Trevaskis.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            6, November 2018

