
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05651/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 September 2018                             |On 12 November 2018           |
|                                                 |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                muhammad [u]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Fazli, Counsel for Sohaib Fatimi Solicitors,
Edgware
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on  27  December  1995.
    He appealed the respondent's decision of 18  April  2018  refusing  him
    asylum and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom and  on  human
    rights issues.  The  appeal  was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal Bart-Stewart on 1 June 2018 and was dismissed on  all  grounds
    in a decision promulgated on 6 July 2018.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Buchanan on 31  July  2018.
    The grounds state that the First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the
    appellant's evidence is broadly credible and accepted the core issue in
    the case.  In spite of this she did not accept  that  the  attack  took
    place on the appellant's family guard which led to the  family  fleeing
    to Pakistan so the First-Tier Tribunal Judge finds that  the  appellant
    does not have a well-founded fear of persecution in  Afghanistan.   The
    grounds state that the Judge failed to consider  important  documentary
    evidence, in particular the evidence of the appellant's British  sister
    and  failed  to  consider  the  appellant's  father's  affidavit,   the
    affidavit from Mr Gul and the statement of Mr Khalil.  The  Judge  then
    proceeded on the basis that corroboration is  required  and  made  this
    determinative of credibility. The grounds state that the Judge made  an
    irrational finding about the newspaper article and that  the  appellant
    cannot be reasonably expected to substantiate why the newspaper article
    contained all the details it did and the Judge  made  a  factual  error
    that contributed to her adverse findings, about the appellant's  father
    withdrawing the first claim which the appellant maintains  is  not  the
    case.  The grounds refer to inadequate consideration of Dr  Giustozzi's
    report and the fact-specific evidence contained therein.   The  grounds
    state that the situation following the attack turned into a blood  feud
    and there is no exaggeration in the expert report as alleged.

 3. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 4. This is the appellant's appeal and Counsel for the appellant  made  his
    submissions, submitting that with regard to the first ground the  Judge
    finds at paragraph 34 that the  appellant's  father  may  have  a  land
    dispute given that he has business interests in  property.   The  Judge
    however does not believe that  this  dispute  led  to  the  appellant's
    family fleeing to Pakistan.

 5. At paragraph 30 of the decision the Judge refers to the  statements  on
    file and the  affidavits.  Counsel  submitted  that  there  is  medical
    evidence giving reasons why the appellant's sister could not attend the
    hearing and  he  submitted  that  the  sister's  account  supports  the
    appellant's account.  He submitted that the key issue in this  case  is
    rejected by the Judge at paragraph 34  but  the  Judge  does  not  give
    proper reasons for not accepting the evidence that there was an  attack
    on the appellant's father's business premises by people with whom he is
    in dispute and this caused him to have to flee.  He submitted that  the
    Judge does not give proper weight to the affidavits although  they  are
    mentioned at  paragraph  30.  One  affidavit  is  at  page  60  of  the
    appellant's bundle and refers to the appellant's father's guard and  at
    page 58 there is a national identity card which, he submitted, is a key
    document and supports the appellant's account of his family fleeing  to
    Pakistan, but this was not considered by the Judge.  He submitted  that
    the Judge made findings but gave no reasons for these findings.

 6. I was referred to the appellant's bundle and the witness  statement  of
    Abdul Khalil (the guard) which refers to the appellant and  the  attack
    on him, Mr Khalil.  Reference is made in this to the petition which  Mr
    Khalil lodged about the attack against him by Mr Sayyaf's men.  Counsel
    submitted that this document was not properly considered by  the  Judge
    and he submitted that if the appellant's father's guard was attacked it
    is likely that the family is in danger of attack and  again  the  Judge
    has failed to give adequate reasons for her findings.

 7. Counsel then referred to the second ground which is  corroboration.   I
    was referred to paragraph 31 of the decision.  The Judge states that in
    the  appellant's  brother's  statement  there  are  details  about  the
    appellant's father and he mentions his office being  attacked  but  the
    Judge states that there is nothing in the  statement  about  the  guard
    being shot, or the names of the attackers. The brother's second witness
    statement mentions this but at paragraph 32 of the decision  the  Judge
    states that this omission makes her doubt that the attack occurred.  At
    paragraph 32 the Judge refers to the newspaper report and he  submitted
    that the Judge has given  too  much  weight  to  the  omission  in  the
    brother's first  statement  and  that  this  is  disproportionate.   He
    submitted that the Judge found that the appellant's brother's  evidence
    goes against what is stated in the newspaper article.  At paragraph  34
    the Judge questions how, the newspaper could have all  the  details  in
    the article along with a photograph of the guard and Counsel  submitted
    that corroboration is not required in asylum claims and  the  appellant
    cannot answer what has been printed by  the  newspaper.   He  submitted
    that the newspaper article gives the guard's name  but  the  Judge,  in
    spite of this, does not believe that the  guard  was  beaten  and  shot
    although this is perfectly plausible and no proper  reasons  have  been
    given by the Judge for not believing this.

 8. With regard to the factual error made by the Judge  he  submitted  that
    this is at paragraph 29 of the decision.  The  Judge  states  that  the
    appellant's father withdrew the proceedings he raised  to  recover  the
    land in 2009 and then commenced the proceedings  again  in  July  2016.
    Counsel submitted that the appellant's  father  did  not  withdraw  the
    proceedings but he did not pursue the  claim  as  the  persecutors  had
    considerable influence in Pakistan.  He submitted that the petition was
    always there, it was just not processed by the appellant's father.   He
    submitted that if the appellant's father had pursued the claim at  that
    time the whole family would have been put in danger and the reason  his
    father took up the claim again, which was mentioned at the hearing, was
    that people who had taken actions against land grabbers were succeeding
    and this gave the appellant's father  the  courage  to  go  ahead.   He
    submitted that this was a matter of honour and when the people  against
    whom the action was being  taken  realised  they  were  going  to  lose
    against the appellant's father, they attacked.  Counsel submitted  that
    there are no inconsistencies here and the petitions are on file as well
    as the land documents.

 9.  Regarding  the  expert  report  Counsel  submitted  that   the   Judge
    inadequately considered this.  At paragraph 39 the Judge refers to  the
    expert who states that Sayyaf, against whom the appellant's father  was
    taking the action, probably receives a share of the profits made by his
    associates which he might use for funding his political  activities  or
    save for himself.  There is no evidence of payments made by Mumtaz  and
    others to Sayyaf and the Judge states that this aspect of the report is
    based on speculation.  Counsel submitted that  a  senior  warlord  like
    Sayyaf will not leave traces of his criminality.  Payments will be made
    to him but it is unlikely that there will be  any  evidence  of  these.
    Sayyaf's motivation is purely to get rich and have political  influence
    and land grabbing in Afghanistan is not  an  uncommon  thing.   Counsel
    submitted that the expert report supports the appellant's account about
    blood feuds and at paragraph 40 of the decision, which  refers  to  the
    expert stating that if  anyone  is  hurt  in  the  violence,  the  land
    grabbing operation will turn into a blood feud and put the appellant at
    risk, the Judge finds that this exaggerates the appellant's  claim  and
    is speculative.  Counsel submitted that based on the expert report  the
    appellant, on return to Afghanistan, will be at risk.  Although he  has
    been in the United Kingdom when all this has been happening he  was  in
    Afghanistan when it started and he submitted that when the Judge states
    that the expert appears  to  have  been  exaggerating  the  claim  this
    finding was not open to the Judge.  The expert  was  merely  suggesting
    what could happen in this situation.  He submitted that blood feuds  in
    Afghanistan are a reality and in  this  case,  after  the  attack,  the
    situation turned into a blood feud when the guard was attacked.

10. I was referred to paragraph 41 of the decision and  the  last  sentence
    thereof - "On his own evidence land grabbing is  not  state  sanctioned
    and the authorities have announced an intention to stop it  so  I  find
    that the appellant does not have a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
    under the Refugee Convention."  Counsel submitted that land grabbing is
    a major problem in Afghanistan and the background evidence  shows  that
    the authorities cannot  protect  against  this  and  there  can  be  no
    peaceful resolution.  Counsel submitted that it was  only  when  Sayyaf
    realised that the appellant's family were going  to  succeed  in  their
    claim that the situation became serious and the family had to  flee  to
    Pakistan.

11. The Presenting Officer made his submissions, submitting that the  Judge
    did  not  consider  some  of  the  evidence  but  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's sister and her  statement,  she  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2009 and  does  not  have  first-hand  knowledge  of  the
    situation in Afghanistan.

12. The Presenting Officer referred to the affidavit by Mr Gul which states
    that the appellant's family are living with him in  Pakistan  and  have
    been since August 2017 as has the  guard  Mr  Khalil.   The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that this is not a material piece of evidence and the
    fact that  the  Judge  has  not  specifically  mentioned  this  is  not
    material.  He submitted that the  Judge  has  considered  the  material
    evidence and given satisfactory reasons for his findings.

13. With regard to ground 2 and corroboration he submitted  that  the  fact
    that the Judge sought  an  explanation  of  the  appellant's  brother's
    omission in his initial statement, about the guard being shot, was  not
    a request for corroboration.  Because this was omitted in  the  initial
    statement the Judge had reason  to  find  that  perhaps  this  did  not
    happen.  This is made clear  by  the  Judge  at  paragraph  32  of  the
    decision.  Proper reasons are given and  he  submitted  the  Judge  was
    entitled to reach this finding.

14. The grounds refer to a perverse finding by the Judge when she  requests
    an explanation for the  newspaper  having  so  much  detail  about  the
    incident.  She wonders how this information is in the public domain and
    if it can be relied on but the appellant cannot  give  an  explanation.
    The Judge states that it is for the individual claimant  to  show  that
    the newspaper article is reliable in the same way as any other piece of
    evidence put forward on  which  she  seeks  to  rely.   The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the appellant was unable to give an  explanation
    and the Judge was entitled to her finding, including her finding  about
    the photograph in the newspaper, particularly in view of  the  injuries
    mentioned in the newspaper which are different from the details in  the
    witness statement.  He submitted that the Judge was not using too  high
    a threshold and found the newspaper  article  and  photograph  to  lack
    credibility.

15. With regard to the ground relating to a factual error,  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted that at  paragraph  20  of  the  appellant's  witness
    statement there is mention of a second petition  which  indicates  that
    the first petition was no longer valid.  In Mr [U]'s original statement
    at C27 in the respondent's bundle he refers to his father renewing  his
    application.  Based on this the Judge did not make any  factual  error.
    The evidence was clear.

16. Regarding the expert report the Presenting Officer submitted  that  the
    Judge considered this extensively and I was referred to  paragraphs  38
    to 45 of the decision.  The Judge is critical of the expert report  but
    the Judge did not make speculative findings.  At paragraph  11  of  the
    expert report the expert states  that  Sayyaf  does  not  get  directly
    involved in land grabbing and other crimes.   The  expert  states  that
    Sayyaf probably receives a share of the profits made by his  associates
    which he might use for funding his political  activities  or  save  for
    himself, but there is no evidence of payments made by Mumtaz and others
    to Sayyaf.  He submitted that as this is in the expert  report  it  was
    open to the Judge to consider this aspect of the report but she has not
    given this much weight.  The word  "probably"  is  significant  in  the
    report. Also  regarding  the  blood  feud  the  expert  refers  to  the
    situation not yet being a blood feud and he submitted that  the  expert
    is speculating and it is up to the Judge what weight she puts  on  this
    report. She has given adequate reasons for giving it little weight.

17. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is no material error of law
    in the Judge's decision.  She has given  proper  explanations  for  her
    findings.

18. Counsel for the appellant submitted that the error of law in ground one
    is that the Judge did not mention parts of evidence and gave inadequate
    reasons for her findings on the parts she did mention.  I was asked  to
    consider the evidence of the appellant's father at pages 31 to 34.  His
    father refers to many petitions, refers to  the  land  mafia  and  then
    refers to the attack and fleeing to Pakistan as a result of this.   His
    father refers to the first petition and refers to Sayyaf  as  a  famous
    warlord and he submitted that there is no explanation for the Judge not
    accepting this evidence, particularly  when  the  appellant's  father's
    affidavit is taken into account and there is evidence of the family now
    being in Peshawar in Pakistan. The  appellant's  father's  evidence  is
    that he and his family fear for their lives.  He  submitted  that  this
    goes to the heart of the matter and the  Judge  has  not  given  proper
    reasons for finding this evidence to be incredible.  He submitted  that
    there are no reasoned findings about these documents and the  Judge  is
    not disputing one  document  but  is  disputing  a  range  of  relevant
    documents.

19. With regard to the newspaper article and photograph he  submitted  that
    the Judge's reasons are  not  well  made  out.   Her  reasons  for  not
    accepting that the guard was shot,  based  on  the  photograph  in  the
    paper, are flawed.

20. Counsel withdrew the ground about the factual error but with regard  to
    the expert evidence he submitted that the expert at  page  109  of  the
    appellant's bundle states that the appellant's family will be  at  risk
    from Mumtaz as long as they do not hand over the  land  titles  to  his
    associates, so Mumtaz and by extension Sayyaf cannot give in on such  a
    claim, as failing to enforce their  power  would  encourage  others  to
    resist. He submitted that this is an important finding  by  the  expert
    and must be taken into account by the Judge but she did not do so.   He
    submitted that land grabbers are into  political  power,  prestige  and
    money and they cannot  afford  to  be  shamed  or  dishonoured  and  he
    submitted that while the appellant's family hold the  title  deeds  for
    this land the family, including the appellant  will  be  in  danger  in
    Afghanistan.

21. I was asked to find that there are errors of law in  the  decision  and
    allow the appeal.

Decision and Reasons

22. I have to decide if there is a material error of law in the  First-Tier
    Tribunal's decision relating to the appellant's  asylum  claim.   There
    was a lot of evidence before the Judge being affidavits, statements and
    objective evidence, a newspaper article  and  an  expert  report.   The
    appellant's application is based on a land dispute in which his  family
    and a well-known warlord are involved.  There are credibility issues as
    the appellant came to the United Kingdom on a Tier 4 Student  visa  and
    it was only when that visa was almost at an end that he claimed asylum.
     His evidence is that his father and his family have  had  to  flee  to
    Pakistan as they fear for their lives  from  this  warlord  Mr  Sayyaf.
    The appellant's reason for not claiming  asylum  earlier  is  that  his
    father was not attacked until 15 August 2017.   The  appellant  claimed
    asylum the next month.

23. The appellant's evidence is that his family has been involved in a land
    dispute for about 10 years with this warlord.  His father was unable to
    get his land back but after a Jirga it became increasingly  clear  that
    the appellant's father was going to win and that is  when  the  warlord
    sent a threatening message to him, and  although  the  police  filed  a
    report they did not arrest anyone.  The  Judge  does  not  accept,  and
    neither does the respondent, that the  appellant  and  his  family  are
    involved in an ongoing land dispute resulting in the appellant having a
    genuine subjective fear of returning to Afghanistan.

24. The appellant's evidence is that a petition was lodged  by  his  father
    about this land in 2009 but there was no result and  so  in  June  2017
    another petition was lodged and there was a Jirga on 10 June 2017.   At
    this point Sayyaf's people realised they might lose so they raided  the
    appellant's father's office and his home.

25. The Judge refers to  statements  by  the  appellant,  his  father,  his
    brother, his father's guard and his  sister  along  with  an  affidavit
    stating that the family are living in Pakistan and a newspaper  article
    about the attack on the appellant's father's office.  The Judge  refers
    to some of the statements being of no relevance, e.g.  his  sister  has
    been in  the  UK  since  2009.  The  Judge  particularly  mentions  the
    appellant brother's initial statement in which he does not  state  that
    the guard was shot but states that he was beaten.  This is one  of  the
    main reasons the Judge does not believe the attack happened. The  Judge
    is also dubious about the newspaper article and the photograph  of  the
    guard who was injured.  The Judge does  not  understand  how  two  days
    after the attack the newspaper could have all  the  details  about  the
    attack and the appellant was unable to explain this to her.  The  Judge
    finds that this goes against  the  appellant's  credibility.  She  also
    notes  that  the  appellant  has  never  been  directly  threatened  in
    Afghanistan or come into direct contact with Mr  Sayyaf  and  his  men.
    The Judge however does accept that land grabbing is a serious matter in
    Afghanistan and has gone on for a long time.  There is also  an  expert
    report by Dr Giustozzi in which he deals with personal disputes,  blood
    feuds and land grabs in Afghanistan.  He speaks of the danger to  those
    who try to reclaim their land and he is aware  of  Mr  Sayyaf  and  his
    associates.  The expert states that a  land  grabbing  operation  turns
    into a blood feud if there is a violent attack where somebody  is  hurt
    and in this case the appellant states that his father's guard was  hurt
    and this led to the matter turning into a blood feud.  It appears to be
    Sayyaf that the  appellant  and  his  family  are  afraid  of  and  the
    appellant's account is supported by the expert report.   The  Judge  is
    critical of the expert report but when the expert report is considered,
    if the appellant's account is true and his family have had to  flee  to
    Pakistan, then there is a real risk to the appellant if he  returns  to
    Afghanistan from Sayyaf and his associates.  The explanation is that it
    was only when it was clear that the appellant's family  were  going  to
    succeed in reclaiming the land that the attack took place and based  on
    the objective evidence and the expert report this, if it is true, is  a
    strong possibility.

26. The Judge has  referred  to  most  of  the  evidence  and  has  reached
    conclusions about it but I find that much of the documentary  evidence,
    the statements and affidavits, although they have been referred  to  by
    the Judge, she has not given explicit reasons  for  her  findings  that
    there was no attack and why she does not believe that  the  appellant's
    family have had to flee to Pakistan.  I do not accept  that  the  Judge
    was seeking corroboration in the  decision  but  I  do  find  that  the
    Judge's findings on the newspaper article may not  have  been  open  to
    her.  She has reached a conclusion which I find, based on the  evidence
    she was not entitled to reach.  I am  making  nothing  of  the  factual
    error but when I consider the expert report and the  Judge's  rejection
    of much of it I find that again the Judge was not entitled to reach the
    finding she did based on the evidence before her.  The Judge  does  not
    state that she does not believe the expert but she finds  that  in  the
    appellant's case there is not a blood feud  and  that  the  expert  has
    speculated.

27. I find that the Judge has reached conclusions that are not supported by
    the evidence before her. Her reasons for not believing that the  attack
    happened are not sufficient. There are material errors of  law  in  the
    decision.

Notice of Decision

As I find that there are material errors of law in the  Judge's  decision  I
direct that the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal is set aside.   None  of
its findings are to stand other than as a record of what was  said  on  that
occasion.  It is appropriate in terms of Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007
Act and of Practice Statement 7.2  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-Tier
Tribunal for an entirely fresh hearing.

The members of the First-Tier Tribunal chosen to consider the case  are  not
to conclude Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Bart-Stewart.

Anonymity has not been directed.


Signed                                  Date 5 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
