

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05080/2016
                                                               PA/05493/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 16 May 2017                        |On 18 May 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                               N H   and   M S
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
cases involve protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellants are granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellants and to the respondent.

Representation:

For the appellant:           Ms B. Asanovic, Counsel instructed by DJ Webb
& Co.
For the respondent:          Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellants appealed against the respondent's decisions  to  refuse
    their protection claims. First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker ("the judge")
    dismissed the appeals in a decision promulgated on 01 December 2017.

2.    The judge's findings of fact are unchallenged. He accepted  that  both
    men were gay as claimed and that they are  in  a  genuine  relationship
    [43]. He considered the background evidence relating to  the  treatment
    of people who are in same sex relationships  in  Bangladesh.  He  noted
    that the evidence showed that same sex sexual activity was illegal  but
    the law was rarely enforced.  Societal  treatment  and  attitudes  were
    hostile to same sex relationships and were sufficiently widespread  and
    severe to amount to a real risk of persecution  for  those  who  openly
    pursue a same sex relationship [44]. The judge went on to consider  the
    four-step test outlined in HJ (Iran) & HT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC
    31, but concluded that the appellants were likely to live discreetly as
    a result of familial and societal disapproval as they were doing in the
    UK [47-53]. He acknowledged that the appellants  expressed  a  fear  of
    being forced into marriage by their parents and  accepted  that  family
    pressure was likely to be very strong. However, he  concluded  that  it
    would be open  to  the  appellants  to  relocate  to  another  area  of
    Bangladesh to avoid pressure from family  members  [54].  He  concluded
    that the "appellants themselves realise that  they  are  able  to  live
    discreetly in Bangladesh and so avoid any persecution" [55].

3.    The appellants seek to appeal the First-tier Tribunal decision on  the
    following grounds:

       i) The First-tier Tribunal failed to apply the test outlined  in  HJ
          (Iran) correctly.

      ii) In assessing the reasons as to  why  the  appellants  might  live
          discreetly in Bangladesh the judge failed to  take  into  account
          material evidence that indicated that it was due  to  a  fear  of
          persecution  and  failed  to  take   into   account   alternative
          explanations as to why they might live discreetly with  relatives
          in the UK.

Decision and reasons

4.    On behalf of the respondent Mr  Bramble  accepted  that  the  decision
    disclosed errors of law, and considering the judge's  finding  that  an
    openly same sex relationship would give rise to a real risk of  serious
    harm, the consequence of that finding is  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remade  and  allowed.   This  was  a   sensible   concession   in   the
    circumstances of this case.

5.    The judge considered the appellants' fear of persecution arising  from
    the possibility of forced marriage. The first ground of  appeal  argues
    that, if they were forced to live discreetly in order to avoid the harm
    of forced marriage, then the judge wrongly applied the test set out  in
    HJ (Iran) because they would do so because of a  fear  of  persecution.
    However, it was open to the judge to take into account  the  fact  that
    the feared harm was likely to emanate from a small  number  of  people.
    This aspect of the claim does not necessarily rely  on  the  appellants
    having to live discreetly to avoid the feared harm. If they  hid  their
    sexual orientation their parents might think them  more  likely  to  be
    available for marriage. Given that the  feared  harm  emanated  from  a
    small group of non-state agents, it was open to the judge to find  that
    they could move to  another  area  of  Bangladesh  where  their  family
    members could not exercise the same pressure.

6.    However, having accepted  that  the  appellants  were  gay  and  in  a
    relationship the judge failed to consider material  evidence  given  by
    the appellants as to why they would feel forced to live  discreetly  in
    Bangladesh. In interview both appellants expressed fears  about  living
    openly as gay men in Bangladesh due to the  possibility  of  arrest  or
    serious physical attacks.

7.    The judge also failed to take  into  account  evidence  given  by  the
    second appellant to explain why they felt the need to be discreet while
    living with relatives in the UK. Both men live  with  their  respective
    families and are dependent upon them for financial support. The  second
    appellant explained that they did not have sufficient  income  to  live
    independently from their families in the UK. In other words,  they  act
    discreetly not through choice, or necessarily out of  respect  for  the
    feelings of their family members, but out of  financial  necessity.  In
    addition, the judge failed to consider the appellants'  evidence  that,
    aside from discretion in the presence  of  family  members,  they  were
    otherwise able to express their sexuality openly  when  they  socialise
    with friends in the UK.

8.    Even if one reason why the appellants have lived discreetly is out  of
    respect for the views of their family members, it is of course possible
    for a fear of persecution to exist alongside societal  pressures.  They
    wish to have an openly  gay  identity.  If  the  appellants  return  to
    Bangladesh they could also feel forced to act discreetly due to a  fear
    of persecution. If one part of the reason for living discreetly engages
    the operation of the Refugee Convention their claim is  made  out.  The
    appellants were found to be credible witnesses. There is no good reason
    to doubt the fact that one reason why they might feel  forced  to  live
    discreetly in Bangladesh is because of a fear of persecution, which the
    judge concluded was likely to be well-founded if  a  person  wishes  to
    live openly in a gay relationship.

9.    For these reasons I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    involved the making of an error of law. In view of the judge's findings
    relating to risk on return to those who wish to live openly  in  a  gay
    relationship I conclude that there is a reasonable degree of likelihood
    that the appellants have a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons
    of their membership of a particular social group.


Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law

The decision is set aside

The appeal is ALLOWED on Refugee Convention grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date    16 May 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
