

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05919/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14 November 2019                       |On 19 November 2019            |
|                                          |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    P H C


                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr M Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Chung,
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers to them
    as they were in the FtT.

 2. FtT  Judge  Kempton  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 16 August 2019.

 3. The SSHD's first ground of appeal to the  UT  is  headed  "standard  of
    proof".

 4. This ground says at [2-4] that the expert report of Dr Gordon,  and  in
    turn  the  judge,  erred  by  thinking  it  better   to   assume   that
    sterilisation practices in China  had  not  changed,  pending  evidence
    emerging to the contrary.

 5. It makes good sense, and is usual practice, to assume that a risk, once
    established, has not disappeared until evidence emerges  that  it  has;
    particularly in a jurisdiction based on reasonable likelihood.

 6. The grounds at [5] do not correctly represent  the  decision  at  [35].
    The  judge  did  not  find  that  there  was  risk  "even   if   forced
    sterilisation does not continue".  What she said that is that  even  if
    there were no local crackdown,  the  size  of  the  appellant's  family
    singled her out for precisely such a risk.

 7. Mr Clark sought to make the best  of  ground  1,  suggesting  that  the
    expert  stated  no  evidential  basis  for  her  position  on  enforced
    sterilisation, and that the judge failed to follow country guidance and
    to consider the terms of the refusal  letter.   By  that  argument,  it
    would be wrong to wait for further evidence to emerge, particularly  as
    the trend is towards a more lenient family planning  policy.   However,
    that is not a line of challenge to be found in ground 1, which does not
    mention country guidance.

 8. As Mr  Forrest  pointed  out,  the  judge  justifies  her  decision  by
    reference to the circumstances: the appellant has three children, is of
    Roman Catholic beliefs,  is  unwilling  to  practice  artificial  birth
    control, and wishes to  have  an  unrestricted  size  of  family.   The
    grounds did not challenge the judge's findings on these points at  [22]
    and [27].  It was logical, and not a lowering of the standard of proof,
    to conclude at [35] that she was likely to be singled out for attention
    and to be at "greater than average" risk.

 9. I find that the ground 1 does not show  that  the  judge  "lowered  the
    standard of proof", even "inadvertently".  It  would  be  extraordinary
    for a judge of many years' experience to go wrong on  what  is  perhaps
    the best known feature of this jurisdiction.

10. Ground 2, on article 8, is well taken.  The judge was wrong to conclude
    from the fact that the appellant's husband has a form of leave that the
    family cannot be expected to leave as a family unit, or that  it  would
    be a breach of the rights of the appellant and her children  to  remove
    her.  However, as both representatives accepted, if  ground  1  is  not
    made out, ground 2 is immaterial.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

12. The FtT made an anonymity direction, although for no  apparent  reason.
    The matter was not  addressed  in  the  UT.   Anonymity  is  maintained
    herein.

      [pic]

      14 November 2019
      UT Judge Macleman


