
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05279/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 October 2018                       |On 13 November 2018                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    N A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Lowis instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He claims to  have  arrived
    clandestinely in the United Kingdom on 15 October  2015.   On  4  March
    2016, he claimed asylum based upon a fear of  his  stepfather  and  the
    Pashtun Kochi people.

 3. One of the issues in dispute was the appellant's age.  On 18 May  2017,
    the Secretary of State  refused  the  appellant's  claims  for  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.  In doing so, the Secretary
    of State accepted an age assessment conducted by  Kent  County  Council
    that his date of birth was 1 January 1997  so  that,  at  the  date  of
    decision, he was 20 years and 4 months old.

The Appeal

 4. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  K  Real
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  Judge Real  accepted,
    based on the evidence before her, that the appellant was an adult.  She
    accepted that "given the history  of  violence  at  the  hands  of  his
    stepfather" that he was at real risk in his home area and, applying the
    respondent's  guidance,  "there  is  unlikely  to  be  effective  state
    protection" (see para 44 of her decision).  Nevertheless, again  having
    regard to the fact that the appellant was an adult, she found  that  it
    would not be "unreasonable or unduly harsh"  for  him  to  relocate  to
    Kabul (see para 46).

 5. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission to appeal was
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal (DJ Shaerf) on 9 November 2017.

The Judicial Review

 6. Meanwhile, the appellant lodged  judicial  review  proceedings  in  the
    Upper Tribunal challenging the age assessment of Kent  County  Council.
    In a judgment handed down on 10 April 2018, UTJ Canavan quashed the age
    assessment  decision  made  by  Kent  County  Council.   She   made   a
    declaration, based upon the evidence before her, that  the  appellant's
    date of birth was 15 March 2000.

 7. The effect of this decision is, of course, that at the  date  of  Judge
    Real's decision on 30 August 2017, the appellant was a  child  aged  17
    years and 5 months.

The UT Hearing

 8. The appeal was listed before me for a Case  Management  Hearing  on  19
    October 2018.

 9. At that hearing, Mr Howells who  represented  the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law by treating  the
    appellant as an adult in the light of the judicial finding in  the  age
    assessment challenge.  That, he  accepted,  had  implications  for  the
    judge's assessment of whether it was unreasonable or unduly  harsh  for
    the appellant to relocate to Kabul.

10. With the agreement of Ms  Lowis,  who  represented  the  appellant,  he
    invited me to treat the hearing as an error of law hearing and  to  set
    aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

Conclusions

11. In the light of that agreement and Mr Howell's  concession  that  there
    was a material error of law (based upon an error of fact  amounting  to
    an error of law) by treating the appellant as a child at  the  date  of
    hearing, I agreed to determine the error of law issue.

12. I am satisfied that there was a material error of law and that,  albeit
    through no fault of her own, the judge fell into error by taking  as  a
    material fact that the appellant was an adult at the date  of  hearing.
    His date of birth was, in fact, as the Upper Tribunal found in the  age
    assessment judicial review, 15 March 2000, such that  at  the  date  of
    hearing he was a child aged 17 years and 5 months.

13. It was agreed that the judge's findings in  relation  to  the  risk  on
    return of the appellant to his home area should stand.  It  was  agreed
    that  the  sole  outstanding  issue  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    international  protection  claim  was  whether  he  could  safely   and
    reasonably internally relocate  to  Kabul  having  regard  to  all  the
    circumstances, including his age and mental health.  It was also agreed
    that the appellant could continue to rely on  Art  8  at  the  remitted
    hearing.

Decision

14. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of law and  that
    decision is set aside.

15. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House) to  be
    heard by a judge other than Judge K Real in order to determine  whether
    the appellant can internally relocate to Kabul and whether  his  return
    would breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

16. To the extent I  have  already  indicated,  the  judge's  findings  are
    preserved that he would be at risk on return to his home area and  that
    he would be unable to obtain a sufficiency of protection.

17. In order to allow the appellant to obtain updated expert  evidence  and
    psychiatric evidence, the appeal should not be listed before 1 February
    2019.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                       Dated 26 October 2018
