
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05111/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 February 2018                  |On 5 April 2018                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     MAI
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown instructed by Citizens Advice Bureau
(Bolton).
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Price promulgated on 30 March 2017 in which the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  protection  and  human
        rights grounds.






Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on [  ]  1991  who  claimed
        international protection on the basis of his fear that if  returned
        to Iraq he will face persecution by IS on  account  of  an  imputed
        political opinion. The respondent did not find the appellants claim
        to be credible and refused his application for any form of leave to
        remain in the United Kingdom.
     3. Having  considered  the  evidence,  the  Judge  did  not  find  the
        appellant to be a credible witness noting that he provided two very
        different accounts regarding events leading up to  his  arrival  in
        the UK and his employment as a policeman. The Judge found different
        accounts  provided  in  his  screening  interview  and  his  asylum
        interview. In the screening interview the appellant claimed that he
        had worked for week as a policeman although in his asylum interview
        he claimed to have worked  for  nearly  15  months  before  he  was
        arrested by IS.
     4. The Judge found the appellants claim to have  been  released  after
        ten  months  of  torture  by  IS  to  be  implausible  against  the
        background information, especially in light of the extensive nature
        of violence  and  gross  violations  and  abuses  of  human  rights
        employed by this group. The Judge noted the appellant  also  failed
        to mention this aspect of his account in his screening interview.
     5. The Judge found the appellant's account of his escape from his home
        area after release by IS to be internally inconsistent  within  his
        asylum interview as was his alleged reasons for  fleeing  in  Iraq.
        The Judge found the appellant's account of his  journey  from  Iraq
        also inconsistent.
     6. The Judge makes findings  in  relation  to  documents  provided  to
        support the appellants claim at  [44  -  45].   The  appellant  had
        claimed three documents were sent to  him  whilst  he  was  in  the
        United Kingdom by his paternal uncle. The three documents are  said
        to be an Iraqi ID card, Jansiyya ID and Police  ID.  The  documents
        were sent to the National Document Fraud Unit  and  a  report  from
        this organisation has been provided concluding two of the documents
        were counterfeits and could not be relied upon  although  the  Unit
        was 'unable to conclude on the authenticity' of the police ID.  The
        Judge noted the only evidence to support  the  reliability  of  the
        documents is that of the appellant himself who was not found to  be
        a credible witness and who had not adduced any independent evidence
        to assert the reliability of  the  documents  despite  being  aware
        since 10 May 2016 that the authenticity of the same was  in  issue.
        The Judge did not,  therefore,  attach  any  weight  to  the  three
        documents.
     7. The Judge did not find the appellant was a police officer  who  was
        detained by IS and released, did not find the  appellant  to  be  a
        credible witness, did not attach any weight to his police  identity
        document, and did not find the appellant to be at greater  risk  of
        persecution on return to Iraq than any other civilian.
     8. The Judge noted it was not disputed the appellant originated from a
        contested area and went on to consider  the  case  of  AA  (article
        15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 when deciding if the appellant could
        be returned to Iraq  and  relocate  within  Iraq.  The  appellant's
        evidence is that he has a valid ID document and although the  Judge
        found the documents provided could not be relied  upon,  the  Judge
        found this did not mean the appellant is not able to obtain a valid
        ID document to facilitate his return.
     9. The Judge summarises his findings in relation to return to the  IKR
        in the following terms:

             50.  The Appellant does  not  originate  from  this  area  and
                  cannot be returned directly. However, I do not  find  that
                  it will be unduly harsh upon the Appellant to relocate  to
                  the IKR and travel via Baghdad. As a  Kurd  the  Appellant
                  will be entitled to  10  days  entry  into  the  IKR.  The
                  Appellant has not stated that he cannot get  the  relevant
                  documents required to facilitate his travel. Indeed, it is
                  his evidence that he already has valid identity documents.
                  I note that the Appellant does not speak  Arabic  and  has
                  not been to Baghdad. However, I  do  not  find  this  will
                  prevent him from travelling to Erbil by air from  Baghdad.
                  I have made a finding that he is not at an individual risk
                  from IS and that he is of no interest to  them.  He  is  a
                  young Kurdish  healthy  male,  who  has  shown  sufficient
                  resourcefulness to travel to the UK. The Appellant  claims
                  that he has already been refused entry into the IKR,  this
                  request was made on his behalf by the  Sheikh.  I  do  not
                  find the Appellant to be a  credible  witness,  I  do  not
                  accept this claim and do not find that the  Appellant  has
                  already been refused entry to the IKR. On balance, I  find
                  that the Appellant can reasonably be expected to  stay  in
                  the IKR.


             51.  I find the Appellant has not  discharged,  to  the  lower
                  burden  of  proof,  of  having  a  well-founded  fear   of
                  persecution for a Convention reason. I do  not  find  that
                  the Appellants removal would cause the United  Kingdom  to
                  be in breach of his obligations under the 1951 Convention.

    10. The Judge found it would not be unduly harsh for the  appellant  to
        relocate. In accordance with the finding the  appellant  would  not
        face a real risk return, his claim pursuant to Articles 2 and 3 was
        refused. The Judge notes the appellant did not raise an  article  8
        appeal.
    11. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  initially
        refused by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal but renewed  to
        the Upper Tribunal. Permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal on
        12 October 2017.



Error of law


The submissions

    12. Mr Brown, on behalf of the appellant, submitted that in relation to
        the errors identified by the Judge by reference  to  the  screening
        interview these matters should have been put to the appellant as he
        was not represented. It was argued that there  was  more  than  one
        interpretation of what was said  at  the  interview.  It  was  also
        submitted the Judge failed to give adequate  consideration  to  the
        Court of Appeal decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary  State  the  Home
        Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944 regarding a CSID and the feasibility
        of return.
    13. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Bates  noted  the  appellant
        had had legal representation until very late in the proceedings. Mr
        Bates also referred to a letter from the Citizens Advice Bureau  in
        Bolton dated 10 March 2016 setting out a response to the appellants
        asylum interview of 8 February 2016 submitting  corrections  having
        had the opportunity to discuss the interview with the appellant via
        an interpreter and requesting a copy of the screening interview  to
        verify answers given by their client at the substantive  interview.
        It was submitted  this  clearly  demonstrated  not  only  that  the
        appellant was represented at the time but also  that  these  issues
        were being investigated and therefore did not require the Judge  to
        discuss the matter again.
    14. Mr Bates submitted that the appellant at the hearing  denied  there
        are any discrepancies in the interview but was fully aware  of  the
        case against him.


My Findings

    15. The appellant has failed to  make  out  any  arguable  legal  error
        material to  the  decision  by  the  Judge  that  his  claim  lacks
        credibility. I do not find any procedural irregularity made out  in
        the way in which the Judge considered the evidence from all sources
        including the screening and asylum interview. Whilst the  screening
        interview is by its nature not the document in which  an  applicant
        sets out his claim in full detail it is reasonable to expect that a
        person answering questions  will  tell  the  truth.  The  screening
        interview occurred on 20 November 2015 at 13:20 hours a  day  after
        the appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom, indicating that he
        had  the  opportunity  for  some  rest   between   arrival,   being
        encountered, and the start of the asylum process.
    16. Discrepancies identified  by  the  Judge  between  the  appellant's
        accounts given in the interviews have not been shown  to  be  based
        upon a misunderstanding of the evidence.
    17. It is not made out that the Judge unfairly drew  adverse  inference
        from the failure to provide details at the screening interview.  It
        is clear that the appellant had the benefit of  legal  advice  from
        the Citizens Advice Bureau from the outset as copies of the initial
        directions of 18 July 2016 were sent to them  including  notice  of
        the First-tier Tribunal Case Management Review hearing. It  appears
        on the  documents  sent  that  it  was  only  from  the  notice  of
        directions sent on 23 December 2016  that  the  representatives  no
        longer appear, having apparently withdrawn. At  the  relevant  time
        when the evidence was being disclosed the appellant  therefore  had
        the benefit of legal representation. The CAB placed themselves back
        on record in relation to the appellant from 20 October 2017.
    18. In relation to the question of the  ability  of  the  appellant  to
        obtain documents to facilitate return to Iraq, the Judge noted  the
        appellants claim to have a valid Iraqi ID  which  is  the  document
        that has replaced the CSID, and which contains information relating
        to  the  holder  stored  in  a  chip,  as  a  means  of  not   only
        identification but also accessing services in Iraq.  The  appellant
        had claimed to have obtained documents from Iraq via an uncle.  The
        Judge found that he had the means to access documents to enable him
        to obtain either his ID card or a CSID; especially  having  contact
        with his family who already provided documents relied upon by him.
    19. I do not find the suggestion in the grant of  permission  that  the
        Judge was requiring corroboration to be made out. The  findings  do
        not support an assertion of  arguable  legal  error  by  the  Judge
        refusing  to  accept  the  appellants  claim  unless  corroborative
        evidence was provided which, it is accepted, may amount to arguable
        legal error.
    20. I do not find it made out that the appellant will not  have  access
        to the appropriate documents to enable him to return  to  Iraq  and
        gain access to Baghdad.
    21. The case  of  AA  (Iraq)  speaks  about  the  requirements  for  an
        individual to return to and settle in Baghdad. The Judge  does  not
        make a finding that the appellant will be able to settle in Baghdad
        and effectively finds that it would be unreasonable to  expect  him
        to internally relocate to Baghdad as he does not speak  Arabic  and
        has no experience of living in that city. It was  not  claimed  the
        appellant will have a sponsor. Such a finding is in accordance with
        the evidence.
    22. The Judge finds that the appellant can  relocate  to  the  IKR  via
        Baghdad. It is known  that  returnees  receive  a  grant  from  the
        Secretary of State which includes an  element  cover  the  cost  of
        their travel to their home area. The appellant  lived  in  an  area
        outside Mosul which is no longer under the control of IS  following
        their defeat by the Iraqi government and Kurdish forces.  The  case
        law reflects that those returning to Iraq are treated as  IDP's  by
        the  Iraqi  authorities  and  can  receive  a  grant  of  financial
        assistance on return too.
    23. This Tribunal has judicial knowledge of the fact there are  regular
        flights from Baghdad to the airports in the IKR for around $96-$108
        which would fall within the definition of the cost of  travel  form
        the point of return to the appellant's home area.
    24. As a Kurd it was not made out that the  appellant  will  be  denied
        access to the IKR especially as he will be able to prove he is  who
        he claims to be by the use of the documents used to facilitate  his
        return, such as his Iraq ID card or CSID which it is been found  he
        is able to obtain.
    25. The claim by the Appellant that he faces a real risk was  found  to
        lack credibility. It  is  clear  based  upon  the  appellant's  own
        evidence that he has family members in  Iraq  including  a  mother,
        sister, paternal uncle and cousin, indicating that there are family
        members, some who have provided assistance to in the past, who will
        be able to assist  in  his  return  and  reintegration  into  Iraqi
        society. It was not made out before the Judge  that  the  appellant
        will face destitution or a situation that entitles him to  a  grant
        of international protection.
    26. Whilst during the course of the hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal
        it appeared it may be arguable that the Judge failed to  adequately
        analyse the situation pursuant to  AA  (Iraq)  a  closer  and  more
        detailed  examination  of  the  findings,  evidence,  and   country
        information, does not establish any arguable legal  error  material
        to the decision to dismiss the appeal.
    27. Whilst the appellant may have a subjective fear of return to  Iraq,
        as noted by the Judge, such fear  has  not  been  made  out  to  be
        objectively well-founded. The desire for a more favourable  outcome
        or disagreement with  findings  made  do  not  arguably  amount  to
        arguable legal error, per se. The Court of Appeal has  reminded  us
        that the challenge in an appeal of this nature is to the  decision.
        That decision is to dismiss the appeal. The appellant fails to make
        out any arguable legal  error  in  such  a  finding  sufficient  to
        warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering with this decision.

Decision

    28. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    29. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 4 April 2018












