
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06017/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2020 By Remote Hearing  |On 11 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   M M G F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms C Z Besso, Counsel, instructed by BHT Immigration
                    Legal Services (Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the  respondent  (also  the
"claimant"). Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I
make this order because the  respondent  is  an  asylum  seeker  and  so  is
entitled to privacy.

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal of the respondent, hereinafter  "the
claimant", against the decision of the Secretary of State  on  16  May  2019
refusing him refugee status or any kind of  international  protection.   The
claimant had previously claimed  asylum  unsuccessfully.   He  was  born  in
January 2000 and claimed asylum in October  2016  when  he  arrived  in  the
United Kingdom.  He is a national of Egypt.

He claims that he fears persecution from the authorities in Egypt  and  from
family members of people his father was seen to have  wronged.   His  father
worked as  a  people  smuggler  and  people  drowned  as  a  result  of  his
activities.

There is an obvious and fundamental difficulty in the decision, namely  that
the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not identify the  Convention  reason  that
had to be present before the  appellant  could  be  treated  properly  as  a
refugee.

It is the claimant's case that if the decision is read carefully and  fairly
there is no material error.

I begin by considering exactly what the First-tier Tribunal decided.  It  is
necessary to state these findings in  some  detail  so  that  the  arguments
about them can be tested.

The Judge began by summarising the claimant's history and then  set  out  in
some detail standard paragraphs on the relevant law.

An important and development  in  his  case  was  the  provision  of  expert
evidence from Dr Joffe in a report dated 15 February 2019.

The Secretary of State's position was quite straightforward.  She said  that
the claimant had been disbelieved in his earlier application and these  that
was adverse finding was the starting point in this application.  The  expert
report did not add anything of significance and, in any event, the  claimant
was not in danger from the Authorities and so  internal  relocation  was  an
option.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge also had a report from a  psychologist,  a  Dr
Lisa Morrish, who found the claimant a consistent  historian  but  a  little
immature.

The claimant's case is summarised  at  paragraph  22  of  the  Decision  and
Reasons.  He said that his father had  not  told  him  about  his  smuggling
activities but he had worked out what his  father  had  done.   Someone  the
claimant's father relied on to inform him about  police  activity  had  been
arrested and the police had come to the family home looking for his  father.
 He had been slapped on two occasions by police officers.

In April 2016 many aspiring refugees were drowned.   The  claimant's  father
told him that the family  had  to  remove  to  Alexandria  which  they  did.
However the claimant and his brother did not dare to  leave  their  home  in
Alexandria  during  the  two  months  that  they  lived  there  because   of
threatening phone calls directed to their father and his children,  that  is
the claimant and his brother.  His father arranged for the  claimant  to  be
taken to Italy.

The claimant said he did not seek asylum in Italy because that is  not  what
people did and he understood there  to  be  "no  human  rights  there".   He
travelled to France and then Belgium and ended up  arriving  in  the  United
Kingdom by lorry.

It was his case that the Egyptian Authorities would target him and  use  him
as a hostage to make his father return and  face  the  wrath  of  the  state
and/or the relatives of the drowned victims.

He said he would have to perform military service  and  that  would  involve
giving his full identity  and  therefore  he  would  be  recognised  by  the
authorities as the son of a suspected criminal.

The claimant was supported by one Sharon Fisk, described  as  his  "personal
advisor" who helped him.  His caseworker, one Louise Crouch, made a  witness
statement saying she was aware that the claimant had difficulties  obtaining
documentary evidence.

The Judge referred to the "supplementary report"  of  Dr  Joffe  which  said
that the claimant's home village had been  acknowledged  as  the  "smuggling
capital of the Nile Delta" and supported the view  that  if  the  claimant's
father was in Libya it would be  difficult  to  obtain  supporting  evidence
from him.

The Judge's findings begin at paragraph 33 of the Decision and Reasons.   He
acknowledged there had been a previous decision and following, Devaseelan  v
SSHD [2002] UKAIT 00072, that there must be "good  reason"  to  depart  from
them.  In the first decision the claimant had been  criticised  for  failing
to  produce  documentary  evidence  to  support   his   father's   smuggling
activities and but in  the  present  appeal  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
claimant, who was 16 years old when then came to  the  United  Kingdom,  had
never promised to produce an arrest warrant but to  try  produce  an  arrest
warrant.

Dr Joffe had explained that it would be difficult to  obtain  such  evidence
from his father and there was other evidence about  the  difficulty  getting
help from Egyptian lawyers.  The Judge  said:  "his  failure  to  produce  a
warrant does not show that his father is not wanted by the Authorities."

Paragraph 34 might be particularly important.  There the Judge said:

  "Also important in the earlier credibility finding was, as  I  understand
  the position, the absence  of  any  objective  evidence  of  a  smuggling
  operation in the area at the time resulting in serious loss of life which
  could accord with the [claimant's] claim.  Information of  just  such  an
  operation in the same place and time has now been supplied  by  Dr  Joffe
  and has not been challenged by the respondent.  It was evidence which the
  [claimant] wanted an adjournment  to  obtain  at  the  previous  hearing.
  Faced with the same situation any Judge might well have decided as  then,
  since there was no reason to  suspect  that  an  adjournment  would  have
  produced a result, but the position now  is  different,  because  it  has
  produced evidence, albeit not  definitively  confirming  the  appellant's
  father's involvement."

At paragraph 35 the Judge went on to find it of  "equal  significance"  that
independent evidence of the drownings was:

  "...not produced at the earlier hearing, which would appear to show  that
  the [claimant] was not using a real incident he had chanced upon to  make
  an opportunistic false claim of his father's involvement.   He  specified
  place and date and a corresponding incident has now  emerged  which  fits
  with those facts.  In all of the circumstances, I find that  he  has  now
  established, to the lower standard of proof, that his father was involved
  in a smuggling operation which caused serious loss of life.   I  find  no
  reason to disagree with Dr Joffe's reasons for concluding that his father
  was likely to face serious repercussions not only from  the  Authorities,
  who had shown by recent legislation that they were clamping down on  such
  activities but also from the families of those who drowned.  Families  in
  that situation might well not distinguish between the father and the  son
  or might try to find the father through the  son.   Accordingly,  I  find
  that the [claimant] will face the real possibility  of  serious  harm  on
  return.  I find that the [claimant] will not be able safely to  relocate,
  because at his age he will  have  to  report  for  military  service  and
  provide his personal details.  With the personal characteristics set  out
  by Dr Wootton it would in any event be unduly harsh for  him  to  try  to
  live independently in the circumstances."

The Judge then said that for the avoidance of doubt he was not allowing  the
appeal under Article 3 for medical reasons but neither was he endorsing  the
Secretary of State's view about the  claimant's  resourcefulness.   Although
the claimant had managed to travel from Egypt to the United Kingdom  and  it
had been a long journey, he had been under the direction  of  an  agent  and
the Judge preferred "the evidence of those in whose care he has  been  since
his arrival" which must be a reference to  those  who  provided  social  and
medical care tending to suggest that he was vulnerable.

The Judge then allowed the appeal on asylum grounds.

The respondent's grounds are summarised as being "material  misdirection  of
law".

Unsurprisingly the first complaint in the grounds is  that  the  Judge  does
not identify a Convention reason.

At Point 3, the grounds state:

  "It is  further  submitted  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to  adequately
  reconcile the evidence provided to the Tribunal  by  Dr  Joffe  with  the
  negative credibility findings of  Judge  Iqbal  in  the  previous  appeal
  hearing.  Dr Joffe's evidence demonstrates  that  a  smuggling  operation
  took place, but it does not demonstrate, even to the lower standard, that
  the appellant or his family were involved."

The grounds also note that Judge Iqbal found the claimant unable to  provide
basic details about who he had feared  or  those  involved  in  the  capsize
incident which Judge Iqbal found undermined the claimant's case.

The grounds assert that the Judge failed to make any findings about  whether
the claimant would be able to relocate if,  contrary  to  the  Secretary  of
State's case, the claimant was at risk from enemies. It was said that  there
was no basis for finding that even if at risk in his home area the  claimant
would be at risk throughout Egypt.

The grounds also complain that "the Judge has  also  failed  to  address  or
reason  the  obvious  Section  8  considerations  and  the  fact  that   the
[claimant] travelled through a number of safe countries en route to  the  UK
without claiming asylum at the first opportunity to do  so,  despite  noting
it  at  [15].  This  is  clearly  a  reference  to  discreditable  behaviour
identified in  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.

      Mr  Lindsay's  arguments  before  me  were  closely  based  on   these
submissions.

However they produced a spirited repost from Ms Besso in the form of a  Rule
24 response which I outline below. This identifies the new  evidence  relied
on in support of the fresh claim.  It included a  psychologist's  report  by
Dr Morrish and a country  expert  report  by  Professor  Joffe  and  witness
statements from his solicitor and social worker.

The Rule 24 notice contends that, read in  context,  the  Convention  reason
was clearly being a membership of his family.

The Rule 24 notice asserts, with some justification, that  it  is  trite  to
suggest  that  membership  of  a  family  can  constitute  membership  of  a
particular social group and supports this assertion with a  reference  to  a
speech of Lord Hope of Craighead in SSHD v K. Fornah v SSHD [2006] UKHL 46.

Ms Besso then asserted at paragraph 7 that it  was  clearly  the  claimant's
case that he feared retribution because he was  a  member  of  a  particular
family.  It was unarguable that the Judge had decided that the claimant  was
at risk because he was his father's son and therefore  it  was  clear  to  a
fair minded reader that the Judge had found that he was at risk  because  he
was a member of a particular social group, namely his family.

The grounds then contend that there was no error in failing  to  follow  the
previous decision of the Tribunal.  What the Judge  had  done  was  look  at
what was different  in  the  evidence  and  show  how  it  could  support  a
different conclusion.

Dr Joffe had found evidence of a boat capsizing and drowning  at  least  240
people  in  April  2016  which  fitted  completely   with   the   claimant's
chronology.  Professor Joffe found it "highly possible" that the  claimant's
father was involved in that tragically unsuccessful smuggling operation.

The  notice  pointed  out  there  was  no  challenge  to  Professor  Joffe's
findings.

The Judge had also taken notice that there was evidence  that  he  had  been
trying or people had been trying on his behalf to  get  supporting  evidence
and he should not be disbelieved for failing to find an arrest warrant.

The Judge had dealt with the only inconsistency  in  the  core  story  which
related to how many times the claimant had been hit, whether it was once  or
twice and found that the claimant could be  believed.   The  grounds  submit
there was no material error in this approach.

The response to ground 4 is headed "Internal Relocation".  The  Judge  found
that the claimant would not be able to relocate safely because he will  have
to report to the authorities to carry out military  service.   The  Rule  24
notice contends that it is clear  how  the  Judge  had  concluded  that  the
claimant would come to the attention of the authorities and be at risk.

The grounds also refer rather carefully to the summary of Professor  Joffe's
evidence.

The Rule 24 notice contends that there is a difference  between  prosecution
and persecution (plainly there is).  It is not suggested that  the  claimant
has committed any offence, but it was Professor  Joffe's  evidence  that  it
was possible that the claimant had been put on a "watchlist" because he  was
his father's son which would involve him coming to light  in  the  event  of
his return to Egypt which could lead to an interview and that could lead  to
interrogation and ill-treatment.  This was an identified  risk  quite  apart
from anything that the relatives of the deceased might seek to do to him.

It was said there was no material failure in  not  setting  out  "Section  8
considerations".  The Judge clearly accepted evidence that the claimant  was
vulnerable had poor mental health and had been under the  direction  of  the
agent after leaving Egypt.  The Rule 24  notice  then  reminds  me  how  the
Court of Appeal in JT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2008]  EWCA  Civ  878  pointed  out
that Section 8 requires the listed factors to be  taken  into  account,  not
necessarily afforded weight.

In short, it was claimant's case that,  read  carefully  there  was  nothing
unacceptable in the decision.

In his oral submissions Mr Lindsay contended that a claimant's family  could
not be a particular social group because he  was  only  at  risk  while  the
father was "wanted" and that was not an immutable characteristic because  he
can cease to be  wanted,  either  by  reason  of  being  caught  or  of  the
authorities losing interest.

He then contended that there was a switch in the burden  of  proof  because,
by saying that the failure to producing the warrant  did  showing  that  the
father was not wanted, the  Judge  had  lost  sight  of  the  need  for  the
claimant to prove his case.

He also criticised the Judge for not at least entertaining  the  possibility
that the accident identified by Mr Joffe was coincidental and not  involving
the claimant's father at all.

He further maintained that there is no basis for finding that  the  claimant
would be at risk from the state because of his father's  activities.   There
was no real risk to him.

I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal clearly meant that the  claimant
would be at risk because of his family membership.  That does make sense  of
the decision and although the decision could and  really  should  have  been
clearer, I am entitled to construe the Decision and Reasons in  a  way  that
makes sense of it and that is clearly what the Judge meant.

I am also satisfied that the Judge gave proper reasons for parting from  the
earlier Tribunal's decision.   The  Judge  was  faced  with  was  additional
evidence from Dr Joffe. The Judge was entitled to consider it  high  quality
evidence, albeit of limited  relevance.   He  had  evidence  explaining  the
claimant's vulnerability, he had evidence explaining why  the  claimant  had
not been able to find the warrant that he had indicated that he  would.  The
claimant is mentally unstable and young. The  Judge  was  entitled  to  find
that he should not be held too tightly  to  his  promises  especially  about
matters he could not really understand.

Further, I find the Judge was perfectly entitled to decide as  he  did  that
Dr Joffe's report assisted him.  The point is  that  the  claimant,  without
relying on any background evidence whatsoever, had described a  particularly
unpleasant and  serious  incident  in  which  many  people  died.   It  was,
perhaps, surprising that something so serious was not noted anywhere but  it
was not in background evidence before the first tribunal.   Dr  Joffe  found
appropriate background evidence and the Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that
significant.  It may have been a complete coincidence.  It may have  been  a
very cynical ploy by the claimant to take advantage of a calamity  to  prove
his case, but not actually produce any evidence of that calamity  until  the
second time round to make it sound more credible  and  give  the  impression
that he had not just made it up a story to fit the background material,  but
that would require a very high degree of cynical dishonesty. The  Judge  was
perfectly entitled to reject  that  explanation  and  find  the  explanation
offered a credible one.

I do not regard the failure to set out "tick off" each point  identified  by
section 8 as discreditable as a  material  error  of  law.  Conduct  if  not
discreditable because it is mentioned in section  8  and  the  Decision  and
Reasons would not have been improved by  a  line  explaining,  for  example,
that by reason of his youth  and  mental  state  the  claimant  was  clearly
dependant on the advice of others  and  nothing  can  be  deduced  from  his
failure to claim asylum on his way to the United Kingdom.

There is no difficulty with the finding that the claimant would be  at  risk
from family members in his home village.

Neither is there any difficulty with the finding that the claimant would  be
noticed by the authorities in the event of his return and would  be  noticed
wherever he chose to resettle in Egypt so if  he  were  at  risk  relocation
would not be an answer from the state.

I am less comfortable with the conclusion that  the  claimant  would  be  at
risk from the state because of the activities of his father.  It  really  is
rather a sweeping claim from western standards to  think  that  anyone,  and
particularly a young man who was not said to be in  any  way  involved  with
his father's criminality, risked serious ill-treatment by the state  in  its
efforts to find the father.

I have revisited the Judge's findings on this point to see  if  I  can  make
more sense of the Decision and Reasons.  The claimant said in his  statement
that the police came on about seven occasions to visit the family  home  and
were violent towards him but he insisted  that  he  was  only  struck  twice
during one visit.

The high watermark of the appellant's case is, I find, at  paragraph  97  of
Mr Joffe's report.  I begin by setting out the opening paragraph.  He says:

  "Even though [the claimant] was merely a minor and, according to his  own
  account, unaware of his father's true activities, it is  not  necessarily
  the case that the security Authorities in Egypt would accept this.  There
  is, therefore,  a  considerable  risk  that  he  would  be  arrested  and
  interrogated about the 2016 drownings as a result, especially if, in  the
  intervening years, publicity will  have  made  them  aware  of  what  had
  happened.  The  evidence  of  recent  years  has  demonstrated  that  the
  authorities are becoming more, not less, vindictive  towards  any  person
  they perceive as threatening the security of the state.  Indeed, if  [the
  claimant] were to be returned to Egypt and his claims about his  father's
  activities are considered to be true,  he  could  then  be  subjected  to
  serious ill-treatment, as the police might well assume that he must  have
  been aware of them and even complicit in them.  He could well be arrested
  and then could face the danger of severe ill-treatment as  the  citations
  below made clear."

The citations below are  quotations  from  various  reports,  including  the
Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labour Report for 2017 on Egypt  which
refers  to  a  "spike  in  enforced  disappearances,  alleging   authorities
increasingly relied on this tactic to  intimidate  critics."   It  says  how
proper process was not followed and many were detained  in  police  stations
and then places not on official registers.  Mr Joffe then refers to  torture
being "widely used in  Egypt  police  stations  and  prisons"  and  gives  a
reference for that from the same  report.   The  police  were  described  as
corrupt so people could be released easily if the right people  were  known.


This I find highlights, rather than illuminates the difficulty.  If  I  read
this literally then, with respect Mr Joffe, is just plain wrong.  He  begins
by saying that it was "not necessarily the case" that  the  security  forces
in Egypt would accept that the appellant as a minor would  not  be  involved
in his father's activities and then  moves  on  seamlessly  to  say  "it  is
'therefore, a considerable risk that he would be arrested  and  interrogated
about  the  2016  drownings  as  a  result'".   The  word   "therefore"   is
inappropriate.  The fact that something is not necessarily  the  case,  does
not lead seamlessly to the conclusion that there is a considerable  risk  of
ill-treatment because the person was assumed to be involved.

I note that the claimant was born in the year 2000.  He would have been  16
at the time of the drownings or thereabouts.  I can see why it might not  be
thought that  he  was  unconnected.   Further  the  evidence  supporting  Mr
Joffe's  conclusion  is  not  compelling.   Certainly  it  would  support  a
suggestion that a person seen as an opponent of the authorities might be  in
for a very difficult time, but it is  not  really  evidence  that  a  person
related to a person engaged in criminal activities would  be  a  target  for
ill treatment.

However Mr Joffe is an expert in the region.  He is not saying these  things
for no reason and it is clearly his opinion  that  there  is  a  risk.   His
report should not be construed as statute.  It is quite  clear  to  me  that
this is the part of the report that  the  Judge  had  in  the  mind  and  it
supported his conclusion.

I am not allowed the luxury of indecision.  I find on a proper analysis  the
First-tier Tribunal's decision, the Judge has accepted that  the  claimant's
father was involved in people smuggling  activities  and  that  this  is  an
activity seen as hostile  by  the  Government  of  Egypt.   Contrary  to  an
earlier finding and based on further evidence the Judge accepted that  there
was a particularly ugly and serious incident  when  a  lot  of  people  were
drowned.  The Judge accepted that  this  would  cause  outrage  amongst  the
relatives of those who died and they may not be at all  forgiving  and  also
that the state of Egypt would be concerned  because  it  does  not  want  to
facilitate people smuggling.  The  Judge  accepted  that  the  claimant  has
attracted the attention of the authorities because he was "roughed  up"  (my
phrase but I think it catches the meaning) during  a  police  visit  to  his
home and the Judge  has  accepted  that  the  claimant  could  still  be  of
interest in return and could find himself in trouble  for  all  the  reasons
given.  The Judge has equated this possibility with a real risk.  I  am  not
sure that that is the only permissible reading of Dr  Joffe's  evidence  and
it is something Dr Joffe might want to think about rather  carefully  if  he
gives evidence again because he could have been  clearer.   Nevertheless,  I
find that the Judge was entitled to give the evidence the  meaning  that  he
did and was therefore entitled to allow the appeal for the  reason  that  he
did and there is no error of law.

It follows I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law. The Secretary of State's  appeal
is dismissed.


                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 9 November 2020                |

