


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/06215/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11 May 2017                  |On 12 May 2017                  |
|Prepared on 11 May 2017         |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    T. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rogers, Solicitor, Immigration Advice Centre
                       Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally  and  claimed
           asylum on 10 December 2016 after arrest.  That  application  was
           refused on 3 June  2016,  and  the  Appellant's  appeal  to  the
           Tribunal was heard on 10 October 2016 and dismissed by  decision
           of First tier Tribunal Judge Turnock promulgated on  21  October
           2016.
        2. The Appellant was granted permission to  appeal  on  18  January
           2017 by Upper Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy  on  the  basis  it  was
           arguable the Judge had failed to provide  adequate  reasons  for
           her decision. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 notice in  response
           to that grant of permission on 8  February  2017  in  which  she
           argued the Judge had given full reasons for  his  findings  upon
           the disputed issues of fact. Thus the matter comes before me.


      Error of Law?
        3. When the appeal was called on for hearing before  me  Ms  Rogers
           (who had very recently been instructed to  act)  accepted  quite
           candidly that the challenge  advanced  in  the  grounds  had  no
           merit. She accepted that the  correct  burden  and  standard  of
           proof had been applied by the Judge to the evidence before  him,
           and that adequate reasons had been  given  for  the  conclusions
           that were reached. I was invited to dismiss  the  appeal,  since
           permission must have been given in error.
        4. In these circumstances, having considered the matter for myself,
           the  Appellant  should  never  have  made  the  application  for
           permission to appeal, and  permission  should  never  have  been
           granted. The Judge did not make any material error of law in his
           decision to allow the appeal, and that decision must stand.





   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  21
      October 2016 did not involve the making of an  error  of  law  in  the
      decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to  be  set
      aside and remade. That decision is accordingly confirmed.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 11 May 2017


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 11 May 2017
