
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/06812/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 September 2018                          |On 4 October 2018            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                    A E B
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Sesay, of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. The appellant is a Moroccan national born on 27  August  1989.  He
          challenges the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lal,
          promulgated on  27  June  2018,  dismissing  his  deportation  and
          asylum/human rights appeal. He is a visitor overstayer whereabouts
          has a conviction for robbery in January 2018 for which he received
          a 14-month prison sentence. His claim is that he is gay  and  that
          his father and uncle attacked him when they  discovered  this  and
          that he lost a tooth as a result of this.




       2. The complaint made by the appellant is that he  should  have  been
          granted an adjournment of the hearing listed  for  26  June  2018.
          Although for the pre-hearing review listed for 19 June  2018,  the
          appellant's representatives' written response asked for the appeal
          to proceed to an oral hearing after the  review  hearing,  it  was
          also indicated that an adjournment request would be made.


       3. A written application was duly made, dated 18 June 2018, but  does
          not appeal to have reached the Tribunal by 19 June 2018  when  the
          pre-hearing review  was  conducted.  The  representatives'  letter
          seeks an adjournment to enable the appellant to obtain a  Rule  35
          medical report and copy of his medical records "within six weeks".
          The evidence was to confirm the loss of  a  tooth,  the  appellant
          having claimed that his father had head butted him in Morocco.  It
          was also stated that the appellant wished to obtain evidence  from
          his former  gay  partners  in  the  UK  and  from  his  sister  in
          "Albania". A request was also made for the  respondent  to  adduce
          evidence of the appellant's conviction  and  the  remarks  of  the
          sentencing judge. It was also stated that the representatives  had
          been instructed on 8 May 2018 and there was insufficient  time  to
          prepare for the hearing. The application was refused  on  20  June
          2018 on the basis that the appellant had had two years  to  gather
          together his evidence. The application was renewed at the  hearing
          but refused by the judge who  considered  that  the  Tribunal  was
          capable of determining the credibility of the claim in relation to
          the claim of violence in Morocco from  his  family  (at  paragraph
          10).


       4. Permission to appeal against the determination of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal was granted by Judge Keane on 26 July 2018 on  the  basis
          that there may have been a procedural irregularity in refusing  to
          grant the adjournment request. The matter then came before  me  on
          24 September 2018.


       5. The Hearing


       6. I heard submissions from the parties. The appellant  is  still  in
          custody and was not present. A full note of the submissions is set
          out in my Record of Proceedings.


       7. Mr Sesay argued that the judge  had  been  wrong  to  prevent  the
          appellant from obtaining evidence in support  of  his  appeal.  He
          intended to obtain evidence from his former partners in the UK and
          from his family in  Morocco.  The  reference  to  Albania  in  the
          adjournment request letter was a mistake. The  appellant  suffered
          from anxiety and depression. The judge had also erred in attaching
          weight to the delay in making an asylum claim. The  appellant  had
          explained he was not aware of the asylum process and  that  was  a
          reasonable  explanation.  Had  the   appellant   been   given   an
          opportunity to present his evidence and ventilate his  claim,  the
          outcome might have been different.


       8. Mr Lindsay responded. He stated that the  information  before  the
          judge was that evidence from Albania was sought; that was now said
          not to be the case. There was no reason why evidence from  the  UK
          which was also sought cd not be obtained quicker.  The  judge  had
          considered the appellant's explanation for the delay in making  an
          asylum claim but had not found it to be credible.  Strong  reasons
          had been given for the rejection of  the  claim;  other  than  the
          delay there had been a complete  failure  to  mention  the  police
          visit to the house. Evidence as to his sexuality would not, in any
          event, be of probative value. The appellant's conviction showed  a
          dishonest character. The judge had been well placed to assess  the
          credibility of the claim. The Rule 35 report would only have shown
          that he had lost a tooth. That could not be material to the claim.




       9. Mr Sesay replied. He submitted that the test was  whether  it  had
          been fair to proceed in the absence of the evidence the  appellant
          hoped to adduce. The appellant had mentioned his relationships and
          evidence to confirm that would be relevant. He had also claimed to
          have lost a tooth when attacked by his father.  The  reference  to
          Albania as a source of information was a mistake.


      10. That completed submissions. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I
          reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.


      11. Discussion and Conclusions


      12. I have considered all the evidence before me and have  had  regard
          to the submissions made.


      13. The issue before me is whether or not the  appellant  had  a  fair
          hearing. Mr Sesay fairly accepted that the appellant had  been  in
          the UK for a prolonged period prior to the making  of  his  asylum
          claim. Clearly, he would have  had  ample  opportunity  to  obtain
          supporting evidence, although his claim is that he was  not  aware
          of the asylum procedure. I accept that the appellant did not  have
          legal representation until some 6-7 weeks prior to the hearing and
          I also accept the appellant himself may not have appreciated  what
          evidence was required until then. It is also the case that he  was
          in custody when the claim was made and when he was interviewed and
          indeed  remains  incarcerated.  Whether  it  is   meritorious   or
          fabricated  is  another  matter,  but  I  agree  with  Mr  Sesay's
          submissions that he ought to have been given the chance to present
          all  possible  evidence  before  that  decision  was  made.    The
          reference in the grounds to the appellant being told that the Rule
          35 report was due in  just  a  few  days  is  unsupported  by  any
          evidence and contradicts the claim made by the representatives  in
          the adjournment letter of six weeks being needed. I was  not  told
          if it was subsequently adduced. However, whether it was due  in  a
          few days or a few weeks is not really material  to  the  issue  of
          whether it should have been awaited.


      14. I also accept that the reference to Albania in the written request
          for an adjournment was  a  careless  mistake  by  the  appellant's
          representatives. It should not have happened and suggests  a  lack
          of care, but the appellant should not be penalised for that.


      15. For these reasons, I conclude that the request for an  adjournment
          should have been granted. Without the evidence identified  in  the
          letter, the appellant did not have a fair  hearing,  however  weak
          the claim may have been. The determination is  unsustainable,  and
          the decision is set aside.


      16. Decision


      17. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law. The  decision  is  set
          aside. It shall be remade  by  another  judge  of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal at a date to be arranged.


      18. Anonymity


      19. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.

    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 1 October 2018


