
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06467/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 June 2019                      |On 24 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                              Mr Mehari Selasie
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Majid, Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Ethiopia.   He  claimed  asylum  on  the
    basis that he had come to the adverse attention of the authorities when
    in Ethiopia by virtue of his active involvement with Patriotic Ginbot 7
    (PG7) which he said he joined in February  2015,  and  his  arrest  and
    detention and ill- treatment for several months until  his  brother-in-
    law secured his release by payment of  a  bribe.   The  appellant  also
    based his claim on his sur place activities in the UK which he  claimed
    involved active participation in PG7 activities.  PG7,  it  is  not  in
    dispute, was at the date of hearing a proscribed terrorist organisation
    in Ethiopia.

2.    When  the  respondent  refused  his  protection  claim  in  May   2018
    (assessing him not to be  credible),  he  appealed.   His  appeal  came
    before Judge Devlin of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT).   In  a  decision
    sent on 4 March 2019 Judge Devlin  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.
    Although not for precisely the same reasons, he found  the  appellant's
    account of adverse experiences in Ethiopia not credible and  considered
    that he had not shown that his sur place activities  were  specifically
    connected with PG7 and that his sur place activities were contrived and
    would be viewed as such by Ethiopian agents conducting surveillance  of
    political oppositionists in the UK.

3.   The appellant's grounds of appeal fall into two groupings

    1)   those attacking the judge's assessment of the appellant's  claimed
         experiences in Ethiopia; and

    2)   those assailing  his  assessment  of  the  appellant's  sur  place
         activities.

4.   In relation to  1),  it  is  said  first  of  all  that  there  was  an
    inadequacy of reasons.  I cannot think of a more  inaccurate  criticism
    of this decision which, if anything, demonstrates a surfeit of reasons.
     There is no content given to this allegation in any event.

5.   Also in relation to 1) it is said that in paragraphs 106-126 the  judge
    failed to take material matters into account, namely that the appellant
    had said that when the authorities raided his home they  did  not  find
    any incriminating evidence, but the judge was clearly aware  that  that
    was his evidence and gave sound reasons for finding unsatisfactory  the
    appellant's explanation for why his wife had not  fallen  under  active
    suspicion of being a PG7 supporter.

6.   It is further said that the discrepancies identified at paragraphs 141-
    152 was not raised at the hearing, but that  is  immaterial  since  the
    judge accepted that there were  plausible  explanations  for  them  and
    there is nothing to indicate that he attached any significant weight to
    them.

7.   It is also said that in paragraph 167 that the judge  drew  an  adverse
    inference against the appellant for failing to  explicitly  state  what
    the criteria were for joining PG7 as a member in Ethiopia,  but  it  is
    clear from paragraphs 166-167  that  the  appellant  was  afforded  the
    opportunity of providing a satisfactory explanation at the hearing  and
    failed to provide one.

8.   It is submitted that the judge's reasoning  at  paragraphs  172-175  is
    unclear.  Although paragraph 172 is  opaque,  the  general  purport  of
    these paragraphs is clear: reasonably the appellant could have, but had
    failed to, produce evidence confirming his PG7 activities  and  adverse
    experiences in Ethiopia.

9.   The grounds take issue with the judge's references  to  'negative'  and
    'positive' 'pull' factors, but these references were simply aspects  of
    the judge's entirely proper evaluation of  factors  in  favour  of  the
    appellant and factors against.  Nothing about this exercise indicated a
    failure to apply the low standard of proof.

10.   The  appellant's  second   main   grouping   of   criticisms   alleges
    mistreatment by the judge of the appellant's evidence in support of his
    claim to have become a member of the  PG7  in  the  UK.   However,  the
    judge's reasons for finding  this  evidence  unreliable  were  entirely
    within the range of reasonable responses.  There was no failure to take
    account of the appellant's evidence regarding this.

11.  The grounds argue  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  account  of  the
    appellant's oral evidence  that  PG7  applied  different  criteria  for
    membership in the UK than it did in Ethiopia (where it required one  to
    have been a supporter for one year).  That misrepresents  the  gravamen
    of paragraph 292 which is that the appellant was entirely unclear about
    the subject.

12.  The grounds as amplified by Mr Majid contend that on the basis  of  the
    judge's own findings the judge should have  found  that  the  appellant
    would have been identified as a PG7 member  or  supporter  through  his
    active involvement  in  a  PG7  meeting  in  December  2017  and  at  a
    demonstration in Manchester on 3 March 2018.   These  criticisms  muddy
    the waters.  The judge's findings were  very  precisely  summarised  at
    paragraphs 295-305:

         "295.    I have noted that the only independent evidence  that  the
             Appellant has produced in support of his claim  to  have  been
             admitted to membership  of  PG7  in  the  United  Kingdom,  is
             comprised in the emails of 20 June 2018 and  31 August  2018;
             the receipt; and the ticket.

         296. I have identified multiple shortcomings in this evidence.

         297. Thus, there is nothing on the face of the emails to link  them
             with the Appellant, other  than  the  forename  "Mehari".  The
             emails  give  the   address   of   the   recipient/sender   as
             "mehariteferi2017@[~].com". The Appellant's  name  is  "Mehari
             Selasie" and  not  "Mehari  Teferi".  The  Appellant  did  not
             produce any independent evidence to show that his  grandfather
             was  named  "Mehari  Teferi"  or  that   the   email   address
             "mehariteferi2017@[~].com" had been registered  in  his  name.
             Moreover, he failed, without satisfactory explanation, to make
             any  meaningful  attempt  to  explain  why   he   had   chosen
             "mehariteferi2017@[~].com" as his email address.

         298. As regards the receipt, this was not  formally  authenticated;
             no one attended the hearing to speak to it; and, the Appellant
             failed to produce any evidence of provenance,  so  that  there
             was no proof that they did not originate  from  the  Appellant
             himself.

         299. The ticket  is  incapable  of  providing  direct  evidence  of
             membership.

         300. I have noted that (a) the Appellant has failed to produce  any
             independent evidence to show what the criteria for  membership
             of PG7 in the UK are, or  that  he  met  them;  and,  (b)  his
             answers in cross-examination with regards to how he proved  to
             PG7 that he met the criteria  for  membership,  are  far  from
             satisfactory.

         301. These considerations, taken cumulatively,  exercising  a  very
             strong  negative  pull.  There  is  nothing   to   effectively
             counteract that pull. The consequence  is  that  I  cannot  be
             satisfied, even to the  lower  standard  of  proof,  that  the
             Appellant  made  an  application  for,  or  was  admitted  to,
             membership of PG7 in the UK.

         302. I have noted the evidence produced by the Appellant in support
             of his claim to have attended a demonstration  in  Manchester,
             organised by PG7, on 3 March 2018. I have also noted that the
             Home Office Presenting Officer  did  not  challenge  the  said
             evidence or dispute that (a) an anti-government  demonstration
             took place in Manchester on 3 March 2018;  (b)  the  Appellant
             appears to have played  a  prominent  role  in  it;  and,  (c)
             footage of the demonstration was uploaded on to  the  ESAT  TV
             and Andnet Ethiopia websites.

         303. In those circumstances, I am satisfied, albeit  to  the  lower
             standard of proof, that the Appellant played a prominent  role
             in an anti-government demonstration in Manchester, on 3  March
             2018, and that footage of the demonstration  was  uploaded  on
             the ESAT TV and Andnet Ethiopia websites.

         304. However, I have noted that there is nothing in the independent
             evidence  produced  by  the  Appellant,  to  show   that   the
             demonstration was organised by PG7. Since,  (a)  it  ought  to
             have been a relatively simple matter to have proved that  this
             was the case; and, (b) the Appellant has previously been found
             to be generally incredible, I am not prepared  to  accept  his
             unsubstantiated assertions in this regard.  I  therefore  find
             that I cannot be satisfied, even  to  the  lower  standard  of
             proof, that the demonstration of 3 March 2018,  was  organised
             by PG7.

         305.  Likewise,  I  am  not  prepared  to  accept  the  Appellant's
             unsubstantiated claim that  he  attended  a  demonstration  in
             Trafalgar square on  7  February  2018,  organised  by  PG7  -
             particularly since (a) he failed to  produce  any  independent
             evidence of the demonstration or his attendance; (b)  he  made
             no mention of it in the Asylum Interview of 4 April 2018;  and
             (c) his representatives made no mention of it in their  letter
             of 5 April 2018."

13.  The judge's finding that the appellant had not shown  he  was  involved
    in the PG7 meeting in December 2017 was amply  and  properly  reasoned.
    The judge's finding that, albeit it would be  known  to  the  Ethiopian
    authorities, that the appellant had played an active role in the  March
    2018 demonstration in Manchester, this would not put him at  risk,  was
    properly supported by sound reasons, in particular  that  the  evidence
    only established that this was an anti-government protest,  not  a  PG7
    event;  that  the  appellant's  general  sur  place  involvements  were
    opportunistic; and that the Ethiopian authorities  who  were  known  to
    have a sophisticated system of monitoring in the UK, would perceive the
    appellant for what he was, i.e. not a genuine political activist.

14.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly his decision should stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 10 July 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


