
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06817/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 June 2019                      |On 2 July 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                Muhammad [H]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  brought  with  the  permission  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  promulgated
    on 21 March 2019, dismissing the appeal  of  the  appellant  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State on 4 July 2017 refusing  him  asylum
    and/or leave to remain  on  human  rights  grounds.   Counsel  for  the
    appellant in the First-tier  Tribunal  made  clear  that  he  was  only
    relying on  "private  and  family  life"  grounds  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and reasons appropriately made findings limited  to
    that ground. The protection claims were withdrawn before the First-tier
    Tribunal. There is no need for anonymity.

 2. At the hearing before us the appellant repeated orally  an  application
    that had been made administratively and refused for the hearing  to  be
    adjourned.  He had been represented  by  solicitors  but  he  had  lost
    confidence in them and wanted the appeal adjourned in order  to  obtain
    fresh representation.  He had contacted a different firm of  solicitors
    who had tried to obtain some kind of public funding but were  not  able
    to arrange it time.  The appellant explained to us some of his  reasons
    for  being  dissatisfied  with  the  former  solicitors  who  had  been
    criticised by the First-tier Tribunal Judge for poor  preparation.   Be
    that as it may, they are an experienced firm who  represent  appellants
    in this Tribunal frequently and it was under the  guidance  of  Counsel
    they had instructed that permission to appeal was granted.

 3. The appellant complained that he was not legally qualified and did  not
    feel able to present the appeal. He is  not  a  lawyer  but  he  is  an
    educated man. He had adduced evidence showing that he has been studying
    philosophy at Nottingham Trent University and his exam results put  him
    in the upper second division.  The essence of the appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the First-tier  Tribunal  should  have  adjourned  the
    hearing in Birmingham.  It is unthinkable that the  appellant  did  not
    contemplate the possibility of the renewed adjournment  application  to
    the Upper Tribunal being refused and indeed he indicated to us that his
    solicitors, who are not on the record, had encouraged him to attend  to
    try to get an adjournment.  We had regard not only to the interests  of
    the appellant, which lay in the appeal being adjourned, but also to the
    fact there was no satisfactory reason  to  think  that  public  funding
    would ever be extended to the appellant in this case, to the fact  that
    the solicitors who have been criticised before us had not been  invited
    to respond to the criticisms and also to the overall merits of the case
    as they appeared to be from reading the papers.  We remembered as  well
    that adjourning this appeal would not only waste time today  but  would
    delay other appellant's cases  being  heard  as  the  list  had  to  be
    adjusted to accommodate the resumed hearing. Having regard  to  all  of
    these factors, it was our view that the balance of justice required the
    case to continue.

 4. For the record, Mr Lindsay opposed the application.

 5. We had at the forefront of our minds the duty to act  fairly  but  that
    requires fairness to the parties and other Tribunal users,  not  simply
    the wishes of the appellant.

 6. We refused the application

 7. Although the appellant appeared a little distressed when he was told of
    our decision he quickly  composed  himself  and  was  clearly  able  to
    present his case in a way that was articulate and which showed at least
    some understanding of immigration law.  He certainly  appreciated  that
    people relying on Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights
    can in some circumstances present a strong case if they have  lived  in
    the United Kingdom for more than half of their lives and he  was  quick
    to correct Mr Lindsay who made an inconsequential slip about  the  time
    in which an application  for  judicial  review  can  be  brought.   The
    appellant is not a lawyer but neither is he ignorant or timid.

 8. As Mr Lindsay pointed out  correctly  in  his  submissions,  there  are
    really two lines of attack on the First-tier Tribunal's decision.   The
    first  is  the  procedural  challenge  asserting  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was wrong  not  to  adjourn.  That  is  the  point  that  most
    concerned the First-tier Tribunal Judge who gave permission, but  there
    is also a challenge based on the underlying merit  of  the  appellant's
    case that he is entitled to remain on human rights  grounds  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was said to have disregarded.

 9. The appellant was provided with a copy  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and took the opportunity of the time  given  to  read  it.  He
    commented on almost every paragraph. We have not found it necessary  or
    desirable to consider here every point made, not least because some  of
    the points that concerned him were resolved by an  explanation  offered
    at the hearing. The appellant presented as someone  willing  to  listen
    and able and inclined to understand that some matters had been resolved
    correctly by the First-tier Tribunal, even if  in  the  absence  of  an
    explanation he reasonably thought otherwise.

10. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He was born  on  26  November
    1995 and the records show that he claims to  have  entered  the  United
    Kingdom with a "child accompanied" visa.  The  appellant  was  given  a
    "child accompanied" visa in February 2008. He says that he  arrived  in
    March 2008.  There is no independent evidence to confirm that claim but
    plainly it would be wholly consistent  with  a  visa  being  issued  in
    February 2018 and expiring in August 2008.

11. The appellant's father applied for leave to remain in November 2012. He
    named the appellant as a dependant.  That application was refused on  9
    July 2013 and he was served with a notice of his liability for removal.
     On 15 December 2015 he claimed asylum and it was that application that
    eventually led to the decision complained of.

12. We deal first with the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  refuse  to
    adjourn the hearing.

13. As  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  Decision  and  Reasons  recorded,  the
    application for adjournment was based  on  the  unavailability  of  two
    witnesses. They were the appellant's aunt and the  appellant's  father.
    The reasons for non-attendance were rather vague.  In the case  of  the
    aunt there was medical evidence that she was unable  to  give  evidence
    because of memory problems.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  described
    this as being "not of particular assistance".  This is  mainly  because
    there was no prognosis. There is no point in adjourning for  a  witness
    to regain good health unless there is some reason to believe  that  she
    will recover in a reasonable time.

14. The appellant's father had been involved in a  road  traffic  accident.
    That is clearly unpleasant news but the accident was some weeks  before
    the hearing  and  there  was  no  medical  evidence  to  say  that  the
    appellant's father was not fit to attend.

15. Further, both the aunt and the father had made statements.

16. In the case of the aunt the evidence concerned the relationship between
    her and the appellant. It was described  as  close  and  akin  to  that
    between mother and  son.  The  appellant's  mother  has  mental  health
    problems. These claims may well be correct but even if the relationship
    was  strong  enough  to  attract  the  protection  appropriate  to  the
    relationship between a  parent  and  child  it  would  be  relationship
    between parent and adult child and that is rarely very  significant  in
    an article 8 balancing exercise.

17. In the case of  the  appellant's  father  the  evidence  concerned  the
    private life that the appellant had established in the United  Kingdom.
    The  Presenting  Office  confirmed,  unremarkably,  that  he  did   not
    challenge that claim that private life had been  established.  Further,
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge stood down the case for some two hours to
    give the appellant's father an opportunity to  attend.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge noted in her Decision and Reasons that the  Tribunal  is
    used to accommodating people who have particular needs. We assume  that
    this would be understood by the appellant's then representatives.

18. There were no additional statements from these  witnesses  to  indicate
    that they had anything of value  to  say  that  had  not  already  been
    disclosed.

19. We do not wish to trivialise the grounds of appeal because it obviously
    mattered very much to the appellant, but we can see no fault whatsoever
    in the decision not to adjourn.  The Judge did not  just  rush  in  and
    refuse an adjournment but considered its utility and had regard for the
    evidence that had been disclosed and made findings which, as far as  we
    can see,  were  broadly  consistent  with  the  evidence  that  was  in
    statement form.  There is nothing in this criticism.

20. The second line of attack was that the First-tier Tribunal should  have
    had more regard to the difficulties the appellant claimed  to  face  in
    the event of his trying to re-establish himself in Pakistani society.

21. Clearly the appellant has not lived there as an adult and has not lived
    there for many years.  It would be foolish not to expect  him  to  have
    some difficulty.  Further, it was uncertain what support he would  get.
    The case had to proceed on the  basis  that  he  had  no  relatives  or
    friends in Pakistan because there was no evidence to the contrary.

22. However, the First-tier Tribunal determined that the appellant was able
    to speak  Urdu,  which  is  the  language  commonly  spoken  throughout
    Pakistan.  That finding was based on the appellant's own evidence  that
    he used Urdu to speak to his mother and father in the home and also his
    having obtained an A-level in Urdu at grade A.  Before us the appellant
    dismissed the value of a grade A A-level by reference to his grade A at
    GCSE level in French, pointing out that although he was able to satisfy
    the examiners he did not consider himself  able  to  speak  the  French
    language and the advanced level examination  was  not  that  much  more
    challenging.

23. We have considered this. The appellant is an intelligent man and we are
    well-able to understand that passing an examination  at  A-level  is  a
    very different thing from having fluency in a language.   However,  the
    fact he is able to pass  an  exam  at  A-level  and  at  a  high  grade
    indicates that he has some aptitude for learning the  language.  It  is
    his case that he has some knowledge of it.  The Judge did  not  suggest
    that it would be an easy or seamless task, but she was entitled to find
    as she did that the appellant could speak some Urdu, and more  than  he
    was prepared to admit, and that this was a sufficiently fluent  command
    of the language for language not to be a barrier to integration.

24. We do not say that the appellant was dishonest  before  us.   It  is  a
    matter of nuance and inference but it is quite clear that the Judge was
    entitled to conclude as she did.

25. The focus of the criticisms before us was on the Judge's  consideration
    of the appellant's claim that he could not integrate  into  society  in
    Pakistan.  We remind ourselves that he had not  pursued  an  appeal  on
    asylum grounds.  The appellant explained to us that he had lived in the
    United Kingdom for nearly half his life.  He had been educated  in  the
    United Kingdom and he had adopted the values of the society in which he
    grew up and that his attitudes towards the role of  women  in  society,
    towards gay people, towards the monotheism and  exclusivity  of  Islam,
    would be at odds with many people in Pakistan and he felt that he would
    be unable to integrate as a consequence.

26. Nevertheless, he identified himself as a Muslim.  He did not present as
    a man who had, for example, a conscientious  objection  to  identifying
    himself as a follower of a particular religion or someone who would  be
    conscientiously opposed to  visiting  a  Muslim  place  of  worship  or
    observing culturally expected religious practices.

27. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was clearly aware of the essence  of  the
    appellant's case because she refers in  more  than  one  place  to  the
    appellant's values before concluding, as she does at paragraph 32, that
    he  "holds   views   which   could   be   collectively   described   as
    'westernised'". It is obvious from reading the rest of the Decision and
    Reasons that that is a description that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    basically accepted.

28. The Judge did not accept that a person with westernised views could not
    establish himself in Pakistan.  At paragraph 39  the  Judge  considered
    some background material but at paragraph 40 concluded from  an  expert
    report that there is open debate on subjects in Pakistan  and  referred
    to workshops about religious tolerance and laws relating to  women  and
    "honour  based"  violence  (if  we  may  be  permitted  that  hideously
    inappropriate but convenient phrase).

29. The Judge did  conclude  that  it  would  be  more  difficult  for  the
    appellant to engage in political debate but not that  the  difficulties
    amounted to persecution or  an  otherwise  unlawful  restraint  on  his
    behaviour.

30. The Judge concluded at paragraph 56 that she was "satisfied that  there
    is a lack of evidence before me to lead me to conclude that he would be
    at risk of harm or at risk of 'not fitting  in'  because  of  his  non-
    traditional views."  This conclusion  was  reached  after  reading  the
    expert report mentioned above and was not undermined in any way by  the
    submissions or grounds before us.  The expert report is the decision of
    Uzma Moeen who is an  academic  and  lawyer  who  has  written  several
    reports on conditions in  Pakistan.  Much  of  the  report  relates  to
    difficulties the appellant claimed to have with  the  MQM  due  to  his
    father's involvement, but that  is  of  little  relevance  because  his
    father failed to make out his claim for asylum  and  was  fundamentally
    disbelieved.  That of course is not a reflection on the expert who  was
    explaining the consequences  that  flowed  from  a  certain  hypothesis
    rather than considering the truthfulness of the  claim.   Nevertheless,
    as far as the appellant is concerned, the report  is  much  more  about
    lack of support than any overt opposition or  certainly  opposition  or
    difficulties of a kind that would result on the inability to integrate.

31. It is not suggested by anyone that re-establishing himself would  be  a
    simple task and without hitches but the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was
    clearly entitled to find that the appellant had not made  a  case  that
    there would be very significant obstacles in the  way  of  integration.
    The Judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant did  not  satisfy
    the rules and this failure informed the article  8  balancing  exercise
    that she was required to undertake.

32. The appellant's father has been refused asylum and  refused  permission
    to appeal the decision dismissing his appeal  against  the  refusal  of
    asylum.  He has not yet sought  judicial  review  of  a  decision  that
    subsequent further submissions are not a fresh claim although there may
    still be time to do that. It seems unlikely that the appellant would in
    fact be expected to return on his own.

33. However, the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  appellant  is  an
    educated and able young man and that he could re-establish  himself  in
    Pakistan.

34. Before us the appellant made much of the damage done  to  relationships
    established in the United Kingdom by his removal.  There was no  reason
    to say that these points had not been considered properly by the Judge.
     He may well have a close relationship with his  aunt  but  it  is  the
    close relationship of an adult man with a close female relative  of  an
    older generation.  It  is  not  analogous  to  a  relationship  between
    husband and wife or parent and minor child and is not  something  which
    would ordinarily attract much weight in a balancing exercise.  There is
    no basis for criticising the Judge's  decision  not  to  give  it  much
    weight here.

35. Clearly removing the appellant from the country where he has  grown  up
    and the relationships he has established in the United Kingdom would be
    a significant interference with his private and family life  but  there
    is no basis for suggesting the Judge has given it unlawfully inadequate
    weight in determining what is proportionate.

36. We find that there was much to commend in Mr Lindsay's submission that,
    following the requirements  of  Section  117B(v)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, little weight should be given  to  the
    appellant's private life because it was established at a time  when  he
    had precarious immigration status.  This is  something  that  concerned
    the appellant in his submissions to us but we  are  satisfied  that  he
    missed the point.  It is not a question of the appellant being in  some
    way criticised for  not  making  his  immigration  status  better  than
    precarious.  That was almost certainly not possible.   His  status  was
    precarious because he had not attained indefinite leave to  remain  and
    he had not shown  himself  entitled  to  such  leave.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge applied the  necessary  statutory  test.   Whilst  there
    might be room in an academic argument to say that the relationship with
    the aunt was better characterised as part of  his  family  rather  than
    private life,  that  is  only  because  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    determination to separate the two ends of the spectrum of "private  and
    family life" that is protected  by  article  8.   It  is  part  of  his
    "private and family life" but there is no basis for saying  it  was  an
    important part that should have been given more weight than  was  given
    by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  contention  that  there  was
    anything fundamentally wrong with the Judge's approach to the Article 8
    balancing exercise is entirely misconceived.

37. There are also positive aspects of the appellant's character. Not  only
    has he taken advantage of the university education,  for  which  proper
    financial provision has been made by a well-known charity, but  he  has
    contributed to the community by doing voluntary work for the Red  Cross
    and fundraising activities for the British Hearth Foundation.  This  is
    wholly creditable and something in which he can be properly  proud  but
    it not a reason to permit him to remain in the United  Kingdom.   These
    are positive points in an Article 8 balancing exercise but they are not
    strong matters in the case of a person who essentially is not  entitled
    to remain under the Rules.  They certainly do not amount to the kind of
    exceptional circumstances that would make a  decision  to  grant  leave
    outside of the Rules desirable or even permissible.

38. The appellant was very aware of the provisions of the Immigration Rules
    that makes his case stronger if it is established  that  he  has  lived
    half of his life in the United Kingdom.  He is clearly of the view that
    he will have qualified under this Rule in a further eight months' time.
     We are not satisfied that that is right.  We do not rule on the  point
    because that is not part of our function but it is only fair  to  point
    out that he needs to check his dates very carefully if he is  intending
    to make anything of that  point  on  another  occasion.   However,  the
    arbitrary period of half of a person's life, in the case of  the  Rules
    accrued between the ages of 18 and 25, is intended to put certainty and
    clarity in the case of people who have been in the United Kingdom for a
    long time and will often be of value to people who  have  spent  rather
    more than half of their life in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is  not  a
    question of this appellant almost  satisfying  the  Rules  but  of  his
    falling short of the absolute minimum requirement to satisfy the Rules.
     There is nothing unfair or wrong about that.  Again,  because  of  the
    nature of a proper Article 8  balancing  exercise  it  is  possible  to
    postulate circumstances where a shorter  stay  becomes  important,  but
    generally it does not and there is nothing here  to  suggest  that  the
    Judge could have responsibly given much weight to  the  length  of  the
    appellant's stay in the United Kingdom, still less that she  was  wrong
    to deal with it in the way that she did.  The simple fact is  that  the
    appellant does not satisfy the relevant Rules and the appellant has not
    identified anything that would permit an exceptional decision.

39. The appellant also told us that his brother, who arrived  at  the  same
    time, has now been given leave to remain in the United Kingdom based on
    his length of residence. That was not a point argued before the  First-
    tier Tribunal and so cannot support an error of law finding,  but  even
    if it had been argued we do not see how it can help.  The fact is  that
    his brother's case is different, based on different facts and it is not
    surprising that they might support a different conclusion.  It adds  to
    the appellant's sense of frustration but it has not made  the  decision
    unlawful.

40. Like the First-tier Tribunal Judge we found the appellant in some  ways
    impressive. We understand that he has tried to  contribute  to  society
    and we understand his belief that he would contribute positively to the
    United Kingdom if that were permitted, but these are not the  tests  in
    the law and we can find no fault in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    approach or conclusion that the appellant is not entitled to remain  on
    Article 8 grounds.

41. We do note that the appellant has some history of a mild form of mental
    illness which was dealt with by counselling.  He was  open  about  this
    and it is nothing about which he should be in any way ashamed but it is
    not the kind of  very  serious  illness  that  occasionally  becomes  a
    weighty point in the human rights balancing exercise. It was dealt with
    entirely satisfactorily by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  paragraph
    43 of her Decision and Reasons, if not elsewhere as well.

42. This is a case of a young man brought to the United Kingdom when he was
    a child. He could do nothing about the circumstances of his arrival but
    he chose to remain on achieving adult life. He  introduced  himself  to
    the authorities and was trying to legitimise his position, but he  does
    not meet the necessary requirements.

43. We find no error on the part of the First-tier Tribunal in approach  or
    substance and we dismiss the appellant's appeal against the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision.

    Notice of Decision

44. This appeal is dismissed.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 June 2019                   |





