
                                    [pic]


    Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06686/2019




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




    |Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 1st December 2020                      |On 11th December 2020           |
|                                          |                                |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA




                                   Between


                                     SOH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Mr D Forbes, Lifeline Options CIC
    For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

An anonymity direction was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT").   As
this a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made.  Unless
and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, SOH is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or
any member of his family.  This direction  applies  amongst  others  to  all
parties. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.



Introduction


 1. The hearing before me on 1st December 2020 took the form  of  a  remote
    hearing  using  skype  for  business.  Neither  party  objected.    The
    appellant joined the hearing remotely  from  the  offices  of  Lifeline
    Options CIC and throughout, he was able to see  and  hear  me  and  the
    representatives.  I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre.  I  was
    addressed by the representatives in the same way as I would  have  been
    if the parties had attended the hearing  together.   I  was  satisfied:
    that the open justice principle has been secured;  that  no  party  has
    been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on
    a right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I
    was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in accordance
    with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote hearing  because
    of the present need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19,
    and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure
    the  matter  is  dealt  with  fairly  and  justly  in  a  way  that  is
    proportionate to the importance of the  case,  the  complexity  of  the
    issues that arise, and the  anticipated  costs  and  resources  of  the
    parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied that  both  parties
    had been able to participate fully in the proceedings.


 2. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision. I informed the
    parties that my decision will follow in writing, with reasons.  This  I
    now do.


Background


 3. The appellant is a national of Iraq.   The  appellant  claims  to  have
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 27th February 2005. He  made  a  claim
    for asylum that was refused by the respondent for reasons set out in  a
    decision dated 8th March 2005.  The  appellant's  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed by Immigration Judge Sanderson for  reasons  set
    out in  a  decision  promulgated  on  5th  July  2005.   The  appellant
    subsequently made further submissions  to  the  respondent  on  several
    occasions and on each occasion, the respondent  refused  to  treat  the
    further submissions as a fresh claim. On 1st  May  2019  the  appellant
    again made further  submissions  to  the  respondent.   The  respondent
    refused the appellant's claim for reasons set out in a  decision  dated
    18th June 2019 and concluded that the appellant would not  be  at  risk
    upon return to Iraq. The appellant's appeal against that  decision  was
    dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sills  ("Judge  Sills")  for
    reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 22nd October 2019.


 4. The background to the appellant's claim and the matters relied upon  by
    the appellant are summarised at paragraphs [2] to [4] of  the  decision
    of Judge Sills.  The appellant was  assisted  at  the  hearing  of  his
    appeal by Mr Forbes, who at the time, attended as a McKenzie Friend. Mr
    Forbes has  since  achieved  OISC  accreditation  and  represented  the
    appellant at the hearing before me. At paragraph [8] of  his  decision,
    Judge Sills recorded that the respondent had been  ordered  to  produce
    the original ID card that  had  previously  been  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant.  He records that the respondent wrote  to  the  Tribunal  on
    27th August 2019  stating  that  the  respondent  could  not  find  the
    original ID card and there was no note on the respondent's file of this
    having been retained, but copies would be provided at  the  hearing  of
    the appeal.  Judge Sills noted, at [8],  that  the  Presenting  Officer
    provided copies of the documents that had previously been  relied  upon
    by the appellant including a personal identification certificate and  a
    certificate of  Iraqi  nationality,  with  translations.   Judge  Sills
    records at paragraph [9] of his decision that once  the  documents  had
    been produced, he gave the appellant  an  opportunity  to  discuss  the
    matter with Mr Forbes.  The appellant was content to proceed, and there
    was no application for an adjournment.


 5. At paragraph [15] of his decision, Judge Sills states that his starting
    point is the  determination  of  Judge  Sanderson.   The  findings  and
    conclusions of  Judge  Sanderson  are  summarised  by  Judge  Sills  at
    paragraph [15] of his decision.  For reasons set out at paragraphs [16]
    to [19] of  his  decision,  Judge  Sills  concluded  that  the  further
    submissions made  by  the  appellant  did  not  undermine  the  adverse
    credibility findings previously made against him, and he  rejected  the
    appellant's claim that he would be at risk upon return.   At  paragraph
    [22] of his decision Judge Sills said:


         "... I have applied the lower standard of proof,  with  the  burden
         upon the appellant. Having considered all the evidence,  I  am  not
         persuaded that I should depart from the findings of  fact  made  by
         Judge Sanderson.  I thus reject the appellant's claim  in  relation
         to  his  membership  of  the  Ba'ath  Party.   I  also  reject  the
         appellant's claims in relation to his relationship  with  Naim.   I
         thus find that the appellant would not face a risk  of  persecution
         on return to Iraq relating  to  his  claimed  activities  with  the
         Ba'ath Party, or due to his claimed relationship with Naim."


 6. Judge Sills also addressed the  appellant's  claim  that  he  would  be
    unable to get a CSID card. At paragraph [21], Judge Sills said:


         "In relation to  the  issue  of  documentation,  I  note  that  the
         appellant has previously submitted to the respondent  copies  of  a
         personal  identification  certificate  with   translation   and   a
         certificate of Iraqi nationality with translation. These  documents
         were not rejected by the previous judge and were not considered  to
         be material to the issues at that  time.  If  these  documents  are
         genuine, they will assist the re-documentation process of the Iraqi
         authorities. If they are not genuine, then I  considered  that  the
         appellant's  evidence  in  relation   to   his   documentation   is
         unreliable...."


 7. At paragraph [25], Judge Sills said:


         "I also consider the issue of documentation. I have considered  the
         appellant's document entitled 'Personal  Identification'  alongside
         the Respondent's policy document  Country  Policy  and  Information
         Note Iraq: Internal relocation, civil documentation and returns  at
         5.4, referred to in the refusal letter.  The  document  appears  to
         contain all the information that should be on a CSID.   The  report
         states that the CSID is governed under the Civil Status Law  65  of
         1972.  The appellant's document states that it was issued  under  a
         law of the same name save that  the  word  'circumstance'  is  used
         instead of 'status'.  In  my  view,  status  and  circumstance  are
         likely to be different translations of the same word  from  want  I
         assume is the Arabic original. The suggestion that this document is
         his  CSID  is  consistent  with  his  statement  at  his  screening
         interview at Q7.36, that the appellant left his National ID card in
         Iraq.  The Appellant's evidence is that  his  brother  subsequently
         sent documents to him in the UK. I find that this is a copy of  the
         Appellant's  CSID  card.  The  information   on   the   Appellant's
         Certificate  of  Iraqi  Nationality  is  also  in  line  with   the
         information contained at 5.5 of the CPIN referred to above."


 8. Judge Sills found, at [27], that  the  appellant  has  the  information
    required to obtain a replacement passport outside Iraq.  At  paragraphs
    [29] and [30] he said:


         "29. I am the satisfied that the appellant can obtain  a  new  CSID
         should he require one before returning to Iraq based on  these  two
         ID documents. His brother or brothers  could  also  assist  him  by
         providing him with copies of their CSID cards.  It follows that the
         appellant will be able to safely travel to the KRI by air and enter
         the KRI without difficulties.


         30.  In the alternative, if the  documents  are  not  reliable,  it
         follows in this regard that the appellant's evidence in relation to
         documentation is unreliable. On this basis, the appellant could not
         establish that he is unable to obtain the  necessary  documentation
         to be able to safely travel to and enter the KRI.  Finally, I  find
         that  if  the  appellant  is  returned  to  Iraq,  it  will  be  on
         documentation that makes it clear he is from the KRI.  I find  that
         if the appellant is returned to Iraq, he will also be able  to  fly
         to the KRI either direct or via Baghdad so he can safely reach  the
         KRI.  The appellant can return to the KRI  and  live  a  relatively
         normal life  with  the  support  of  his  brother  or  brothers  in
         circumstances that would not breach his Article 3 rights. I dismiss
         his protection appeal."


The appeal before me


 9.  The appellant advanced two  grounds  of  appeal.  First,  Judge  Sills
    admitted four documents, copies of which were provided on  the  day  of
    the hearing without offering the appellant, who was unrepresented,  the
    opportunity of an adjournment.  It is said that the appellant  was  not
    made aware of the  opportunity  for  an  adjournment.   Second,  having
    erroneously admitted the copies of the four documents, Judge Sills gave
    unclear reasons as to the authenticity of the documents and found  that
    one of the documents is a genuine copy of the appellant's CSID.  It  is
    said that  Judge  Sills  disregarded  the  implied  findings  of  Judge
    Sanderson previously, who made adverse credibility findings against the
    appellant and rejected the documents that had been relied upon  by  the
    appellant.


10. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen  Smith
    on 31st January 2020.


11. At the outset of the hearing before me, Mr Forbes  confirmed  that  the
    two grounds of appeal are linked.  The  appellant  claims  Judge  Sills
    erroneously admitted the copies of the documents that were provided  by
    the respondent on the  day  of  the  hearing  of  the  appeal.   Having
    admitted the  documents,  the  appellant  claims  Judge  Sills  made  a
    decision on the documents without regard to the Devaseelan guidance and
    the findings previously made by  Judge  Sanderson  that  the  documents
    relied upon by the appellant are unreliable.


12. Mr Forbes adopted the appellant's written submissions dated  29th  June
    2020.  The appellant submits that the error in the  decision  of  Judge
    Sills lies in his presumption that it was open to him to make  positive
    findings as to the authenticity of documents that were not found to  be
    authentic in the earlier decision of  Judge  Sanderson  promulgated  in
    2005.  Having said that the documents were not found to be authentic by
    Judge Sanderson, in the written submissions the appellant also  accepts
    that Judge Sanderson  made  no  explicit  findings  on  the  particular
    documents (i.e. the person identification certificate  and  certificate
    of Iraqi nationality).   The  appellant  submits  the  absence  of  any
    finding that they were authentic is insufficient to  properly  conclude
    that "they  were  not  rejected".   Although  the  written  submissions
    adopted by Mr Forbes, concedes that "Judge Sanderson made  no  explicit
    findings on these particular documents",  Mr  Forbes  submits  that  at
    paragraphs [14(d)] of his decision, Judge Sanderson had in  fact  found
    that the arrest order and membership card were forgeries and  the  rest
    of the documents were unreliable. He submits Judge  Sanderson  did  not
    positively  reject  the   personal   identification   certificate   and
    certificate of Iraqi nationality, but equally, did not find them to  be
    valid documents. He submits Judge Sills entered into an examination  of
    those documents for himself without proper reference  to  the  findings
    and conclusions reached by Judge Sanderson previously.


13. The appellant submits that the proper course is  for  the  decision  of
    Judge Sills to be set aside and for the appeal to now be determined  in
    accordance with Country Guidance set out in  SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article
    15(c); identity documents) CG  Iraq  [2019]  UKUT  400  (IAC)  ("SMO  &
    Others"), which post-dates the decision of Judge Sills.


14. In reply,  Mrs  Aboni  adopted  the  respondent's  written  submissions
    settled by Rhona Pettersen, a Senior  Presenting  officer,  dated  30th
    June 2020.  She submits the appellant had been made aware that  a  copy
    of the ID Card would be provided at the hearing.  Mr Forbes was at  the
    hearing as a McKenzie friend. At paragraph [9] of his  decision,  Judge
    Sills records that he gave the appellant  the  opportunity  to  discuss
    matters with Mr Forbes and that no application to adjourn was made.  In
    any event, the documents were in fact copies of the documents that  the
    appellant himself had relied upon at the hearing of his appeal in  2005
    and he was therefore aware of the documents.  Mrs Aboni  submits  Judge
    Sills clearly noted, at [15], that his starting point is  the  decision
    of Judge Sanderson.  Matters have moved on since  2005  and  the  issue
    before Judge Sills was whether the appellant could  get  the  documents
    that he requires to return to the IKR.  She submits Judge Sanderson did
    not address or specifically consider the ID documents because they were
    not material to the issue before the Tribunal in 2005.  Judge Sanderson
    focussed upon the arrest order and membership card  because  they  were
    relevant to the issues before the Tribunal in 2005.  Mrs Aboni  submits
    Judge  Sills  was  entitled  to  note,  at  [21],  that  the   personal
    identification certificate and certificate of  Iraqi  nationality  were
    not rejected previously and it was open to Judge Sills to make his  own
    assessment of those documents.


Discussion


15. In my judgement the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sills was one
    that was open to him on the evidence and there is no material error  of
    law in his decision.


16. I reject the claim that Judge Sills erroneously admitted the copies  of
    the documents that were provided by the respondent on the  day  of  the
    hearing of the appeal.  At the request of the appellant, in advance  of
    the hearing of the appeal, the respondent had been directed to  produce
    the original of the ID Card.  The respondent wrote to the  Tribunal  on
    27th August 2019 (the appeal was listed for hearing on  16th  September
    2019) stating that the respondent could not find the original ID  card,
    but copies would be provided at the hearing.  Although not represented,
    the appellant was assisted at the hearing of his appeal by Mr Forbes in
    his capacity as a McKenzie Friend.   Judge  Sills  clearly  records  at
    paragraph [9]  of  his  decision  that  once  the  documents  had  been
    produced, he gave the appellant the opportunity to discuss  the  matter
    with Mr Forbes.  The appellant was content to proceed and there was  no
    application for an adjournment.  The documents were copies of documents
    that have previously been relied  upon  appellant,  and  the  documents
    could not have taken the appellant by surprise. It was in my  judgement
    plainly open to Judge Sills to admit the documents and have  regard  to
    them in reaching his decision. On any view, documents relating  to  the
    appellant's identity and nationality were relevant to the issues to  be
    considered by the Tribunal.  That much must have been  obvious  to  the
    appellant because it was the appellant  that  had  requested  that  the
    respondent provide the original of the ID card.


17. Because of its  relevance  to  the  second  ground  of  appeal,  it  is
    appropriate for  me  to  refer  to  the  decision  of  Judge  Sanderson
    promulgated on 5th  July  2005.   Judge  Sanderson  did  not  find  the
    appellant to be a credible witness.  Dealing with  the  documents  that
    were relied upon  by  the  appellant  in  support  of  his  appeal,  at
    paragraph [14(d)] of his decision, Judge Sanderson stated:


          "In support of  his  claim  the  appellant  has  produced  various
         documents.  I confirm that I have  considered  these  documents  in
         accordance with the Tribunal's guidance as laid down in the started
         determination of Tanveer Ahmed.... The crucial documents appear  to
         be what purport to be an arrest order and a membership card of  the
         Ba'ath Party;  the  Appellant's  personal  identification  and  his
         certificate of Iraqi nationality do not have a  direct  bearing  on
         his claim to be a member of the  Ba'ath  party.   Both  the  arrest
         order and the Ba'ath Party membership card refer to the Appellant's
         rank in the party as that of "comrade".  As indicated  above,  when
         interviewed, at Q8, the appellant was specifically asked "what rank
         did you attain  before  leaving  Iraq?".   The  appellant  replied,
         "senior supporter/member".  In his explanation of the ranks  at  Q7
         of the interview the appellant recognises the rank of comrade,  but
         that that rank is one above that held by him. The documents do  not
         corroborate  the  appellant's  claim  to   have   been   a   senior
         supporter/member of the Ba'ath Party.  They refer to  a  completely
         different rank and I find that  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  a
         membership  party  (sic),  issued  in  2002,  would   reflect   the
         appellant's correct rank as he states it  to  be.  I  come  to  the
         conclusion, after looking at all the evidence in  the  round,  that
         these documents are forgeries and therefore unreliable."


18. In my judgement, the appellant was right to acknowledge in the  written
    submissions dated 29th June 2020 that Judge Sanderson made no  explicit
    findings as to the personal identification certificate and  certificate
    of Iraqi nationality.  On a careful reading of paragraph [14(d)] of the
    decision of Judge Sanderson it  is  clear  that  he  focused  upon  the
    documents that were crucial to the issues he was considering. They were
    the arrest order and the membership card of the  Ba'ath  Party.   Judge
    Sanderson carefully considered the extent to which those two  documents
    supported  or  undermined  the  claim  made  by  the  appellant.  Judge
    Sanderson noted the appellant's personal identification certificate and
    his certificate of Iraqi nationality do not have a  direct  bearing  on
    his claim to be a member of the Ba'ath party.


19. Judge Sills properly noted at paragraph [21] of his decision  that  the
    appellant has previously submitted copies of a personal  identification
    certificate with translation and a  certificate  of  Iraqi  nationality
    with translation. He correctly noted  that  those  documents  were  not
    rejected by Judge Sanderson, noting that they ".. were  not  considered
    to be material to the issues at that time.".


20. The  personal  identification  certificate  and  certificate  of  Iraqi
    nationality are documents of a different nature to the arrest order and
    the membership card of the Ba'ath Party that  had  been  considered  by
    Judge Sanderson previously.  They were not documents relied upon by the
    appellant to support his claim that he would be  at  risk  upon  return
    because of his association with the Ba'ath Party.  They were  documents
    relied upon by the appellant to  support  his  claim  to  be  an  Iraqi
    national.  It is, as often occurs, entirely open to the respondent  and
    on appeal, open to the Tribunal to accept an  individual's  nationality
    and identity, but to reject the credibility of the account relied  upon
    to establish a risk upon return.  It did not follow from the finding by
    Judge Sanderson that the arrest order and membership card of the Ba'ath
    Party  are  forgeries  and  therefore  unreliable,  that  the  personal
    identification certificate and  certificate  of  nationality  are  also
    unreliable.


21. It was in my judgement open to Judge Sills to find  that  the  personal
    identification certificate and certificate  of  Iraqi  nationality  are
    reliable documents and the  appellant  therefore  has  the  information
    required to obtain  a  replacement  passport.   Judge  Sills  carefully
    considered whether the documents are consistent  with  information  set
    out in the background material.


22. It was in my judgement open to Judge Sills to find that the appellant's
    brother(s), at least one of whom the  appellant  is  in  contact  with,
    would be in a position to support him on return to Erbil  by  providing
    him with accommodation and his essential needs.  Judge Sills found,  at
    [29], that the appellant can obtain a new CSID should he  require  one,
    before returning to Iraq based upon the  two  ID  documents  available.
    The findings and conclusions reached by  the  FtT  judge  were  neither
    irrational nor unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense.


23. Having found that the documents are reliable, the question as  to  what
    the position would be if the documents are not reliable, did not arise.
     Anything that is said in paragraph [30] of the decision of Judge Sills
    is not material to the outcome of the appeal.  In that paragraph  Judge
    Sills simply observes that if the  documents  are  not  reliable,  that
    undermines the appellant's evidence in relation to the availability  of
    the documentation required, and, the appellant cannot establish that he
    is unable to obtain the necessary documentation to be  able  to  safely
    travel to and enter the KRI.


24. It was in the end, open to Judge Sills to find that if the appellant is
    returned to Iraq, it will be on documentation that makes  clear  he  is
    from the KRI and he can return to the  KRI safely and live a relatively
    normal life with the support of his  brother(s) for the reasons set out
    in the decision. As the Court of Appeal said in Herrera v  SSHD  [2018]
    EWCA Civ  412, it is necessary  to  guard  against  the  temptation  to
    characterise  as  errors  of  law  what  are  in  truth  no  more  than
    disagreements about the  weight  to  be  given  to  different  factors,
    particularly if the judge who decided the appeal had the  advantage  of
    hearing oral evidence.


25. It follows that in my judgement  there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of Judge Sills and the appeal is dismissed.


DECISION


26. I dismiss the appeal and the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sills promulgated on 22nd October 2019 stands.


    V. Mandalia                         Date     3rd December 2020
    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
