
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06990/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 January 2020                      |On 3 February 2020                 |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                  iurii [t]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, instructed by PGA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine born on 30 May 1987. He has been
      given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge  Swinnerton  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

   2. The appellant claims to have arrived in the UK in  April  2015.  On  4
      April 2018 he and his wife  were  encountered  during  an  immigration
      visit and were served with documentation as illegal entrants and  were
      detained pending removal. The appellant made an  asylum  claim  on  10
      April 2018, as a result of which removal  directions  were  cancelled.
      His claim was refused on 16 May 2018.

   3. The appellant's asylum claim was  made  on  the  basis  of  being  the
      subject of charges for military evasion and at risk of being  sent  to
      war or imprisoned in Ukraine if returned there. He claimed that he had
      previously served in the military as a junior  sergeant  between  2007
      and 2008, completing his service in Autumn 2008. He received a call-up
      notice on 6 March 2014. Representatives from the military  recruitment
      office and the head of the village council came to serve him with  the
      documentation, but he was not at home at the time  and  they  did  not
      leave a call-up notice with  his  parents.  The  military  recruitment
      office attempted to serve the documentation on him again on  10  March
      2014 but again he was not at home and he learned of the visit from his
      parents. The military unit came again a  week  later  and  then  every
      month, but he was never at home as he had a second  home  provided  by
      his employer, in a hostel. He then registered as living at his  friend
      Victor's vacant property, in order to avoid further  call-up  notices.
      In March 2015, 20 people from the military office conducted a raid  on
      his place of employment and the  police  came  to  assist  them.  Some
      people were arrested but he and others managed to escape.  His  friend
      Victor received documentation for him in 2014-2015,  in  the  form  of
      three court summonses and a court decision charging him with  military
      evasion, which he gave to his parents. He then left Ukraine  in  April
      2015 and travelled to Poland, and then through Germany and  France  to
      the UK.

   4. In  the  decision  refusing  the  appellant's  claim,  the  respondent
      considered that a refusal to participate in military service  was  not
      viewed by the Ukraine government as an act of political opposition and
      that persons who had evaded or absconded from national service did not
      form part of a particular social  group  within  the  meaning  of  the
      Refugee Convention. The appellant's  fear  was  therefore  not  for  a
      Convention reason. The respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  had
      served as a junior  sergeant  in  the  Ukrainian  army.  However,  the
      respondent considered that the appellant's claim to have registered as
      falsely living in a  vacant  property  was  not  consistent  with  the
      background information and did not accept that three  court  summonses
      and a court decision had been sent to such an address. The  respondent
      did not accept the appellant's account of being charged  with  evading
      military service and did not accord weight to  the  documents  he  had
      provided. The respondent considered in any event  that  the  appellant
      feared prosecution and not persecution and that any punishment he  may
      receive would not amount to  persecution.  The  respondent  considered
      that the appellant's removal to Ukraine would  not  breach  his  human
      rights.

   5. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was initially
      heard on 3 July 2018 and allowed in a decision promulgated on 26  July
      2018 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Coutts. Judge Coutts  did  not  find
      the appellant's claim to be credible.  He  did  not  accept  that  the
      appellant's refusal to participate in military service would be viewed
      by the Ukraine government as  an  act  of  political  opposition,  but
      considered that he would be subjected to a criminal sanction. He found
      that the appellant's claim was for a non-Convention reason and that he
      was not a member of a particular social group  and  he  dismissed  the
      appeal on asylum and  humanitarian  protection  grounds.  However  the
      judge accepted that the court judgment and summonses were genuine,  he
      accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been  sentenced  to  two   years'
      imprisonment for his failure to mobilise for  the  Ukraine  army  when
      called up and, following the guidance in VB and Another (draft evaders
      and prison conditions) Ukraine CG [2017] UKUT 79,  he  concluded  that
      there was a risk of detention on  arrival  in  Ukraine  and  that  the
      conditions of such detention would breach the  appellant's  Article  3
      human rights. He allowed the appeal on that basis.

   6. Following the respondent's application for permission to challenge the
      decision on Article 3  and  the  grant  of  permission,  Deputy  Upper
      Tribunal Chana found,  at  an  error  or  law  hearing  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal, that the judge had erred in law in  his  assessment  of  the
      documentary evidence and  she  accordingly  set  aside  Judge  Coutts'
      decision. The matter was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

   7. The appellant's appeal was then heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Swinnerton on 22 August 2019. The judge  did  not  find  credible  the
      appellant's  account  of  the  authorities  continuing  to  visit  his
      parents' home after such a lengthy passage of time and considered  the
      appellant's level of knowledge of the court sentence to undermine  his
      credibility. The judge  accorded  little  weight  to  the  copy  court
      summons produced by the appellant  as  it  was  undated  and  accorded
      little weight to the court  judgment  given  his  concerns  about  its
      origin and authenticity. He found the appellant's  delay  in  claiming
      asylum to undermine his credibility. The  judge  did  not  accept  the
      appellant's account of  being  prosecuted  for  military  evasion  and
      concluded that he would not be at any risk on return  to  Ukraine.  He
      accordingly dismissed the appeal.

   8. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  on  various  grounds  in
      relation to the judge's assessment of the documentary evidence  and  a
      failure to give adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's  claim.
      Permission was granted on 17 October 2019, primarily  with  regard  to
      the judge's treatment of the court summons.

   9. At the hearing, both parties made submissions. Mr Karim submitted that
      the judge had made  irrational  findings  in  relation  to  the  court
      documents, that he had failed to engage  with  the  other  documentary
      evidence confirming the appellant's change of registered  address  and
      that he had applied too high a standard  of  proof  to  the  evidence.
      Having given little weight to the court  documents  but  not  rejected
      them entirely, and having not rejected the other documentary  evidence
      about the appellant's registered address,  the  judge  ought  to  have
      accepted the evidence and allowed the appeal. Mr Singh,  in  response,
      submitted that even if the judge's individual  concerns  and  findings
      were insufficient to reject the appellant's claim, he was entitled  to
      make the decision that he did on an assessment of the  evidence  taken
      as a whole. Mr Karim, in reply, disagreed with Mr Singh and reiterated
      the submissions made previously.

Discussion and conclusions

  10. As Mr Singh properly submitted, the judge's conclusion at  [25]  makes
      it clear that his decision was based upon an  assessment  of  all  the
      evidence in the round and an accumulation of the  individual  concerns
      addressed in the previous paragraphs, at [20] to [24]. The appellant's
      grounds seek to challenge  individual  findings  made  by  the  judge,
      whereas it is not the case that the  judge  rejected  the  appellant's
      claim on the basis of any  individual  concern.,  but  rather  on  the
      cumulative effect of those concerns. Whilst the grounds criticise  the
      judge for making an adverse finding at [20] on the  appellant's  claim
      that the authorities were looking for him after such a lengthy  period
      of time, it is clear that that was one of several concerns  raised  by
      the judge when assessing the evidence as a whole and it  seems  to  me
      that he was entitled to take that into account. Likewise, at [21]  the
      judge was entitled to have regard to the appellant's lack  of  clarity
      in regard to a  material  matter,  namely  the  length  of  the  court
      sentence. The grounds  assert  that  the  judge  applied  too  high  a
      standard of proof by expecting the appellant to be certain  about  the
      length of his sentence, but the judge was simply  observing  that  the
      appellant's lack of knowledge was significant, which he  was  entitled
      to do.

  11. The grounds challenge the judge's approach to the documentary evidence
      in  several  respects.  Mr  Karim  made  much  of  Judge  Swinnerton's
      reference, at [22], to Deputy Upper Tribunal Chana stating that it was
      for the appellant to verify the documents provided, and submitted that
      that was a fundamental and material error of law  which  infected  his
      overall findings. However Judge Swinnerton was  clearly  referring  to
      Deputy Upper Tribunal Chana's finding at [15] of  her  decision,  that
      the previous First-tier Tribunal had erred by reversing the burden  of
      proof in relation to the documentary evidence. Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
      Chana properly found that the previous First-tier Tribunal  had  erred
      by requiring the respondent  to  verify  documents;  it  was  not  her
      finding that the appellant was required to verify his  documents,  but
      merely that the appellant had the burden of proving his  case.  In  so
      far as Judge Swinnerton's comments at [22] may suggest otherwise,  his
      choice of words is  unfortunate.  However  there  is  nothing  in  his
      findings at [22] to  indicate  that  he  understood  it  was  for  the
      appellant to provide verification of his documentary evidence, or that
      his conclusion as to the weight to  be  given  to  the  documents  was
      influenced by his failure to verify them; he  was  simply  reinforcing
      the fact that the burden of proof lay upon the appellant and  he  went
      on to give reasons for concluding that  the  documents  could  not  be
      afforded weight.

  12. It was Mr Karim's submission that  the  judge  acted  irrationally  by
      using the fact that the court judgment  was  dated  to  undermine  the
      reliability of the court summons which was undated.  However, it seems
      to me that there is nothing irrational about the judge having concerns
      about the fact that an official court document was undated. I  do  not
      agree with Mr Karim that the judge's concern was addressed by the fact
      that the document contained a date, given that the date  to  which  Mr
      Karim referred was not the date of issue of the document but  was  the
      date of the court hearing. Mr  Karim  submitted  that  the  judge,  in
      according little weight to the court summons, did not properly  engage
      with  the  other  documentary  evidence  which   provided   consistent
      information about the  appellant's  registered  address.  However  the
      judge was not required to make specific findings on all the documents.
      It is clear that he considered all the evidence in the two bundles  to
      which he referred at [19] and it is also clear that he  was  aware  of
      the  appellant's  evidence  of  having  re-registered  his  place   of
      residence and indeed asked the appellant to clarify  his  evidence  in
      that regard, as he recorded at [14].

  13.  Neither do I find that any error was made by  the  judge  failing  to
      recognise that Deputy Upper Tribunal Chana was unaware of the original
      of the court judgment having been submitted to the respondent as  part
      of his claim. It is clear that Judge Swinnerton was fully aware of the
      fact that an original had been submitted with the claim,  as  referred
      to  at  [21],  and  that  a  further  original  version  was  obtained
      subsequent to the Upper Tribunal hearing. He specifically referred, at
      [23], to the appellant's evidence in that regard in  his  most  recent
      statement of 22 July 2019 and clearly was aware that  there  were  two
      versions of the document.

  14. Mr Karim submitted that the judge had erred by failing to engage  with
      the features and content of the court judgment, including the hallmark
      and stamp on the document. However the judge was not required to  make
      findings on every aspect of the documentary evidence. It is clear from
      his findings at [23] that he had  full  regard  to  the  document  and
      properly   assessed   its   reliability,   noting   the    appellant's
      significantly inconsistent evidence about how he  obtained  the  first
      version of the judgment and the lack of supporting evidence about  his
      acquisition of the second version and drawing adverse  conclusions  as
      he was entitled to do.

  15. As for the suggestion that the judge's finding of "little weight" with
      respect to the court  judgment  and  the  court  summons,  when  taken
      together with the fact that the other  documentary  evidence  was  not
      specifically rejected, was an indication that the appeal  should  have
      been allowed, I simply do not agree. The judge  plainly  had  concerns
      about the authenticity and reliability of the court documents for  the
      reasons cogently given. Whilst he did not make  specific  findings  on
      the certificates of non-compliance from the village  council  and  the
      registration details in the appellant's passport, the fact is that  he
      did not accept that the appellant had been prosecuted  for,  or  found
      guilty of, military evasion and did not accept that he was  wanted  by
      the Ukraine authorities and his conclusion in that  regard  was  based
      upon an accumulation of properly held concerns about  the  reliability
      of the evidence as a whole.

  16. Mr Karim did not make submissions in relation to ground 6 in regard to
      the judge's findings on Article 8, and properly so, since the findings
      at [27], albeit brief, adequately addressed the  relevant  issues  and
      were properly open to the judge on the basis of  the  evidence  before
      him.

  17. For all of these reasons I find no merit in the grounds of  challenge.
      The judge gave detailed consideration  to  all  relevant  matters  and
      properly assessed the evidence in  the  round,  drawing  together  his
      observations in his conclusion at [25]. He provided clear  and  cogent
      reasons for reaching the conclusion  that  he  did.  The  grounds  are
      essentially a disagreement with the weight the judge accorded  to  the
      evidence, whereas the judge was fully entitled  to  make  the  adverse
      findings that he did. The judge's conclusions were fully and  properly
      open to him on the evidence before him and he was entitled to  dismiss
      the appeal on the basis that he did. He did not make any errors of law
      in doing so.


DECISION

  18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.











Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  29 January
2020
