
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA061832016




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 6 June 2017                        |On 12 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     JA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z I Simret, barrister employed by Simon Noble
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Talbot, promulgated on 5 January 2017. Permission to appeal was granted
    by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman on 5 April 2017.



Anonymity

   2. Such a direction was made previously, and is reiterated below.

Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 19 January 2014 with  leave
    to enter as a Tier 4 migrant. That  leave  was  extended  in  the  same
    capacity until 21 October 2016.  In  the  interim,  the  appellant  was
    encountered working in breach of his visa conditions on 14 August 2015.
    The appellant made a human rights  application  on  7  September  2015,
    which was refused and certified. He lodged a judicial review  claim  to
    prevent his removal to Bangladesh, which was  refused  on  16  December
    2015. On 8 December 2015, he applied for asylum.

 4. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim was that  he  was  an  active
    member of the Islamic Chatro Shibir organisation (the student  wing  of
    Jamat-e-Islami) and had been arrested on two occasions.  The  appellant
    fears persecution by  both  the  Bangladeshi  authorities  as  well  as
    members of opposing political groups. The Secretary of  State  rejected
    almost every aspect of that claim, on credibility grounds, in a  letter
    dated 6 June 2016. The same letter mentioned  that  attempts  had  been
    made to verify the appellant's documents in Bangladesh and only a First
    Information Report was found on  the  records  which  showed  that  the
    appellant "was released from  the  case  and  no  charge  was  brought"
    against him. There was no verification of the  second  arrest  nor  the
    bail document.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  judge  heard  oral
    evidence from the appellant and submissions from both  representatives.
    He declined a late request for a video recording to be shown. The judge
    accepted that the appellant was involved with the  Shibir  organisation
    as claimed and that the incident of 2011 was credible and may have  led
    to the appellant's  arrest  and  detention.  He  also  found  that  the
    respondent's verification of the FIR supported this. The judge did  not
    accept that the appellant was arrested  in  2013  for  a  catalogue  of
    reasons which are set out in the decision.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal argued that  the  judge  failed  to  address  the
    appellant's sur place claim; erred in the assessment of the appellant's
    credibility; applied an  incorrect  legal  test;  made  assumptions  or
    speculated; misconstrued the decision in Tanveer  Ahmed;  finding  that
    documents had been fabricated without  evidence  of  the  same  and  in
    failing to give reasons  for  dismissing  the  humanitarian  protection
    claim.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 8. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on  9  May  2017  indicated
    that the appeal was opposed. Regarding the sur place argument,  it  was
    said that expressing support for a political party was  distinguishable
    from  threatening  the  Prime  Minister  of  Bangladesh.  Support   was
    expressed for the judge's credibility findings.










The hearing

 9. The appellant attended the hearing promptly for 1000 hours.  He  showed
    me correspondence indicating that his representative would be  arriving
    at 2pm because he had other business to attend to at a court in Romford
    in the morning. I asked the appellant to contact his representative  to
    ask him to make his  way  immediately.  The  appellant's  text  message
    received no response. Having put the matter back, I asked my  clerk  to
    telephone Simon Noble Solicitors. She did so three times and her  calls
    went unanswered. Nor was there any facility for  leaving  messages.  In
    view  of  the  appellant's  inability  to  speak  English  and  on  the
    understanding that a representative would eventually appear I  put  the
    matter back in the list until after Mr Simret's arrival.

10. In terms of submissions, Mr Simret began  by  stating  that  the  judge
    provided no explanation  for  dismissing  the  humanitarian  protection
    claim. Secondly, no verification report was provided by the respondent;
    this matter was addressed in the second skeleton argument and the judge
    should have found in favour of appellant on this issue.   Thirdly,  the
    judge found no risk to the appellant owing to  his  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom and  Bangladesh,  however  he  had  not  considered  the
    Facebook posts. Fourthly, Mr Simret complained that the judge  had  not
    explained  in  what  way  the  appellant's  account  was  inconsistent.
    Fifthly,  the  judge  should  have   found   the   appellant   credible
    notwithstanding that the medical  evidence  did  not  comply  with  the
    Istanbul protocol. Sixthly, the judge erred in  finding  it  incredible
    that there  was  no  supporting  letter  from  the  appellant's  mother
    regarding the ongoing interest from the  authorities  and  lastly,  the
    judge did not apply the lower standard and should have found  that  the
    core of the claim was made out.

11. Mr Jarvis' detailed submissions  can  be  summarised  as  follows.  The
    appellant's criticisms were directed at  the  respondent  and  did  not
    amount to material errors of law carried out by the judge. The  grounds
    amounted to a series of disagreements which did not identify any  legal
    error. It was not necessary  for  the  judge  to  provide  reasons  for
    dismissing  the  humanitarian  or  human  rights  appeal,   given   his
    associated findings on the asylum claim. He  further  argued  that  the
    judge directed himself appropriately, followed that self-direction  and
    was fair in reaching credibility findings favourable to the  appellant.
    The  outcome  of  the  verification  of  documents  had  assisted   the
    appellant, without which the judge might have rejected all  aspects  of
    the appellant's claim.  There  was  no  substance  to  the  appellant's
    claimed activities in the United Kingdom and in any event, there was no
    background evidence showing that just being associated with Shibbir led
    to persecution.

12. In closing, Mr Simret clarified that he  was  not  saying  that  anyone
    involved in the Shibir organisation was at risk, but  emphasising  that
    the judge accepted that the appellant came  to  the  attention  of  the
    police in 2011. This meant that the appellant would be on the radar  of
    the authorities and would be  monitored  because  he  belonged  to  the
    student wing of a  banned  organisation.  He  also  accepted  that  the
    appellant would not have known in  2011  that  there  was  no  risk  in
    leaving Bangladesh on his own passport via  the  international  airport
    and speculated as to why he would have chosen to travel in that  manner
    if he was of adverse interest to the authorities.  Mr  Simret  conceded
    that the appellant would not necessarily face a  risk  if  he  did  not
    continue his activities in Bangladesh,  however  the  appellant  stated
    that he would do so. He  contended  that  the  objective  evidence,  in
    general, pointed to the  appellant  facing  persecution  for  even  the
    slightest criticism of the Prime Minister of Bangladesh,  as  evidenced
    by a person sentenced to 5 years in absentia for such conduct. Finally,
    Mr  Simret  said  that  it  was  irrelevant   that   the   respondent's
    verification process favoured the appellant because the judge  used  it
    to criticise the credibility of the appellant.

13. At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision.

Decision on error of law

14. The strongest ground was perhaps the argument that the judge failed  to
    address the  appellant's  claim  that  he  would  face  persecution  in
    Bangladesh owing to post-flight  political  activities.   There  is  no
    substance to this claim of continued political activity in  the  United
    Kingdom and  the  judge  did  not  fail  to  consider  the  appellant's
    evidence, both oral and written,  on  the  topic.  At  [13]  the  judge
    records what the appellant had to say about his political activities in
    the United Kingdom, which included the following; "He  has  not  become
    formally involved in any political organisation  since  coming  to  the
    UK." There  is  no  challenge  to  the  judge's  understanding  of  the
    appellant's evidence. In the same paragraph, the judge further  records
    the appellant's testimony that he has made comments on  Facebook  about
    the political situation in Bangladesh and  that  he  has  "over  4,000"
    Facebook friends. That is the full extent of the appellant's  (claimed)
    political activity since arriving in the  United  Kingdom  three  years
    ago.

15. Tucked at the back of the appellant's bundle were 78 pages of  material
    which give the appearance of being copies of the Facebook  postings  of
    someone with a similar, albeit not identical, name  to  the  appellant.
    The judge summarised this evidence  at  [20],  noting  that  the  posts
    "appear to relate to a variety of different topics (not all relating to
    Bangladesh)." As the overwhelming majority of  this  material  was  not
    translated into English, the judge's use of the term "appear" was  apt.
    In  view  of  the  absence  of  translations   (let   alone   certified
    translations) as required by the  Practice  Directions,  most  of  this
    evidence was inadmissible in any event.  Furthermore, a dozen pages  of
    this material related to posts from 2012  and  2013  and  thus  if  the
    Facebook content is likely to pose a problem for the appellant,  it  is
    notable that it did not do so prior to him  leaving  Bangladesh.  There
    was no evidence before the judge as to the  security  settings  put  in
    place by the  appellant  and  thus  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    Bangladeshi authorities would be reasonably likely look view the posts.
     For the foregoing reasons,  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  Facebook
    evidence was entirely appropriate.

16. It is argued that the judge applied a higher standard of proof and that
    he erred in the assessment of the appellant's credibility. At [25]  the
    very experienced judge directed himself appropriately as to the correct
    standard of proof and it would be surprising if he did not  follow  his
    direction in the following paragraphs. In addition, on credibility, the
    judge demonstrated  that  he  followed  his  self-direction  by  making
    findings favourable to the appellant, such as at [32] and  he  did  not
    simply reject  his  evidence  in  its  entirety,  notwithstanding  many
    concerns as to the credibility of the claim.

17.  One  complaint  mischaracterises  the  judge's  comments  at  [29]  as
    requiring  corroboration.  The  judge's  criticism   relates   to   the
    appellant's failure to provide detailed evidence  regarding  his  claim
    that the Bangladeshi authorities continued to show an adverse  interest
    in him. In fact, the judge records  that  the  appellant  provided  "no
    detail" about the visits despite being  in  regular  contact  with  his
    mother and that he had never asked his mother to  provide  a  statement
    giving details of these visits. Clearly, it  was  the  lack  of  detail
    about alleged police interest in the appellant which led the  judge  to
    consider this to be a  further  matter  which  adversely  affected  the
    appellant's credibility, not the absence of a letter from his mother or
    other individuals.




18. Another of the judge's findings which were singled  out  for  criticism
    was regarding the appellant's  discrepant  evidence  regarding  how  he
    spent the time between him being released on bail in March 2013 and his
    departure from Bangladesh in January 2014. Mr Simret  argued  that  the
    judge had unfairly focused on a discrete  comment  in  the  appellant's
    asylum interview where had had said that he "never ventured out at all"
    and compared that to the appellant's oral evidence as to his  political
    activities in Bangladesh during  those  9  months.  This  criticism  is
    unwarranted. At [27], the judge set out everything the appellant had to
    say about this period when he claimed to be in  hiding.  To  summarise,
    the appellant told the interviewing officer that he stayed with various
    people and did not venture out from the time he claimed  to  have  been
    released from prison in March 2013 until he left  for  the  airport  in
    January 2014. As the judge  records,  the  appellant  gave  a  markedly
    different account of this time during his oral evidence;  stating  that
    he continued to carry out his party functions as ward president, attend
    meetings and conspicuously participate in street  protests.  The  judge
    records that  the  appellant  was  unable  to  provide  any  reasonable
    explanation for this obvious contradiction. There is no error here.

19. The judge had serious concerns about the credibility of the appellant's
    account owing to a lack of correlation between  his  oral  and  written
    testimony and what the documents he  relied  upon  purported  to  show.
    Furthermore, the judge considered  the  appellant's  delay  in  seeking
    asylum despite opportunities to do so and the lack of  clarity  in  his
    oral evidence. The judge provided sustainable reasons for concluding at
    [33] and [34] that his evidence as to events in  2013  was  unreliable;
    that the medical evidence was deserving of only limited weight and that
    the background evidence did not indicate that the appellant would  face
    persecution based on his past involvement with Shibir.

20. Mr Simret argued that the judge erred in failing to  give  reasons  for
    dismissing the humanitarian protection and human rights claims. He  did
    not develop this ground in any meaningful way. Indeed, in  Mr  Simret's
    skeleton argument  produced  for  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, he states, "The appellant  also  qualifies  for  humanitarian
    protection under paragraph 339C  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  for  the
    reasons set out above  and  below."  The  reasons  set  out  above  the
    reference to humanitarian protection related to the Refugee  Convention
    and the reasons below were brief submissions in relation to Articles 2,
    3 and 5, all of which concerned  only  the  appellant's  fear  of  ill-
    treatment owing to his political activities. The Article 8 claim simply
    stated that this Article was engaged.  In  this  case  the  appellant's
    human rights and humanitarian protection claims stood or fell with  the
    asylum aspect and the judge dismissed all three grounds of  appeal.  He
    cannot be criticised for failing to address arguments which were  never
    made.

21. The grounds argued that the judge reached finding that the  appellant's
    documents had been fabricated without evidence of the same.  Mr  Simret
    invited me to  find  that  the  judge  wrongly  placed  weight  on  the
    references to verification set out in the refusal  letter,  despite  no
    document verification reports (DVR) having been provided. There  is  no
    indication that Mr Simret attempted to persuade  Judge  Talbot  not  to
    consider the summary of the DVR set out in the refusal letter.  On  the
    contrary, Mr Simret's skeleton argument  was  based  on  a  failure  to
    verify. In any event, the Home Office verification procedures  assisted
    the appellant by corroborating part his claim, which the judge accepted
    at [32-33] owing, at least in part, to that corroboration.   While  the
    judge rejected other aspects of the appellant's  claim,  this  was  not
    based on the respondent's  inability  to  obtain  verification  of  all
    incidents relied upon but owing to inconsistencies in his evidence  and
    his poor immigration history.




22. Mr Simret made much of background evidence showing that at the time the
    appellant left Bangladesh there was no computerisation at the  airport.
    Contrary to what he argued, the judge did not find that  the  appellant
    would not have been able to leave Bangladesh if he was wanted. What the
    judge did find, at [27] was that it was "implausible that he would have
    taken the risk of departing the airport through normal  channels  using
    his own properly issued passport despite the issue of  arrest  warrants
    against him." Therefore, what the judge considered implausible was  the
    appellant's conduct  rather  than  the  fact  that  he  encountered  no
    problems at the airport.

23. The grounds argue that the judge made no findings as to the appellant's
    fear of non-state agents in the form of supporters  of  other  parties.
    The appellant' evidence on this point amounted to a mere assertion that
    he would be at such risk in his witness statement and oral evidence  at
    [16]. Given that the judge had recorded the oral evidence on the  point
    and had considered all the evidence before him, there is no  reason  to
    conclude that his global finding at [34] that the appellant was not  at
    risk of persecution in Bangladesh was not also referring  to  the  risk
    from other groups. Indeed, in that same  paragraph,  the  judge  quotes
    extensively from the  background  material,  referring  to  reports  of
    ongoing high levels of politically motivated  violence  perpetrated  by
    the security forces, opposition and government  activists  and  student
    wings.

24. The fact that  the  judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  used  to  be
    politically active in a discrete area of Sylhet  until  2013  does  not
    automatically indicate that he would be at  risk  of  ill-treatment  if
    removed to  Bangladesh  now,  as  Mr  Simret  implied.  The  background
    material was considered by the judge and relevant  sections  reproduced
    in the decision, however Mr Simret did not draw  my  attention  to  any
    evidence to suggest that past association with the student  faction  in
    question  led  to  a  real  risk  of  persecution.   Furthermore,   the
    appellant's own evidence, set out at [27] was that he carried  out  his
    ward-based  political  activities  in  Bangladesh  including   standing
    conspicuously at  the  head  of  demonstrations  until  his  departure,
    without adverse incident. Accordingly, the judge's finding at [33] that
    if the authorities had any real adverse interest in the  appellant,  it
    would have been easy to re-detain him, is wholly sound.

25. For the foregoing reasons, the judge made  no  errors  of  law  in  his
    decision and reasons.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.











Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed        T Kamara                       Date 28 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

