
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06184/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2020                             |On 19 March 2020              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                                     CN
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, Counsel, instructed by AC Gilead
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is a remade decision following the identification of a
         material legal error in the decision of Judge of the First-tier
         Tribunal Ripley, promulgated on 2 September 2019, dismissing the
         appellant's appeal against a decision dated 14 June 2017 by the
         respondent refusing his protection and his human rights claim.
      2. In an 'error of law' decision promulgated on 17 January 2020 the
         Upper Tribunal satisfied itself that Judge Ripley acted in a
         procedurally unfair manner by drawing an adverse inference based on
         her belief that the appellant and SM, his claimed same-sex partner,
         met in June 2019 in circumstances where neither of them referred to
         such an encounter and where the issue was not put to the witnesses
         or raised with the appellant's legal representative. Despite a
         range of other adverse credibility findings made by Judge Ripley
         the Upper Tribunal found, albeit by a narrow margin, that the
         identified legal error was material and required the judge's
         decision to be set aside.

      3. The Upper Tribunal retained jurisdiction to determine the appeal
         and it was listed for a de novo hearing. As there had been no
         challenge to the accuracy of the recording of the oral evidence
         from the appellant and SM, as set out in the First-tier Tribunal
         judge's decision, the Upper Tribunal indicated that, in re-making
         the decision, it would be entitled to consider the oral evidence
         that was given by the appellant and SM in the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

      4. The appellant is a national of Cameroon, born in 1982.  He entered
         the United Kingdom on 23 August 2009 as a Tier 5 Migrant. His leave
         was subsequently extended until July 2015. Thereafter he made
         applications for further leave to remain, but these were refused
         and he became an overstayer. On 19 December 2016 the appellant
         applied for asylum. He claimed that he was gay and that he feared
         persecution from his family and society in general in Cameroon.

      5. I summarise the appellant's claim. He became attracted to boys when
         he was around 15 years old. When he was at school he felt like he
         liked boys, and his feelings were realised when he was secretly
         kissed by another boy at a party; he felt a 'current' flowing
         through him. He had a secret relationship with someone in Cameroon
         when he was 20, although this person was now deceased. After he
         entered the UK the appellant was taken by a friend to a gay sauna
         in Vauxhall and started to go every weekend. The appellant's
         Facebook posts, and his activities identified through Facebook,
         made after he entered the UK, caused people in Cameroon to question
         his sexual orientation and this came to the attention of his
         father. His father telephoned the appellant and asked if he was
         gay, but the appellant did not give an answer. The appellant
         returned to Cameroon in December 2014 but his father refused to see
         him. His father died from a heart attack on 27th December 2014 and
         the appellant soon returned to the United Kingdom following threats
         made by his paternal uncle. The appellant attends gay nightclubs
         and bars and Gay Pride events in the UK, has gay and lesbian
         friends, and is a member of a gay gym. In 2015 he formed a
         relationship with SM, who is a national of Sierra Leone and is a
         recognised refugee whose refugee status was premised on his sexual
         orientation. They met on Adam4Adam, an online gay dating website.
         SM lives in Manchester and the appellant lives in London but they
         travel to see each other. The appellant was living an openly gay
         life in the UK and feared being persecuted in Cameroon if he was
         openly gay.

      6. The respondent did not accept that the appellant was gay. She
         considered he gave a vague explanation for his realisation of his
         sexual orientation and that there were inconsistencies in his
         account. The appellant exercised his right of appeal pursuant to
         s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. His
         appeal was dismissed by another First-tier Tribunal judge on 8
         August 2017 but this decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal
         on 19 June 2018 and remitted for a fresh hearing before Judge
         Ripley on 12 August 2019.

The oral evidence given at the hearing before judge Ripley

      7. In his oral evidence at the hearing in August 2019 the appellant
         claimed he had last seen SM when he visited Manchester in May or
         June 2019, but SM's oral evidence was that they had last seen each
         other in London in July 2019. SM believed the appellant last came
         to Manchester in March 2019. SM stated that he was busy with work
         and had spent time with the appellant twice in 2019 by the date of
         the hearing, which was less than that suggested by the appellant in
         his evidence.

The documentary evidence lodged with the Tribunal

      8. The respondent's bundle contained, inter alia, the screening and
         asylum interviews and the Reasons for Refusal Letter. The appellant
         produced a bundle for the First-tier Tribunal hearing on 18 April
         2018 running to 97 pages and including, inter alia, the appellant's
         membership contract with Sweatbox dated 14 November 2016, official
         documentation confirming the appellant's email address, email
         correspondence to the appellant's email address from Adam4Adam
         using the username 'AndyJohn', including his membership email dated
         3 November 2012, confirmation that the appellant used a different
         username for the website Adam4AdamLive, which he joined in February
         2016, various photographs of the appellant and SM (including some
         at gay pride events), and letters by several individuals attesting
         to the appellant's homosexuality.


      9. A 2nd bundle of documents prepared for the First-tier Tribunal
         hearing in 2019 contained evidence of the appellant's travel to
         Manchester on various dates in 2017 and 2018 and further
         photographs of the appellant and SM, a 2nd statement from the
         appellant stated 12 June 2019, and further letters by individuals
         attesting to the appellant's homosexuality. The bundle additionally
         contained invoices relating to SM's stay at Premier Inns in London
         in 2017. A bundle prepared for the Upper Tribunal hearing on 11
         March 2020 included a further contract between the appellant and
         Sweatbox dated 5 May 2019 and many screen shots of communication
         between the appellant's Adam4Adam username and other individuals in
         2013, 2014, 2016 and 2017. At the hearing the appellant produced a
         Christmas card he claimed was sent by SM. At the hearing the
         appellant, after being requested to do so by myself and in the
         presence of both representatives, produced a large number of text
         messages on his mobile phone between him and SM and a voice note
         recording made by SM. I have taken account of all these documents
         in reaching my decision.

The hearing

     10. The appellant adopted his statements and confirmed he had been in a
         relationship with SM since 2015. SM was not present at the hearing.
         The appellant described how he had an argument with SM following
         the First-tier Tribunal hearing on 12 August 2019 relating to when
         they had last seen each other. The appellant informed a friend of
         what happened at the hearing and this friend then contacted SM. SM
         was angry about this phone call and shouted at the appellant on the
         phone. SM then refused to answer the appellant's texts or calls
         throughout September to November 2019. SM did however extend an
         olive branch by sending the appellant a Christmas card, which the
         appellant produced at the hearing. They started exchanging text
         messages again and talking, although the appellant was doing most
         of the talking. After receiving notice of the resumed hearing the
         appellant asked SM to attend the Upper Tribunal hearing. SM said he
         would ask his manager for time off but that he was having problems
         at work, he was stressed and his mother was sick. SM's manager did
         not respond to him even when the appellant asked SM a week before
         the hearing whether he was coming. The appellant claimed that SM
         had left him a voice note on WhatsApp saying he was still awaiting
         his manager's reply.

     11. In cross-examination the appellant explained that Sweatbox closed
         for refurbishment in 2018 and the appellant had to reregister with
         the company in 2019. When asked to explain why he had to different
         usernames, one for Adam4Adam, the other for AdamAdamLive, he
         explained that the latter was an associated website offering
         communication through webcams. The appellant claimed that, although
         he was in a relationship with SM, he still wanted to make friends
         with other gay men. The appellant claimed he had mentioned the
         threats from his uncle when he returned to Cameroon in his asylum
         interview.

     12. After the cross-examination I asked some questions by way of
         clarification. I reminded the appellant of his oral evidence
         relating to his text communication with SM and his evidence of a
         voice note left by SM on WhatsApp. I asked the appellant to explain
         why he did not produce any of this evidence. The appellant
         immediately said that the evidence was on his mobile phone and
         offered to give his phone to the Tribunal. At this point I asked
         the appellant to place his mobile phone on the table in view of
         both representatives. I indicated to the representatives that I was
         prepared to consider evidence of text communication between the
         appellant and SM if it appeared on the mobile phone, and to hear
         the voice note if that was also available. I asked both
         representatives to stand simultaneously behind the appellant whilst
         he accessed this information to ensure there was no addition or
         deletion of any messages. After rising for a short time to enable
         this to be done I was provided with the appellant's mobile phone
         and invited to consider the text messages and the voice note.
         Neither representative raised any issue as to the possibility of
         fabrication or addition or deletion of the evidence on the
         appellant's mobile phone, or in respect of the identities of
         individuals whose messages were being considered.

     13. There were many text messages between the appellant and SM. A
         significant number of the messages sent by the appellant to SM used
         terms of endearment. For example, the word "dear" was used by the
         appellant on several occasions when enquiring about SM. The
         appellant would often text "good morning dear" or "good evening
         dear". Among the text messages were requests from the appellant
         asking whether SM would be able to attend his next hearing. SM
         first answered, "I have to see if I can get time off from my work."
         There were then several other messages from SM referring to his
         manager and indicating that he has been very busy at work, that his
         life was stressful and that his mother was sick. Many of the text
         messages discussed what the appellant and SM had been doing. One
         text message describing a meal the appellant had prepared ended
         with a love heart symbol. Other messages contained the symbol for
         kisses and lips and other love heart symbols. On occasion the
         appellant sent messages such as "good morning love". The appellant
         sent a digital Valentine's Day card to SM and his message read
         "happy Valentine's Day sweetie pie". Other text messages sent by
         the appellant included "how was your night Sweetheart?", "Good
         night love", "good evening my beloved", "good evening Sweetheart".
         In his voice note SM explained that his manager had not been in the
         office, that his mother was still sick, and that SM was still
         waiting for his manager's approval to enable him to attend the
         hearing.

     14. In re-cross-examination the appellant explained that he shared a
         room with 3 other family friends and that it was therefore
         impossible for SM to spend the night at the appellant's place of
         residence. It was for that reason that SM stayed in hotels when he
         visited London.

     15. Both parties made submissions which are a matter of record and
         which I have fully considered.

Legal principles

     16. The burden of proof in asylum claims rests on the appellant, and
         the standard of proof is whether there is a 'real risk' of the
         appellant being subjected to treatment sufficiently serious to
         amount to persecution.

     17. In HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1024 the Supreme Court mandated
         a sequential four-stage test when determining whether a person
         would be at risk of persecution on the basis of their sexual
         orientation.

             (i) Is the appellant gay,  or  is  he  someone  who  would  be
             treated as gay by potential  persecutors  in  his  country  of
             origin? If no, the claim should be refused. If yes:
             (ii)  Do  openly  gay  people  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
             persecution in the country of origin? If no, the claim  should
             be refused. If yes:
             (iii) In respect of his sexual  orientation,  on  his  return,
             will the appellant be open? If yes, he is a  refugee  and  his
             claim should be allowed. If no:
             (iv) If he would not be open, but rather live discreetly, is a
             material  reason  for  living   discreetly   that   he   fears
             persecution? If yes, he is a refugee and his claim  should  be
             allowed. If no, then his claim should be refused.
     18. In her submissions Ms Jones clarified that the central issue to be
         determined was whether the appellant was gay. She confirmed that if
         I was satisfied the appellant was gay then the respondent accepted,
         applying the HJ principles, that he would face a well-founded fear
         of persecution in Cameroon, that the state would be unable or
         unwilling to offer him a sufficiency of protection and that
         internal relocation would not be an available option.

Findings of fact and conclusions

     19. The respondent did not find that the appellant gave a credible
         account in his asylum interview of how he came to realise that he
         was gay. Having considered the totality of the asylum interview, I
         cannot agree with the respondent's view. In my judgement the
         appellant gave a coherent and plausible account of how his
         understanding of his sexual orientation developed (see paragraph 5
         above for a summary of the appellant's account). The appellant's
         explanation of how he felt a 'current' pass through him when he was
         first kissed by another boy at a party has a strong ring of
         authenticity. In his 1st statement he explained that he thought
         having feelings for other boys was abnormal and he pretended to his
         friends that he was more interested in books than girls to deflect
         any perception that he was attracted to boys. This is a credible
         description of how he dealt with his feelings as a youngster. The
         appellant's awareness of his own feelings towards boys when he was
         at school, and the furtive kiss at a party that precipitated his
         full realisation, is a plausible narrative of a person's initial
         awareness of their sexual identity.

     20. The appellant has now provided cogent and persuasive evidence that
         he has been registered with a gay dating website (Adam4Adam) since
         November 2012. The relevant documentation, unchallenged by Ms
         Jones, established the link between the appellant's personal email
         address and the username he used on the website. The date that the
         appellant joined the dating website is relevant as it was nearly 3
         years before he became an over stayer and when he still had lawful
         leave to remain in this country. The screenshots produced in his
         3rd bundle of documents demonstrate beyond doubt that he received
         and sent messages using the website in 2013, 2014, 2016 and 2017.
         Although I cannot entirely discount the possibility that the
         appellant may have been 'laying the tracks' for making a future
         asylum claim on the basis of his sexual orientation, I do not find
         this is likely to be the case, and certainly not on the lower
         standard of proof. The fact that the appellant was actively using a
         gay dating website since 2012 supports his claim to be a gay man.

     21. The appellant gave a plausible account of his membership of
         Sweatbox, a gay sauna in Oxford Street, and this was supported by
         registration documents dating from 2016 and 2019 and a photograph
         of him at the sauna. The appellant's claim that Sweatbox closed for
         refurbishment for several months in 2018, requiring him to re-
         register, was not challenged by Ms Jones in her submissions and is
         inherently plausible. The appellant gave details of a gay bar he
         frequented in Soho, both in respect of the interior and surrounding
         area, the accuracy of which has not been challenged, and his claim
         to have attended gay pride festivals is supported by photographs.
         Whilst I am aware that anyone may attend a gay pride festival, this
         nevertheless remains a factor to take into account, one to be
         considered 'in the round'.

     22. I had concerns at the outset of the hearing that SM was not
         present. Given the importance of hearing for the appellant and the
         significant consequences that would flow from its dismissal, and in
         light of the adverse credibility findings made by Judge Ripley, I
         was surprised by SM's absence. Although the appellant offered a
         detailed account of an argument he claimed to have had with SM
         following the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal and the efforts
         that were made to re-establish the relationship, the appellant's
         solicitors failed to serve on the Tribunal any supporting evidence.
         Neither Mr Gajjar nor Ms Jones sought to ascertain from the
         appellant whether he possessed any evidence supporting his claimed
         contact with SM and SM's explanation for not attending the hearing.
         It was only when I asked questions by way of clarification that the
         appellant made mention of his mobile phone. The evidence contained
         in the WhatsApp text messages and the voice note would not have
         otherwise have come to light. This is significant as it supports
         the reliability and the authenticity of the digital evidence.


     23. The text messages and the voice note, the contents of which have
         been outlined at paragraph 13 above, strongly support the
         appellant's account of his relationship with SM and his explanation
         for SM's absence at the hearing. This evidence has turned what
         might otherwise have been an implausible explanation into one upon
         which I can attach weight. Moreover, the entirely unsolicited
         evidence of the text messages between the appellant and SM strongly
         suggest, at the very least, emotional intimacy between them and is
         supportive of the appellant's claim to have been in a genuine
         relationship with SM, even if that relationship is now precarious
         and unstable. Ms Jones suggested that a Valentine's card can be
         sent by anyone to anyone. This, with respect, entirely misses the
         context in which the Valentine's card was sent and the fact that it
         was sent from one adult man to another adult man. No mention had
         been made by the appellant of the digital Valentine's Day card
         until I enquired about his text messages. The fact that the
         appellant sent a digital Valentine's Day to SM, and the endearing
         terms of his communication with SM, together with the fact that SM
         has been recognised as a refugee based on his sexual orientation,
         the evidence of the appellant's trips to Manchester, the
         photographs of the appellant and SM in both Manchester and London,
         the hotel receipts relating to SM's stays in London and the
         explanation offered by the appellant for why they could not stay at
         his residence, and the statement from SM confirming their
         relationship, all support the appellant's claim to have been in an
         intimate relationship with SM.

     24. I appreciate that both the respondent and the previous judge
         identified some legitimate concerns surrounding the appellant's
         relationship with SM. In his asylum interview in 2017 the appellant
         initially gave the wrong year for SM's date of birth, although he
         subsequently corrected this within the same interview giving SM's
         full date of birth. SM had only provided a very short statement for
         the appellant's initial asylum claim, but he subsequently produced
         a more detailed statement and attended the previous appeal hearing.
         There was inconsistent oral evidence before Judge Ripley relating
         to when the appellant and SM had last seen each other, and when
         appellant last came to Manchester, and how often they had seen each
         other in 2019. This suggests that the relationship between the
         appellant and SM was much more strained than the image presented by
         the appellant at the First-tier Tribunal, and this embellishment is
         likely to have accounted for the inconsistencies in the evidence
         between the appellant and SM. I do not however find, applying the
         lower standard of proof and having holistic regard to the evidence
         before me, that the existence of the relationship itself has been
         fabricated. Whilst the appellant had attempted to embellish the
         relationship, I am entirely satisfied, based on the unsolicited
         WhatsApp communication, that the relationship is, or at least was,
         genuine.

     25. I do not however accept that the appellant was threatened by his
         paternal uncle. In his asylum interview the appellant was asked
         whether any family member said anything to him following the death
         of his father. Although the appellant claims he informed the
         interviewer that his uncle threatened him, this is not recorded in
         the asylum interview. No attempt was made to correct the interview
         record after it was given to the appellant and no complaint was
         lodged against the respondent for this alleged omission. Given the
         importance of this threat I am not persuaded that it was omitted
         from the interview record. If a threat was made to the appellant's
         life this would have been an important factor in his asylum claim.
         The failure of the appellant to mention this in his asylum
         interview undermines his claim regarding the threat from his uncle.
         I find the appellant has embellished this aspect of his claim. This
         does not however mean that he has lied in relation to the other
         elements of his case, although I take the lie into account when
         assessing the credibility of the appellant's claim to be gay and
         his claim as a whole.

     26. Whilst I am bound to consider the appellant's delay in claiming
         asylum as damaging his credibility under section 8 of the Asylum
         and Immigration (treatment of claimants, etc.) Act 2004, I must
         determine what weight to attach to the delay taking account of all
         relevant circumstances and the particular facts of his case (JT
         (Cameroon) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 878). In his asylum interview the
         appellant explained that he did not claim asylum immediately
         because he was lawfully present in the UK and hoped to be able to
         obtain settlement through his lawful residence. Making an asylum
         claim is a relatively drastic measure and the appellant's claim
         that he hoped to be able to reside in the UK without doing so is a
         credible explanation when considered in the context of his
         immigration history and my other credibility findings.

     27. Whilst there were several letters from individuals attesting to
         their knowledge of the appellant's sexual orientation, none of
         these individuals attended the hearing. There was therefore no
         opportunity to test their evidence. In these circumstances I find I
         can place very little weight on their letters.

     28. Despite rejecting the appellant's claim that he was threatened by
         his uncle, and despite having found that he embellished his
         relationship with SM to some degree, I am persuaded, having
         cumulative regard to the totality of the appellant's evidence and
         for the reasons given above, that he is a gay man. I accept that
         the appellant lives an openly gay lifestyle in this country, having
         regard to his frequenting gay nightclubs and bars, gay pride
         events, and through his use of a gay dating website.

     29. Ms Jones accepted that, if I find the appellant was gay, then he
         would hold a well-founded fear of persecution in Cameroon if he
         lived his life openly, and that internal relocation would not be an
         option. This position is, to a significant extent, reflected in the
         Country Policy and Information Note - Cameroon: Sexual orientation
         and gender identity or expression (February 2020). After
         summarising the treatment of gay people by the government and by
         society in general (2.4.3 to 2.4.14), the CPIN concluded at 2.4.15,
         "In general, LGBTI persons are likely to face mistreatment from
         state and societal actors which, by its nature and frequency, may
         amount to persecution. Each case, however, needs to be considered
         on its facts, with the onus on the person to demonstrate that they
         face such a risk." The CPIN states that same-sex sexual relations
         are prohibited, and sexual minorities are afraid to go to the
         police as once their sexual orientation is known they are at risk
         of abuse or extortion by police officers. If the appellant were to
         live as an openly gay man in Cameroon, there is a real risk his
         conduct would be likely to come to the attention of the
         authorities. There is therefore a real risk that he would not
         receive a sufficiency of protection from the authorities. At 2.6
         the CPIN explains that, in general, given the widespread societal
         and state hostility towards and discrimination against LGBTI
         persons, it will not be reasonable for a person to relocate,
         although each case must be considered on its particular facts.
         Given that the appellant will want to live as an openly gay man and
         in light of the treatment of gay people by society and the
         government, I am not satisfied that an internal relocation option
         would be available, even if this was not already conceded by Ms
         Jones. In his statements and his oral evidence before me the
         appellant maintained that he feared being persecuted if he was open
         about his sexual orientation in Cameroon. I am therefore satisfied
         that a material reason for the appellant living discreetly as a gay
         man in Cameroon would be as a result of his fear of persecution. I
         am consequently satisfied that the appellant is entitled to refugee
         status under the 1951 Refugee Convention and that his asylum appeal
         must be allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's asylum/protection claim is allowed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum                                                    13 March 2020
Signed                                                    Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


