
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06089/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by Skype)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2020                   |On 27 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                DF (albania)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran, instructed by Islington Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

 1. The appellant is an Albanian national who was born on  10  April  2001.
    He appeals, with permission granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kamara,
    against a decision which was issued by Judge K L James ("the judge") on
    20 January 2020.  By that decision, the judge dismissed the appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's refusal of his claim for  international
    protection.

 2. The appellant's protection claim has two limbs.   He  claims,  firstly,
    that he is a gay man who has been subjected to violence and insults for
    much of his life as a result of his sexual orientation,  and  he  fears
    similar treatment on return to Albania.  Secondly, he  claims  that  he
    became involved in an Albanian drugs gang when he was  a  teenager  and
    worked for some time in a cannabis factory in that  country.   He  also
    fears retribution from the gang in the event that he returns.   It  was
    accepted by the Competent Authority, on conclusive  grounds,  that  the
    appellant was a victim of trafficking.  For her  part,  the  respondent
    also accepted that aspect of his claim.  She did not accept  his  claim
    to  be  a  gay  man,  however.   She  refused   his   application   for
    international protection for that reason, and  because  she  considered
    that he could avail himself of a sufficiency  of  protection  from  the
    Albanian state.

 3. I pause here to note that the refusal letter in this  case,  which  was
    sent to  an  accepted  victim  of  modern  slavery  shortly  after  his
    eighteenth birthday, is the longest refusal letter I have seen  in  the
    two decades that I have been in immigration law.  It comprises 59 pages
    of single-spaced type.  Whilst it is entirely understandable  that  the
    respondent will wish to set out with some clarity the basis upon  which
    she  refuses  a  claim  as  important  as  a  claim  for  international
    protection, it must be recalled that a refusal letter is  addressed  to
    an applicant and is to be understood by that individual.  It  does  not
    assist that individual, nor does it assist a judge on  appeal,  if  the
    respondent is unable to express her conclusions with greater concision.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed, and his appeal came  before  the  judge  on  29
    November 2019.   The  appellant  was  represented  by  Ms  Loughran  of
    counsel, as he was before me;  the  respondent  was  represented  by  a
    Presenting Officer.  There was  a  bundle  from  the  respondent  which
    comprised the refusal letter, the asylum interview and the  appellant's
    initial statement (dated 8 November  2017),  amongst  other  documents.
    There was a lengthy bundle from the appellant's solicitors,  containing
    expert reports from a Mr Tahiraj and Ms Beddoe and a  detailed  witness
    statement (of 34 pages), amongst other documents.

 5. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  submissions  from
    Mr Wilcox and Ms  Loughran  before  reserving  her  decision.   In  her
    decision, the judge stated that  the  appellant  had  'failed  to  give
    persuasive  oral  evidence  on  basic  issues  regarding  his   claimed
    sexuality': [27]. Over the course of the following three pages  of  her
    decision, the judge set out a series of  reasons  in  support  of  that
    conclusion.  The reasons may be summarised as follows.

 6. Firstly, the judge was concerned by the absence  of  any  witnesses  or
    documentary evidence to support the appellant's claim to be a gay  man.
    Secondly, she considered his claims to be living an openly gay life  in
    London to be contradicted by his inability to name any of the  bars  he
    had visited or the people he had met.  Thirdly,  the  judge  considered
    the appellant's account  of  practising  mannerisms  in  front  of  his
    bathroom mirror and of watching  'gay  stuff'  on  his  phone  to  lack
    detail, for example of the names of gay  dating  apps.   Fourthly,  the
    judge considered it to be 'a concern' that the appellant had  not  been
    in touch with D, the young man with whom he claimed to have  enjoyed  a
    relationship in Albania.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant's
    account was  vague,  improbable  and  that  he  had  failed  to  submit
    satisfactory evidence to establish even to the lower standard  that  he
    was a gay man.  In the alternative, the judge accepted  the  contention
    in the refusal letter that the appellant could find support in  Albania
    and that there would be a sufficiency of protection and  an  option  of
    internal relocation upon return.  The judge did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on return as a victim of trafficking and she
    also dismissed his appeal on ECHR grounds.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. In grounds of appeal which were settled by Ms Loughran  on  31  January
    2020, it was submitted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in  four
    respects.  Ground one is that the judge failed to have  regard  to  the
    expert evidence of Dr Tahiraj and Ms Beddoe.  Ground two  is  that  the
    judge failed  to  consider  the  appellant's  appeal  statement  of  19
    November 2019 at all.  Ground three is that  the  judge's  reasons  for
    finding  the  account  to  be  untrue  were  unlawful,  for   requiring
    corroboration  and  for  re-characterising  the  appellant's  behaviour
    according to her own perceptions of 'reasonability'.   Ground  four  is
    that the judge failed to make any findings  on  a  separate  contention
    which had been advanced before her, which was that the Article  8  ECHR
    claim should succeed because the appellant was a recognised  victim  of
    trafficking.

 8. Judge Kamara granted permission on each of these grounds,  noting  that
    it was particularly arguable that the judge had failed to  engage  with
    the expert evidence or the contents of the 34  page  witness  statement
    which had been prepared for the appeal.

 9. The respondent filed a response to the grounds of appeal under rule  24
    of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   In  that
    response, which was settled by Mr Melvin  (Senior  Presenting  Officer)
    the respondent submitted that the judge's decision had been open to her
    on the evidence presented; that she was not required  to  set  out  the
    witness statement 'in any great detail'; that  the  conclusions  as  to
    credibility were sustainable; and that  it  did  not  follow  from  the
    conclusion that the appellant  had  been  trafficked  that  the  appeal
    should be allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.   The  respondent  invited
    the Upper Tribunal to dismiss the appeal.

10. At the outset of the hearing, I asked Mr Cunha for her  submissions  on
    ground two, which I considered to be Ms Loughran's strongest point.  Ms
    Cunha had noted that the judge had made no reference to the appellant's
    witness statement and she acknowledged that it might have  been  better
    if there had been some consideration of that document.  In  defence  of
    the stance taken in the rule 24 response, however, she  submitted  that
    the judge had based her findings on oral testimony, which was 'stronger
    evidence' than the witness statement.  It had been open to the judge to
    find as she had.

11. I indicated to Ms Loughran that I did not need to hear from her on  her
    grounds of appeal, and that the appeal would be allowed.  I  asked  her
    what relief she sought.  In light of the nature of the error into which
    the FtT had fallen and the scope of  the  fact-finding  exercise  which
    would be necessary, Ms Loughran submitted that the  proper  course  was
    for the appeal to be remitted to the FtT for re-hearing de novo  before
    a judge other than Judge K L James.   Ms  Cunha  did  not  oppose  that
    course, and I indicated that it would be the outcome of the appeal.  My
    reasons for reaching that conclusion are as follows.

Analysis

12. At [31]-[36] of the refusal letter, the respondent  gave  a  number  of
    reasons for concluding that the appellant's account was 'vague, lacking
    in detail, internally inconsistent' and that he had 'failed to show any
    personal connection to [his] emotions'.  The latter comments appear  to
    be based  upon  an  assumption,  commonly  encountered  in  letters  of
    refusal, that every individual who realises that they are gay will  not
    only go through an 'emotional journey' of discovery but also that  they
    will have the ability to describe that journey in an asylum  interview.
    For those like the appellant who come from a society in which any  such
    'journey' is likely to be repressed and never discussed, and  in  which
    the very process of talking about one's emotions and sexual orientation
    (or experiences) is frowned upon, I do not consider that to be  a  safe
    assumption.  Although a student from California might well be  able  to
    explain quite cogently the journey of discovering and coming  to  terms
    with their own sexual orientation, the emotional and linguistic  skills
    to do so may not have been learned by a person from a culture  such  as
    the appellant's.

13. Thankfully, however, the experienced judge in the FtT based none of her
    findings  on  the  appellant's  inability  to  explain  his   'personal
    connection' to his emotions.  The central plank of  her  reasoning  was
    instead that the appellant's account  was  not  supported  by  evidence
    which she thought should be readily available from within the UK.   She
    was surprised that there were no other gay men who could attest to  the
    appellant's lifestyle in this country.   She  was  surprised  that  the
    appellant had not produced any evidence that he had been to gay venues,
    and was unable to name any of these venues.  And she was surprised that
    he had made no attempt to be in touch with D, with whom he had been  in
    a relationship in Albania for some time.  She thought it unlikely  that
    he would be unable  to  name  a  single  gay  dating  app.   The  judge
    expressed these concerns after considering  the  appellant's  interview
    transcript and his first witness statement  (of  8  November  2017)  at
    length.  Paragraph [25] of her  decision,  which  spans  essentially  a
    whole page, contains a detailed  analysis  of  what  was  said  in  the
    interview.  And at [26] there  is  a  detailed  summary  of  the  first
    witness statement.  At no point in  the  decision,  however,  does  the
    judge make any reference to the appellant's  detailed  statement  which
    was prepared specifically for the purpose of the appeal.

14. As Ms Loughran notes in her concise and precise grounds of appeal,  the
    witness statement bore directly upon  some  of  the  judge's  concerns.
    Insofar as she found that the  appellant  had  'chosen  not  to  be  in
    contact with [D]', for example, that was not the account put forward by
    the appellant.  He said in his statement that he had tried  to  contact
    D, including by sending him messages through Facebook, but that  D  had
    blocked the appellant on his phone and  had  not  responded  to  online
    messages.

15. The judge was also concerned about the fact that the appellant had  not
    called to give evidence a man with whom he had had  a  relationship  in
    the UK.  But the  appellant  had  detailed  this  relationship  in  his
    statement, saying that it had not been close and that he feared he  had
    merely been used for sex by the other man.

16. The appeal statement also shed light on what had gone before  it.   The
    appellant sought to make amendments to the statement he had made  on  8
    November 2017, for instance, and said that he was not sure whether that
    document had ever been read back to him.  He said that he had not  been
    feeling well on the day of the substantive asylum  interview  and  made
    comments on the answers he had given.  And he had provided  a  detailed
    response to the  points  taken  against  him  in  the  refusal  letter.
    Despite her detailed references to the  interview,  the  November  2017
    statement  and  the  refusal  letter,  the  judge  made  no   reference
    whatsoever to the appeal statement or to the way in which it  addressed
    the contents of those earlier documents.

17. It is clear that the judge had many reasons for finding the appellant's
    account of his sexual orientation to be untrue.  Many of those  reasons
    were soundly based, in my judgment, but the error identified by  ground
    two  is  fundamental  and  is  such  that  the  judge's  assessment  of
    credibility cannot stand.  The appellant adopted his witness  statement
    as his examination in chief and it fell to be considered by the  judge.
    It was plainly material to a number of the  judge's  concerns  and  her
    conclusions as to his credibility are unsafe because she failed to take
    the statement into account.

18. This is not a case in which the decision can properly be upheld on  the
    basis of the judge's findings in the alternative.  She concluded, as  I
    have recorded above, that the appellant could relocate  internally  and
    that he could avail himself of a sufficiency  of  protection  from  the
    Albanian state.  As suggested in the first of  Ms  Loughran's  grounds,
    however, those conclusions were reached without any engagement with the
    expert evidence provided by Ms Beddoe and Dr Tahiraj.   Both  of  those
    reports bore directly on these questions.  At [31], the judge found for
    the respondent on these issues.  In doing so, she  'adopted'  what  had
    been  said  in  the  refusal  letter  "even  taking  into  account  the
    background and expert evidence adduced by the  appellant".   I  do  not
    consider these reasons to represent a legally  adequate  resolution  of
    these critical issues.  The expert evidence advanced  detailed  reasons
    for reaching the opposite conclusion to the refusal letter and  it  did
    not suffice for the judge merely to state that she had  taken  it  into
    account.  If she was to reject the conclusions in the expert  evidence,
    her obligations were to approach that evidence  with  appropriate  care
    and to give good reasons for reaching a contrary  conclusion:  SS  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 155.   I  do  not  consider  the  judge's
    reasons to have complied with either limb of that requirement.

19. It follows that the first  two  grounds  are  made  out  and  that  the
    decision must be set aside as a whole.  Ms Loughran  did  not  seek  to
    address me on the remaining grounds in those circumstances  and  it  is
    not necessary for me to express any view upon those grounds.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law and that decision is set aside as  a  whole.   The  appeal  is
remitted to the FtT for rehearing de novo before a judge other than Judge  K
L James.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of  court  proceedings.   I  make
this direction because it reduces the risk to the appellant if his claim  is
ultimately unsuccessful and he is returned to his country of origin.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                             27 October 2020
