
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06381/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd September 2020               |On 28th September 2020               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     LT
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss U Dirie, Counsel instructed by J McCarthy
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("the FtT").  As
the appeal raises matters regarding a claim for international protection,
it is appropriate for an anonymity direction to be made.  Unless and until
a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
contempt of court proceedings.

Remote Hearing


 1. The hearing before me on 22nd September 2020 took the form of a remote
    hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  At the
    outset, I was informed by Miss Dirie that the appellant is aware of the
    hearing but does not have the facilities to join the hearing remotely.
    Had a request been made for a simultaneous BT conference call to be
    facilitated so that the appellant could hear the proceedings, I would
    have acceded to such a request.  Miss Dirie confirmed the appellant is
    happy for the hearing to proceed in his absence. I sat at the
    Birmingham Civil Justice Centre and the hearing room and building were
    open to the public. The hearing was publicly listed, and I was
    addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as I would
    have been, if the parties had attended the hearing together.  I was
    satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open court; that the open
    justice principle has been secured; that no party has been prejudiced;
    and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a right or
    interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I was
    satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in accordance
    with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote hearing because
    of the present need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19,
    and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure
    the matter is dealt with fairly and justly in a way that is
    proportionate to the importance of the case, the complexity of the
    issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and resources of the
    parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied that both parties
    had been able to participate fully in the proceedings.


The Background


 2. The appellant is an Afghan National who arrived in the UK on 19th March
    2008, aged 18, and claimed asylum.  The claim for asylum was refused by
    the respondent on 29th April 2010 and an appeal against that decision
    was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Iqbal for reasons set out in
    a determination promulgated on 30th June 2010.   The appellant has
    since made further submissions to the respondent and most recently, the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 21st May 2019
    to refuse his claim for international protection was dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Connor for reasons set out in a decision
    promulgated on 22nd August 2019.


 3. The appellant's immigration history is set out at paragraphs [2] to [6]
    of the decision of Judge Connor. The matters relied upon by the
    appellant in support of his claim for international protection are
    summarised at paragraph [7(iv)] to [7(viii)] of the decision.  The
    appellant gave evidence at the hearing of his appeal and his evidence
    is summarised at paragraphs [11] to [22] of the decision.  Judge
    Connor's findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [45] to
    [75] of the decision.  At paragraph [48] of the decision, Judge Connor
    said:


         "...The Immigration Judge in the determination promulgated on 30th
         June 2010 dismissed the appellant's claim having found his father
         and brother were not members of the Taliban and were not killed at
         the hands of the authorities due to their membership of the
         Taliban. The appellant's evidence was not considered credible and
         the Judge found the appellant was not at risk from the Taliban or
         the authorities. The judge found the appellant did not have
         problems in his home area or in the Kunar province.  As a result of
         those findings he did not go on to consider relocation to another
         area of Afghanistan."


 4. Judge Connor said at paragraph [50] that having considered the evidence
    she had from the appellant, she did not find him credible, and, his
    evidence changed in order to present a picture that would bolster his
    asylum claim. She rejected the appellant's claim that he had been
    supported by friends in the UK and had not worked.  She found, at [51],
    that it is more likely that the appellant has been undertaking work
    whilst in the UK in order to support himself.  She also found that the
    appellant had been inconsistent in his evidence regarding the work he
    undertook in Afghanistan previously.  She noted that in the previous
    appeal the appellant's evidence was that he ran a video shop with his
    brother, whereas in the appeal before her, he claims he did not run the
    video shop with his brother but only visited the shop and had not
    worked in Afghanistan.  She also rejected the appellant's account that
    he does not know the whereabouts of his family in Afghanistan or has
    been unable to make other attempts to find his family.  She found it is
    more likely that the appellant either has knowledge of his family's
    whereabouts or believes it is not in his interests to attempt to locate
    them.  Judge Connor considered the claims made by the appellant
    regarding his physical and mental health. She noted the appellant has
    not produced any medical evidence to support his claims and placed
    little weight on the appellant's own evidence.  At paragraph [56] of
    her decision Judge Connor said:


         "The issue before me, in light of the findings above, is whether
         the appellant can return to Afghanistan. The appellant relies on
         EASO report from May 2018 Country Guidance: Afghanistan - Guidance
         Note and Common Analysis which post-dates AS in the Upper Tribunal.
          The EASO report sets out the level of indiscriminate violence in
         Nangarhar, however, the respondent in this case has already
         accepted that the appellant cannot return to that area.  Miss
         Gledhill on behalf of the respondent confirms it is not the
         respondent's position the appellant can return to his home area in
         the Nangarhar region of Afghanistan. It is the respondent's
         position the appellant can internally relocate to Kabul."


 5. Judge Connor referred to the country guidance set out in AS (safety of
    Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 and the decision of the Court
    of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 873.  She noted
    the Court of Appeal found that the Upper Tribunal in its country
    guidance decision had erred in law in that its conclusion as to the
    percentage risk of being a victim of indiscriminate violence was not
    available to it, on the evidence. She noted the appeal was remitted
    back to the Upper Tribunal to reconsider the extent of the risk to
    returned asylum seekers from security incidents. She noted it was for
    the Upper Tribunal to consider, in light of the new UNHCR guidelines on
    returns, whether a more extensive basis for reconsideration was
    required. Judge Connor noted, at paragraph [58], that the appellant
    relies on the UNHCR guidelines from August 2018 which report that
    people fleeing Afghanistan may be at risk of persecution for reasons
    related to the ongoing armed conflict and that internal flight or
    relocation to Kabul is not generally available.  Judge Connor said at
    paragraph [60] of her decision:


         "...The country guidance at the time of my determination is in
         accordance with AK namely that the level of indiscriminate violence
         in Kabul and Kabul City in general is not at such a high level that
         it represents a real risk of harm contrary to Article 15(c).
         However, there may be particular factors relating to an individual
         which might nevertheless place them at risk e.g. age, disability,
         gender, ill-health or perceived as a collaborator."


 6. At paragraph [61] of her decision, Judge Connor noted that as at the
    time of the hearing of the appeal before her and her determination, the
    country guidance remains as she had stated, "... albeit I have also
    considered the UNHCR guidelines and the July 2019 CPIN".  At paragraphs
    [62] to [64] of her decision, Judge Connor said:


         "62. I have therefore considered whether there are any particular
         factors which raise the risk profile of this appellant. In
         accordance with my findings and the determination of Immigration
         Judge Iqbal, the appellant is a person with no or low profile who
         is unlikely to be of interest to the Taliban. In AS (Safety of
         Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 the Upper Tribunal held
         (and a finding which was not remitted by the Court of Appeal for
         further consideration) that a person who was of lower level
         interest for the Taliban (i.e. not a senior government or security
         services official, or a spy) is not at real risk of persecution
         from the Taliban in Kabul.


         63.  The appellant is a single man aged 29. In accordance with the
         above I have found he does not have any physical or mental health
         issues. In accordance with the findings of Immigration Judge Iqbal,
         he is not at risk from the Taliban or the authorities. He speaks
         Pushto and some Dari and now has some English. To have been able to
         support himself in the UK he has shown the personality, capacity
         and intelligence to manage independently and there is no reason why
         he cannot do so in Kabul.


         64.  The appellant has maintained he has no support network in
         Kabul.  However, I have set out my findings in relation to the
         appellant's efforts to locate his family in Afghanistan. Further,
         he has been part of the Afghanistan community and the Mosque in the
         UK for some 11 years and given his ability to find help and support
         in the UK, it is not credible he could not find assistance if he
         were to return to Kabul.  Further, whilst not a persuasive factor,
         there is still the consideration of the assistance available to
         voluntary returnees in Kabul which the appellant is capable of
         availing himself and which may assist to counter any particular
         vulnerability of an individual on return."


 7. At paragraph [65], Judge Connor addressed the claim made by the
    appellant that he will be perceived as being 'westernised' having lived
    in the UK for over 10 years.  She rejected the claim that the appellant
    having been in the UK has a risk profile, on the basis of
    'westernisation'.  Judge Connor concluded at paragraph [66] that the
    appellant does not have any particular characteristics which mean he
    would have an increased risk profile or that would make him more
    vulnerable on return to Afghanistan.  At paragraph [67] she said:


         "For the reasons I stated above, I do not accept the appellant has
         discharged the burden upon him to demonstrate he has a well-founded
         fear of persecution to qualify for asylum, or the that he is at
         real risk of serious harm if returned to Afghanistan as internal
         relocation is available to Kabul. I do not therefore accept that
         the appellant qualifies for humanitarian protection."


The appeal before me


 8. The appellant claims Judge Connor erred in her approach to internal
    relocation because the position adopted by the UNHCR in its 2018
    Eligibility Guidelines is materially different to the position they
    previously adopted, and which were considered by the Upper Tribunal in
    the Country Guidance decision in AS (safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG
    [2018] UKUT 00118.  The appellant claims the judge did not engage with
    UNHCR's 2018 eligibility guidelines and the EASO report, and had she
    done so, the outcome of the appeal may have been different.


 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on 16th
    December 2019.  He noted:


         "The judge's decision is well structured and well-reasoned.
         Although the Court of Appeal remitted AS (Safety of Kabul)
         Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) on a relatively narrow
         basis, it would not have done so had it been satisfied that the
         Upper Tribunal's error would not have made any material difference.
         The Court of Appeal additionally indicated that the Upper Tribunal
         may wish to consider the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines 2018 when
         assessing the reasonableness of internal relocation to Kabul more
         generally. It is arguable that the judge may have erred in failing
         to depart from extent Country Guidance in circumstances where there
         may have been some doubt as to the reliability of that country
         guidance."


10. Upper Tribunal Judge Blum directed that the error of law appeal in the
    Upper Tribunal is to be stayed until promulgation of the Upper
    Tribunal's further decision in AS.   AS (Safety of Kabul) (CG) [2020]
    UKUT 130, has now been promulgated by the Upper Tribunal and the matter
    is listed before me to determine whether the decision of Judge Connor
    is vitiated by a material error of law. The parties agreed at the
    outset that Judge Connor found that it would not be unduly harsh for
    the appellant to internally relocate to Kabul and the issue before me
    is whether there is a material error of law in her decision, in light
    of what has since been said in AS (Safety of Kabul) (CG) [2020] UKUT
    130.


11. Miss Dirie submits Judge Connor failed to engage with the UNHCR
    Eligibility Guidelines of July 2018 and the European Asylum Support
    Office ("EASO") report that had been relied upon by the appellant, when
    she considered whether internal relocation to Kabul would be unduly
    harsh.  She submits the Upper Tribunal has now confirmed, in headnote
    (iv) of its decision that the particular circumstances of an individual
    applicant must be taken into account in the context of conditions in
    the place of relocation, including a person's age, nature and quality
    of support network/connections with Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical
    and mental health, and their language, education and vocational skills
    when determining whether it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh for a
    single adult male to relocate to Kabul.  When pressed, she accepted
    that at paragraphs [63] and [64] of her decision, Judge Connor had in
    fact considered many of the factors identified.  Miss Dirie submits
    that what Judge Connor did not refer to, is the appellant's age when he
    left Afghanistan.  She drew attention to paragraphs [251] of the
    Country Guidance as it now is, in which the Tribunal stated:


         "The Panel in the 2018 UT decision identified that a returnee's
         age, including the age at which he left Afghanistan, is relevant to
         reasonableness. We agree. Returnees of any age without a network
         will face significant challenges establishing themselves in Kabul.
         A person who left Afghanistan at a young age may, depending on
         individual circumstances, be less able than someone who spent their
         formative years in Afghanistan to navigate the challenges of the
         city by, for example, finding work and accommodation.


12. Miss Dirie submits the appellant left Afghanistan at the age of 18 and
    had not spent the formative years of his life in Afghanistan.  On any
    view, she submits, he was still a very young adult when he left
    Afghanistan and that would impact upon his ability to find employment,
    accommodation and to navigate the city.  These are all matters, she
    submits, Judge Connor did not address in her decision.


Discussion


13. At paragraphs [7(viii)] and [58] of her decision, Judge Connor noted
    the appellant had referred to the UNHCR's August 2018 Eligibility
    Guidelines.  She noted that the UNHCR guidelines provide that
    relocation to Kabul is not generally available and there is a
    deteriorating security and humanitarian situation in Kabul.  She noted
    that report was not available to the Upper Tribunal when it reached its
    decision in AS (safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118. At
    paragraph [61] of her decision, Judge Connor stated:


         "...As at the time of the hearing of this appeal and my
         determination, the country guidance remains as I have stated above
         albeit I have also considered the UNHCR guidelines and the July
         2019 CPIN."


14. It was in that context that Judge Connor went on at paragraphs [62] to
    [64] of her decision to consider whether there are any particular
    factors that raise the risk profile of the appellant.


15. I accept, as Mr Howells submits that in AS (Safety of Kabul) (CG)
    [2020] UKUT 130, the Upper Tribunal considered a wealth of evidence
    regarding the Article 15(c) risk, including the 2018 UNHCR Guidelines,
    the 2019 UNHCR Submissions, the 2019 COI UNHCR Report, and EASO's Legal
    Analysis and Recommendations. The Upper Tribunal carefully considered
    the UNHCR evidence and agreed with the critique of the SSHD's counsel
    as set out in paragraphs [188] to [193] of the decision.   The Upper
    Tribunal also addressed EASO's Legal Analysis and Recommendations at
    paragraphs [193] to [198] of its decision.


16. As Mr Howells submits, at paragraph [210], the Upper Tribunal
    acknowledged it had reached a conclusion that is different to that
    expressed by UNHCR in the 2019 UNHCR submissions where (in contrast to
    the 2018 UNCHR Guidelines and 2019 UNHCR COI Report) it is stated in
    terms that UNHCR believes Kabul is not an internal flight alternative.


17. I accept the submission made by Mr Howells, that Judge Connor
    considered the evidence before the Tribunal and carefully considered
    the profile of the appellant at paragraphs [62] to [64] of her
    decision.  The appellant is, on the unchallenged findings made, a
    single man now aged 29 with no physical or mental health issues.  He is
    not at risk from the Taliban or the authorities in Afghanistan and he
    is able to speak Pushto, some Dari, and now English.  He has been able
    to support himself in the UK and has demonstrated the personality,
    capacity and intelligence to manage independently. Judge Connor found,
    at [54], that it is more likely the appellant either has knowledge of
    his family's whereabouts or believes it is not in his interests to
    locate them.


18. I reject the submission made by Miss Dirie that in reaching her
    decision, Judge Connor failed to have any proper or adequate regard to
    the appellant's age when he left Afghanistan.  Judge Connor recorded at
    paragraph [1] of her decision that the appellant was born on 1st
    January 1990 and at paragraph [2], that the appellant claimed to have
    arrived in the UK on 19th of March 2008. She was therefore plainly
    aware that the applicant was aged 18 at the time of his arrival in the
    UK. She had noted in her decision that the appellant has been in the UK
    for 11 years, and that he is now a single man aged 29.  Judge Connor
    had considered at paragraph [52], the conflicting evidence given by the
    appellant regarding his previous work in Afghanistan. It is clear in my
    judgement that in reaching her decision, Judge Connor considered the
    age at which the appellant left Afghanistan, and the support that may
    be available to him.  The appellant was 18 when he left Afghanistan and
    although there is no bright line as to when an individual reaches
    adulthood, it is clear in my judgement that the appellant spent the
    formative years of his life in Afghanistan.  In reaching her decision,
    Judge Connor carefully considered the appellant's individual
    circumstances and whether he would have support, and be able to
    navigate the challenges of Kabul.


19. In my judgement the conclusion reached by Judge Connor that internal
    relocation to Kabul is available to the appellant is a conclusion that
    was open to the Judge on the evidence and findings made.  There is in
    my judgement, no material error of law in the decision.


20. It follows that I dismiss the appeal.





Decision


21. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Connor promulgated on 22nd August 2019 shall stand.


Signed   V. Mandalia                                             Date: 24th
September 2020
 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

