
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06145/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 14 May 2019                         |On 21 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                            MR MD LUTFOR RAHAMAN
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on  11  August  1988.  He
    appeals against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Oliver
    sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  11  February  2019  in  which  the  Judge
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Respondent
    dated 28 April 2018.  That  decision  was  to  refuse  the  Appellant's
    application for asylum.


 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  12  February  2011  in
    possession of a tier 4 general student visa valid until 6  March  2011.
    He applied for further leave to remain as a tier 4 general  student  on
    30 May 2013. This was granted until 3 July 2013. On 6 August  2014  his
    leave was curtailed due to the closure of his course at his college. On
    28 November 2014 he applied for further leave to remain  as  a  tier  4
    student which was granted on 18 September 2015 until 1 September  2016.
    On 16 May 2016 the Appellant's leave to remain was again curtailed this
    time to expire on 18 July 2016. The Appellant applied for further leave
    to remain outside the rules, but this application was  rejected  on  17
    October 2016. On 23 November 2016 the Appellant was  served  with  form
    IAS96 as an overstayer and he claimed asylum on the same day.


The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant's claim was based on his political activities which  had
      come to the adverse attention of agents of the ruling party. From 2006
      to 2009 the  Appellant  had  been  the  organising  secretary  of  the
      Bangladesh National Party (BNP) arranging programs and demonstrations.
      The Appellant had held the position of assistant general secretary  of
      the Dhamrai Thana Chatradal and was on an executive committee of  this
      organisation in the Dhaka district. He had to go into hiding to  avoid
      being arrested by army intelligence. After the Awami  league  came  to
      power in 2008 their student wing attacked him on three  occasions  and
      tried to kill him. He had been tortured harassed and threatened by  an
      entity called the Rapid Action Battalion (I deal with this  allegation
      in more detail below).


   4. In 2010 the police arrested him and  filed  some  cases  against  him.
      Since he left Bangladesh his family and friends had been harassed  and
      threatened. Some of his political colleagues had been  killed  by  the
      Bangladesh Chatra league and the Rapid Action Battalion. In  2016  the
      Appellant's home was raided by the local police  and  members  of  the
      Chatra league. He had organised a series of  protests  in  the  United
      Kingdom and was afraid  of  persecution  upon  return.  Three  threats
      against his life had been made whilst he was in the United Kingdom. He
      had not claimed asylum earlier because he was in possession of a  visa
      and had hoped for change in Bangladesh.


The Decision at First Instance

   5. The Judge did not accept the Appellant's explanation for the delay  in
      claiming asylum. The Appellant had relied on the evidence of witnesses
      who had themselves claimed asylum, but none had apparently advised the
      Appellant to do likewise for reasons  which  the  Judge  found  to  be
      without foundation. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  at  a
      time when on his evidence false cases had already been  filed  against
      him. Had the Appellant claimed asylum on arrival or at any time before
      November 2016 that would not have  prevented  him  from  returning  to
      Bangladesh when circumstances improved. In the event it was not  until
      he was served with notice of his liability to removal that he made his
      claim.


   6. The Appellant's activities in the United Kingdom were well  documented
      but by themselves they would not place the Appellant at risk on return
      if he was perceived by the authorities in Bangladesh to  be  merely  a
      "hanger on"  as  the  Respondent  had  described  the  Appellant.  The
      Appellant had  provided  no  supporting  evidence  of  the  claims  of
      torture. He was clearly still in  contact  with  his  father  who  had
      supported him financially, yet the  father  had  provided  no  witness
      statement to confirm the attacks on the family home by the  police  or
      even the recent attack upon the father himself. The  production  of  a
      letter from an advocate at what the Judge described as the  11th  hour
      was an attempt to take the court by surprise giving the Respondent  no
      time to investigate its provenance in a country where forged documents
      were rife. The document could have been requested at any time  in  the
      last 3 years. It was unreliable and the charges to which  it  referred
      appeared to be easily rebuttable.

   7. The Appellant was a very low-level member of an opposition grouping in
      Bangladesh who had failed to establish that he was  in  any  way  ill-
      treated before he left Bangladesh, without any  trouble,  on  his  own
      passport. He would not be at  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  ill-
      treatment on return. While a returnee of interest to  the  authorities
      may face  ill-treatment,  the  Appellant  would  have  the  option  to
      relocate because he was not of interest to the authorities. The  Judge
      dismissed the appeal.


The Onward Appeal

   8. The Appellant appealed against this decision  on  grounds  settled  by
      counsel who had not appeared at first instance. The first  ground  was
      that the Judge had failed to take account of  an  expert  report  from
      Doctor Ashraf-ul Hoque who had corroborated aspects of the Appellant's
      claim by reference to objective country  material.  It  was  plausible
      that false reports would have been  filed  against  the  Appellant  in
      absentia by ruling party operatives. Only one of the  three  witnesses
      called by the Appellant had  claimed  asylum.  The  use  of  the  word
      torture by the Appellant was simply a  generalised  and  unfortunately
      inaccurate term used in one set of representations  submitted  by  his
      representatives.


   9.  The  Judge's  conclusion  that  the  Appellant's  well-documented  UK
      activities would not place the  Appellant  at  risk  given  they  were
      focused on human rights criticisms  did  not  take  into  account  the
      Respondent's country policy and  information  note  (CPIN)  which  had
      quoted  evidence  that  human  rights   defenders   faced   escalating
      repression,  harassment  and  threats.  The   Judge   had   erred   by
      categorising the Appellant as a mere  hanger  on.  The  Appellant  had
      given a presentation at Parliament and was recorded as having lectured
      at a  public  rally  in  February  2017.  Little  or  no  evidence  or
      speculation was required to arrive  at  the  strong  possibility  that
      foreign embassies not only film or photograph their nationals but have
      informers who can name them. It was an error to say that  the  charges
      allegedly faced by the Appellant  were  easily  rebuttable  given  the
      expert's evidence that the issue of false charges  was  a  common  and
      effective method of silencing opposition. The  Judge  had  effectively
      required the Appellant to give evidence of an elevated profile  beyond
      the Appellant's own level of activism.

  10. The 4th ground argued that any political supporter of the BNP faced  a
      real risk of serious harm if they continue to exercise their right  to
      political expression. The Tribunal had accepted that the Appellant had
      some political beliefs given that the evidence of the  Appellant's  UK
      activities could not be seriously disputed. There  was  no  reason  to
      think the Appellant would change his activities in the  future  unless
      he acted with a degree of discretion that would be driven by  fear  of
      persecution. This argument relied on the case of HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC
      31.

  11. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andrew on 1 April 2019.  In  granting
      permission to appeal she was satisfied that there were arguable errors
      of law. The Judge did not appear to have  taken  note  of  the  expert
      evidence when assessing the credibility of the  Appellant.  The  Judge
      did not seem to have considered the Respondent's own guidance  in  the
      CPIN or the level of the Appellant's political activities.  The  Judge
      had not considered the HJ (Iran) principles when  considering  whether
      the Appellant would be at risk on return.


The Hearing Before Me

  12. In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me to
      determine in the first place whether there was a material error of law
      such that the determination fell to  be  set  aside,  and  the  appeal
      reheard. If there was not, then the decision at first  instance  would
      stand.


  13. At  the  outset  of  the  hearing  the  Presenting  Officer  raised  a
      preliminary point that paragraph 5 (c) of the grounds of onward appeal
      may have some merit in relation to the complaint that there was not  a
      lack of medical evidence corroborative of the Appellant's  account  of
      torture because he had not stated that he had been  tortured.  It  was
      for the Appellant to clarify the claim, but it was not clear what  his
      representatives had said. The Judge had taken an adverse point against
      the Appellant over the claims that the Appellant  had  been  tortured,
      see for  example  [34]  where  the  Judge  referred  to  none  of  the
      Appellant's witnesses mentioning torture and [36] that  the  Appellant
      had provided no corroboration of the claims of torture  said  to  have
      been made at the outset of his asylum claim. Arguably the Judge should
      have made a finding as to  whether  the  Appellant  had  alleged  ill-
      treatment.

  14. For the Appellant counsel argued that at question 66 the Appellant had
      been asked whether  he  had  received  any  threats  whilst  being  in
      Bangladesh and he replied: "they told me to quit and that if  I  don't
      do it they would harm  me".  The  Appellant  had  never  said  he  was
      tortured.

15. Nevertheless, the principal argument made by counsel in support of  the
    Appellant's onward appeal  was  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  deal
    adequately with the expert report of Doctor  Ashraf-ul-Hoque.  At  [32]
    the Judge had stated that  the  expert's  report  "largely  dealt  with
    political background and general prospects on return it  was  suggested
    that the Appellant would be  unable  to  relocate  within  Bangladesh".
    Counsel acknowledged that  the  report  did  set  out  much  background
    material but at paragraph 60 the report dealt with  why  the  Appellant
    had joined the BNP, at paragraph 76 what was the risk to the Appellant,
    at paragraphs 88 and 89 what the Appellant's UK activities were and why
    they would place him at risk on return and at paragraphs 95 to  96  the
    issue of internal relocation.  The  Tribunal  it  was  argued  had  not
    grappled with the report's contents.

16. The 2nd part of this argument was that the  three  witnesses  who  gave
    evidence on the Appellant's behalf had not all claimed asylum, only one
    had. One had obtained leave to remain through marriage and  the  second
    had leave to remain as a result  of  10  years  lawful  residence.  The
    Appellant had not claimed asylum earlier because he intended to  return
    if his party got into power. It was not his case that he had failed  to
    claim asylum because he did not know how to make a claim. The Appellant
    was at risk because of his human rights activities. The Judge was wrong
    to say the Appellant was a mere hanger on.

17. The 4th ground was that the Appellant would be unable  to  continue  to
    exercise his right to political expression relying on the authority  of
    HJ Iran. I queried with counsel whether that point  had  in  fact  been
    made to the First-tier Tribunal or whether the first time that  the  HJ
    Iran point was being taken was in the grounds of onward appeal. Counsel
    acknowledged that there appeared to be  no  mention  by  the  Appellant
    either in his witness statement or his oral evidence that  he  intended
    to engage in political activities upon return. The Respondent was wrong
    to say in the refusal letter at paragraph 99 that the Appellant  had  a
    wife in Bangladesh. He was not married.

18. For the Respondent it was argued that there was not  a  great  deal  of
    force in the criticism of the Judge's treatment of the  expert  report.
    The expert had laid out evidence  in  general  terms  and  the  adverse
    findings made by the Judge were permissible. Arguably what had happened
    about the allegation of torture was that  the  representations  by  the
    legal representative were different to what  the  Appellant  had  given
    instructions on. Whether that was  a  material  error  of  law  on  the
    Judge's part was another matter.

19. The Respondent did acknowledge that the Appellant had claimed  to  have
    given a presentation to Parliament and  lectured  at  a  public  rally.
    Although it  was  the  Respondent  who  had  initially  said  that  the
    Appellant was a mere "hanger on" the Respondent did not  now  stand  by
    that comment. The Judge had accepted that the Appellant was involved in
    activities in the United Kingdom but  whether  those  activities  would
    lead to serious harm upon return was quite another  matter.  The  Judge
    had spoken about an outstanding First Information  Report  (FIR)  as  a
    minor matter easily rebutted by the Appellant. There were a  number  of
    nuanced layers to the Appellant's claim.

20.  In  conclusion  counsel  reiterated  that  the  Appellant's  political
    involvement in the United Kingdom took on more weight in terms  of  the
    risk on return in the light of the expert's report.


Findings

  21. In submissions to me counsel  argued  that  the  Appellant  had  never
      mentioned that he had  been  physically  harmed  at  any  stage.  This
      submission sat uneasily with a letter written to the Respondent by the
      Appellant's previous solicitors, Chancery solicitors, dated 6 December
      2016 which stated that the student wing of the Awami  league  attacked
      the Appellant three times and attempted to kill him. The  letter  then
      went on to say  "[the  Appellant]  has  been  tortured,  harassed  and
      threatened by the Rapid Action Battalion, Detective Branch, police and
      BCL [Bangladesh Chatra League] cadres  for  his  political  activities
      which have started from March 2007" and later the letter said: "he has
      already been subject to persecution".


  22. This letter was written 13 days after the Appellant claimed asylum and
      was a clear notification on the Appellant's behalf to  the  Respondent
      that the Appellant had been tortured whilst in Bangladesh.  The  Judge
      summarised this claim of torture at [15] of  the  determination  under
      the subheading "Development of the Appellant's Case". The Judge  noted
      that there was no supporting evidence to confirm the ill-treatment  of
      which the letter complained. It does  not  appear  that  there  was  a
      repudiation of that letter by the time of the hearing  in  the  First-
      tier. In those circumstances  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  draw  the
      conclusion that this was part  of  the  Appellant's  case.  The  first
      repudiation of the solicitors' letter appears in the grounds of onward
      appeal where  the  reference  to  torture  (used  in  the  letter)  is
      described as "a generalised term" and "unfortunately inaccurate".

  23. That characterisation itself is not completely  accurate  since  there
      was more to the letter than a single  mention  of  the  word  torture.
      There was also an allegation  of  physical  attacks  and  the  alleged
      perpetrators of these  attacks  in  Bangladesh  were  identified.  The
      solicitor's letter was written to the Respondent. It  is  not  obvious
      why the Respondent in submissions to me should suggest it might not be
      clear  what  the  representatives  had  said,  particularly   as   the
      Respondent  had  the  opportunity  of  questioning  the  Appellant  in
      interview 4 months later. It was  not  incumbent  upon  the  Judge  to
      investigate whether the Appellant had in fact been  tortured.  It  was
      open to the Judge to find that  an  allegation  of  torture  and  ill-
      treatment  had  been  made  by  the  Appellant's  solicitors  but   no
      supporting evidence to back  that  up  had  ever  been  produced.  The
      representatives appeared to be embroidering  the  Appellant's  account
      and that was a factor which the Judge  was  entitled  to  consider  in
      deciding the overall credibility of the Appellant's account.

  24. I was not referred to any evidence of any complaint made  against  the
      previous  solicitors  for  example  that  they   had   acted   without
      instructions. The letter of 6 December 2016 is a detailed one and sets
      out many of the Appellant's activities which he does rely on,  it  was
      not just an allegation of torture. The letter must have  been  written
      after the solicitors had taken full instructions. It was open  to  the
      Judge to find as he did at [14] and [15] that the letter  was  written
      on the Appellant's behalf  and  as  such  the  lack  of  corroboration
      adversely impacted on the Appellant's credibility. The attempt in  the
      grounds to distance the Appellant from the letter of 6  December  2016
      appears to be an attempt to  repair  the  damage  to  the  Appellant's
      credibility but does not disclose a  material  error  of  law  on  the
      Judge's part. It was not a material error of law for the Judge to have
      regard to representations written on the  Appellant's  behalf  and  to
      factor those  representations  into  his  general  assessment  of  the
      credibility or otherwise of the Appellant's account.

  25. It is correct to say that the Judge deals  with  the  expert's  report
      somewhat briefly but the problem for the Appellant is that it  is  not
      the function of the expert to  give  an  opinion  on  the  Appellant's
      credibility. In this case the expert was assessing what would  be  the
      risk to the Appellant if his account were true. The Judge was aware of
      the  Appellant's  attendance  at  an   international   conference   in
      Parliament in January 2017 as he referred to them at [22]. At [35] the
      Judge accepted that the Appellant's activities in the  United  Kingdom
      were well documented but did not accept that  those  activities  would
      place the Appellant at risk. The Judge drew a distinction between  the
      Appellant's  human  rights  activities  rather  than  any  exclusively
      political activities. For  example,  it  appears  from  the  documents
      supplied by the Appellant that some of  the  representations  made  to
      Parliament were about  the  treatment  of  the  Rohingya  minority  in
      Myanmar. It was open to the Judge to find that  such  activities  were
      unlikely to be of concern to the Bangladesh authorities.

  26. The Judge applied the description "hanger on" to the Appellant  taking
      that from the refusal letter. That the  Respondent  now  resiles  from
      that description does not of itself invalidate the Judge's conclusion.
      The Judge had to assess all the evidence and form his own  view  which
      happened to agree with what at that stage was the Respondent's case.

  27. It was not just the  lack  of  corroboration  of  the  allegations  of
      torture which  concerned  the  Judge.  There  was  also  the  lack  of
      supporting evidence from the Appellant's father. The Appellant had  on
      a number of occasions claimed that his family had been harassed by the
      Bangladesh authorities and it was  reasonable  to  have  expected  the
      Appellant to have produced some supporting evidence but as  the  Judge
      noted at [36] the Appellant had not done that. The grounds  complained
      that any political supporter of the BNP faced a real risk  of  serious
      harm  if  they  continued  to  exercise  their  right   to   political
      expression. It does not appear to have been the  Appellant's  case  at
      first instance that he was proposing to continue political  activities
      on return. It is not a fair criticism of the  determination  that  the
      Judge failed to anticipate an argument not made before him. I disagree
      with the grant of permission that it was an arguable error of law that
      the Judge had not considered the HJ Iran principles  when  the  matter
      had not been raised before the Judge.

  28. It was speculation in the grounds to suggest  that  the  Judge  should
      have found that agents of the Bangladesh  government  had  filmed  the
      Appellant taking part in sur place activities. The Appellant's  expert
      stated that he was unable to say that the Appellant's activities  will
      have been monitored by  the  Bangladesh  authorities  and  the  matter
      therefore was for the Judge to decide. This paragraph in  the  grounds
      also appears to be attempting to raise a matter not previously  argued
      before the Judge.

  29. Whilst it might have been helpful if the  Judge  had  dealt  with  the
      expert's report in more detail, was not necessary for the Judge to set
      out each and every piece of evidence that  was  put  before  him.  His
      overall conclusion on the expert's report was that it dealt more  with
      generalities. The Judge's fundamental point was that the Appellant was
      engaged  in  a  relatively  low  level  of  activities  and  what  was
      undertaken in the United Kingdom was unlikely  to  bring  him  to  the
      adverse attention of the Bangladesh authorities.  At  a  fairly  early
      stage in his claim the  Appellant's  representatives  had  embroidered
      matters which inevitably undermined the credibility of the claim.  The
      Judge was in a better position to assess the credibility of the  claim
      than the expert as the Judge had the benefit of seeing  the  Appellant
      cross-examined.

  30. The Judge also found against the Appellant that he had delayed a claim
      for asylum. The Appellant only made his claim after being served  with
      a removal notice. This was very late in the day by any reckoning.  The
      Judge was aware of the  Appellant's  explanation  for  the  delay  but
      rejected it at [34] of the determination. The complaint in the grounds
      about this rejection is a mere disagreement with  the  Judge's  cogent
      findings. If the Appellant had claimed earlier  that  would  not  have
      prevented him from returning to Bangladesh  at  a  later  date  if  he
      judged the situation to have improved.

  31. The Judge explained at [37] why he placed little weight on the  FIR(s)
      against the Appellant, the Appellant  had  had  ample  opportunity  to
      obtain evidence confirming the import of  the  FIRs  but  instead  had
      chosen to provide a letter at what the Judge described  as  "the  11th
      hour". That affected the weight that could be  afforded  to  the  FIRs
      given the background material which showed that  such  documents  were
      readily issued and as the Judge pointed out in a context of widespread
      forged documents. That this information was photocopied only added  to
      the Judge's anxiety about its authenticity. The grounds are a  lengthy
      disagreement with  the  determination  they  do  not  demonstrate  any
      material error of law in the Judge's  decision  and  I  dismissed  the
      onward appeal against it.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed


I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 15 May 2019


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 15 May 2019


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
