
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06980/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On May 13, 2018                     |On 17 May, 2019                       |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  m r C A L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C Harris, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a Sri Lankan national, arrived in the United Kingdom  as
    a student on October 19, 2010 and his leave was  subsequently  extended
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student on August 21, 2013, giving him  leave  to
    remain in  that  category  until  September  18,  2014.   A  subsequent
    application to extend that stay was rejected on April 9, 2015,  as  was
    an application for leave to remain on family and private life  grounds.



 2. On November 23, 2017 the appellant applied  for  asylum  but  this  was
    refused by the respondent on May 23, 2018 under paragraph 339A HC 395.

 3. The appellant  appealed  that  decision  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  on  June  4,  2018.   His
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Higgins  who  in  a
    decision dated February 1, 2019 dismissed the appellant's appeal on all
    grounds.  In doing so the Judge accepted  the  appellant's  account  of
    events in Sri Lanka but concluded in paragraph [92] that  he  would  no
    longer be of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities were he to  return.



 4. Permission to appeal was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kamara  on
    April 9, 2019 on the basis that having accepted the appellant's version
    of events it was arguable the Judge had erred in his  assessment  of  a
    risk on return based on GJ and others (post-civil war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

 5. UNLESS AND UNTIL A TRIBUNAL OR COURT DIRECTS OTHERWISE,  THE  APPELLANT
    IS GRANTED ANONYMITY.  NO REPORT OF THESE PROCEEDINGS SHALL DIRECTLY OR
    INDIRECTLY IDENTIFY HIM OR ANY MEMBER OF HIS  FAMILY.   THIS  DIRECTION
    APPLIES BOTH TO THE APPELLANT AND TO THE RESPONDENT.  FAILURE TO COMPLY
    WITH THIS DIRECTION COULD LEAD TO CONTEMPT OF COURT PROCEEDINGS.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 6. Miss Harris adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted that  the  area
    of appeal was a narrow issue  and  ultimately  centred  upon  what  was
    considered a war crime.  She submitted that the appellant's account  to
    the LLRC about his friend's abduction was an account of a war crime  as
    this was a  type  of  issue  the  Commission  was  investigating.   She
    submitted that the Judge's conclusion at paragraph [92] of his decision
    that the appellant did not fall into a risk category was  an  error  in
    law and the  Tribunal  failed  to  have  regard  to  resolution  47/133
    (December 18, 1992).  She referred the Tribunal to category 7(c) of the
    head note of GJ which stated:

         "Individuals who have given evidence to  the  Lessons  Learned  and
         Reconciliation  Commission  implicating  the  Sri  Lankan  security
         forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan authorities in  alleged  war
         crimes.  Among those who may have witnessed war crimes  during  the
         conflict, particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only those
         who have already identified  themselves  by  giving  such  evidence
         would be known to the Sri Lankan  authorities  and  therefore  only
         they are at real risk of adverse attention or persecution on return
         as potential or actual war crimes witnesses.".

 7. She submitted that the appellant would be known to the  authorities  as
    the First-tier Judge had accepted that he had provided  such  evidence.
    The Tribunal in GJ stated at paragraph 2 that the Sri Lankan Government
    had established the Commission and mandated it to prepare a  report  on
    matters that may have taken place between February 2002 and  May  2009.
    She submitted therefore that the appellant's evidence fell within  this
    category.

 8. There was an additional issue raised  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to
    consider what would happen to him on return to Sri  Lanka,  bearing  in
    mind country evidence suggested a forced returnee could be expected  to
    be asked about his own and his family's LTTE connections and sympathies
    and he was not expected to lie.

 9. Mr Tarlow opposed  the  application  and  submitted  that  the  Judge's
    finding at paragraph [92] of the  decision  was  sustainable.   It  was
    wrong to suggest that every general crime was a war crime and the  fact
    that ten years had elapsed since the incident he argued the  Judge  was
    entitled to find the appellant would no longer be of  any  interest  to
    the authorities.

    FINDINGS ON MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

10. This is an appeal brought on a  narrow  issue,  namely  the  First-tier
    Judge's approach to the risk categories set out by the  Upper  Tribunal
    in GJ.

11. The Judge effectively accepted the appellant's account of what occurred
    in Sri Lanka and at paragraph [92] of his decision  the  Judge  had  to
    assess whether or not returning the appellant would place him in a risk
    category or not.

12.  Both  representatives  addressed  me  on  the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant's actions amounted to a war crime,  namely  whether  what  he
    reported to the Commission amounted  to  a  war  crime.   There  is  no
    specific definition contained within GJ of what a war crime is or  was,
    but what is clear is that there is a difference  between  a  report  to
    perhaps the authorities and a report to the LLRC.  It  is  argued  that
    the actions taken by the police authorities in Sri Lanka amounted to  a
    war crime.

13. The type of behaviour described by the witness to the Judge was clearly
    a common occurrence in Sri Lanka at that time.  This and  other  issues
    similar were matters that  the  Commission  had  to  consider.   Having
    accepted the reliability and credibility of the evidence the Judge  had
    to make findings on whether this appellant fell within a risk category,
    and in particular the category set out in head note 7(c).

14. Mr Tarlow argued that the passage of time effectively was a lacuna  not
    properly considered by the Tribunal.  I find the Tribunal's findings in
    GJ are quite specific.  The head note, and in  particular  paragraph  7
    sets out those categories of persons who are likely to be at risk  were
    they to be returned.  Most of those  categories  do  not  concern  this
    Tribunal today, but the relevant one is the category set out at 7(c).

15. There is no dispute that this appellant gave evidence to the  LLRC  and
    that that evidence implicated the Sri  Lankan  security  forces,  armed
    forces or the Sri Lankan authorities.   The  type  of  behaviour  being
    investigated was exactly this type of behaviour and I disagree with  Mr
    Tarlow's submission that the type of behaviour described would not have
    been considered as  a  war  crime  by  the  Commission.   GJ  does  not
    distinguish set time limits especially because the Tribunal was looking
    back at matters that had occurred many years  ago  when  providing  its
    advice.

16. In conclusion, I find  that  having  established  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had accepted the appellant's account  in  its  entirety,
    the conclusion that the evidence did not amount to an alleged war crime
    has no real substance.  The statement  he  provided  was  the  type  of
    behaviour being investigated by the Commission and obviously thereafter
    being considered by Tribunals such as the Upper Tribunal  in  GJ.   The
    fact that nothing came of the threats made to him is not the  issue  in
    this case.

17. It is the fact that he would be identified as someone who  had  made  a
    report to the authorities and in particular to the LLRC.   It  is  this
    distinguishing factor which places him in a risk category.

18. I therefore find that there was an error in  law  in  this  matter.  Mr
    Tarlow agreed that if there was an error in law then the only  possible
    outcome would be to allow the appeal.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

19. I therefore find there was an error in law and I set aside the original
    decision and I grant the appeal on the grounds of protection.


Signed                              Date         16 May 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although a fee was paid I do not make a fee award  because  the  appeal  has
been allowed  based  on  findings  made  and  not  on  material  before  the
respondent when the decision was taken.


Signed                              Date         16 May 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
