
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06849/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Without a hearing                    |On 19th June 2020                    |
|5th June 2020                        |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     MA
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant in  this  determination  identified  as  MA.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. FtT Judge Tucker dismissed MA's appeal against the refusal  of  his
         international protection and human rights claim for reasons set out
         in a decision promulgated  on  24th  January  2020.  Permission  to
         appeal  was  granted  by  FtT  judge  Keane  on  13th  March  2020.
         Directions for the further conduct of the appeal were sent and,  in
         the circumstances surrounding COVID 19, provision was made for  the
         question of whether there was an error of law and if so whether the
         decision of the FtT Judge should be set aside to be  determined  on
         the papers.

      2. Both parties complied with the directions; neither party sought  an
         oral hearing to determine the error of law issue.

      3. I am satisfied that the submissions made on behalf of the appellant
         and  the  respondent  together  with  the  papers  before  me   are
         sufficient to enable me to be able to take a  decision  on  whether
         there is an error of law in the decision  of  the  FtT  and  if  so
         whether the decision should be set aside, on the papers and without
         hearing oral submissions.

         FtT decision

      4. The appellant, on the date of his application for  protection,  the
         date of decision and the date of hearing was under  18  years  old.
         The judge took into consideration the relevant guidance in reaching
         his decision. The core of the appellant's claim was that he had sex
         with a girlfriend (K) outdoors in September  2018,  was  discovered
         and filmed and  threatened  with  disclosure;  that  he  left  home
         without telling his mother or father and went to a maternal uncle's
         home who arranged for him to leave Iraq. He did not know how old  K
         was or where she lived or what her family did. His claim  was  that
         they were and had been in a love  relationship  and  did  not  talk
         about their families. He claimed to have had no  contact  with  his
         family since the  incident.  The  appellant  was  fingerprinted  in
         Greece on 4 June 2018.

      5. The FtT judge identified that the central issue was the credibility
         of the appellant's claim.

      6. The FtT judge records the appellant's evidence ([54]) that  he  had
         not told anyone of his and K's  relationship  because  it  was  not
         acceptable within their culture and that they  had  not  seen  each
         other outside school prior to the incident relied upon.  The  judge
         recorded the appellant's evidence that K had phoned  the  appellant
         to suggest they meet in her family orchard  to  have  sex  although
         they had not previously discussed having a  physical  relationship.
         The judge found:

              56. K must have known the considerable personal risk  she  was
                  taking by embarking  on  the  course  of  action  she  was
                  suggesting. The evidence of the  Appellant  was  that  the
                  relationship was  considered  unacceptable,  prior  to  it
                  becoming intimate,  and  now  K  was  suggesting  that  it
                  suddenly progress to a much more dangerous level. This was
                  not a situation where the couple had commenced a  physical
                  relationship which had suddenly 'got out of  control'  and
                  resulted in sexual intercourse. It was, according  to  the
                  Appellant's evidence, a calculated act  at  least  on  the
                  part of K which she must have thought through in advance.

             ...

              61. I found the Appellant's evidence  was  confused  regarding
                  the meeting saying he did  not  know  what  was  going  to
                  happen and if  he  knew  he  would  not  have  gone  there
                  (question 94). That is inconsistent with his evidence that
                  K was clear what the purpose of the meeting was for.

             ...

              66. ... the Appellant has made no effort to contact anyone  in
                  Iraq to try and find out the fate of K. I  find  that  the
                  apparent  indifference  to  the  fate  of  K   is   wholly
                  inconsistent with the nature of the  relationship  claimed
                  by the Appellant who spoke of their 'love relationship'. I
                  take account of the age of the Appellant  with  regard  to
                  his decision making but also of the fact that he  was,  at
                  the time, receiving support and advice from his uncle.

      7. The judge refers to the discrepancy in the dates namely that h  the
         incident took place in September 2018  but  in  June  2018  he  was
         fingerprinted in Greece. The judge records the appellant's evidence
         that he must have been confused and that the  appellant  maintained
         the events took place as claimed but that he must  have  left  Iraq
         earlier than he thought.

      8. The judge finds:

           . The inconsistency in dates undermines the credibility  of  the
             appellant's account;

           . It was not credible the appellant would know so little about K
             if he was in a relationship as claimed;

           . It was not credible he would not  tell  his  mother  what  had
             happened;

           . It was not credible that he would leave his  mobile  phone  at
             home;

           . It was not credible he had no contact with his family;

           . The appellant was not a credible witness; he  had  not  had  a
             sexual relationship with a girl;

           . He is still in  contact  with  his  family  and,  with  family
             assistance  he  would  be  able  to   obtain   the   necessary
             identification documentation to enable him to  return  to  the
             IKR where he would have accommodation and family support.

         Error of law

      9. The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal  on  four
         (mis-numbered as five) arguable grounds:

             Ground 1:     that the  judge  imposed  a  test  on  what  the
             appellant would do through speculation both as to K's motives,
             the personal details they would have disclosed to  each  other
             and that the appellant would legitimately say he did not  know
             what was going  to  happen  in  his  first  sexual  encounter;
             failing to  identify  what  precautions  it  would  have  been
             reasonable for a 17 year old to take.

             Ground 2: the decision lacked cogent reasoning in referring to
             the appellant's lack of concern for K and  yet  his  genuinely
             held fear of death at  the  hands  of  K's  family;  that  the
             finding he would not tell his own  mother  was  irreconcilable
             with negative family attitudes to honour crimes.

             Ground 3: procedural impropriety in going behind a  concession
             by the respondent that  the  inconsistency  between  when  the
             appellant was in Greece and when the claimed incident occurred
             did not impact upon the appellant's credibility.

             Ground 4: the appellant's inability to remember why he was not
             in school on the date of the  claimed  incident  was  a  minor
             irrelevancy.

     10. Grounds 1, 2 and 4 essentially submit  that  the  judge  improperly
         considered the evidence through the prism of  his  own  experiences
         and gave  inadequate  reasoning  for  the  findings  made.  On  the
         contrary, the  FtT  judge  set  out  the  country  information  and
         background evidence regarding  honour  crimes  and  considered  the
         evidence in the context of that evidence. He identified the salient
         parts  of  the   appellant's   evidence   and   referred   to   the
         inconsistencies, for example that K had asked to meet him for  sex,
         that he didn't know what they were meeting for and that he wouldn't
         have gone to meet her if  he  knew.  It  was  not  inconsistent  or
         unreasonable for the judge to refer to the lack  of  knowledge  the
         appellant  had  of  K  personally   after   a   claimed   two-month
         relationship; nor was it irrelevant that this was the first meeting
         they had had outside school. That the appellant could not  remember
         why he was not in school that day may be a small point and  on  its
         own would have been insufficient to found a lack of credibility but
         the judge simply took this as a factor to be  taken  into  account.
         The judge directed himself properly and  reminded  himself  of  the
         appellant's age. He took note that the appellant went to a maternal
         uncle who assisted him. The appellant's claim that the relationship
         was a love relationship, the lack of concern shown by the appellant
         for K and the failure by the appellant to tell his mother what  had
         happened were relevant factors that it was correct for the judge to
         consider.  The  judge  has  considered  the   evidence   from   the
         perspective of the appellant as is plain from his consideration  of
         the background evidence in relation to 'honour' crimes.

     11. The reference in the grounds  to  the  judge  failing  to  identify
         'precautions' is difficult to  understand  -  the  reference  comes
         immediately after the judge  has  set  out  extracts  of  interview
         records where the appellant describes what he knew and didn't know,
         which included reference to the appellant knowing the risks  if  he
         were caught having sex in the open and that had he known  that  was
         proposed he would not have gone.

     12. Ground 3  submits  the  judge  went  behind  a  concession  by  the
         respondent that being in Greece in June 2018 whereas he claimed the
         incident that formed the core of his account was in September  2018
         was not being held against him. As identified by the  judge,  there
         was a discord in the reasons for refusal letter of  the  respondent
         where the respondent points out the discrepancy  in  dates  between
         June and September in paragraph 42 but in  paragraph  46[1]  states
         the  discrepancy  does  not  engage  s8  Asylum   and   Immigration
         (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004. Ground  3  mischaracterises
         this as a concession by the respondent. Firstly, there is no  clear
         concession  -  the  respondent  makes  direct  reference   to   the
         inconsistency and implausibility of his account as a result of this
         ([42]). Secondly the appellant himself accepts there is  a  discord
         between paragraph 42 and 46. Thirdly the  appellant  did  not  rely
         upon a claimed concession  at  the  hearing  before  the  FtT;  and
         fourthly [46] of the reasons for refusal letter does no  more  than
         acknowledge that the discrepancy is insufficient to  result  in   a
         reduction in weight of the appellant's evidence overall, because of
         his age at that time.

     13. The judge identified all the relevant evidence,  the  discrepancies
         and contradictions and assessed that evidence holistically  in  the
         context of the  background  evidence  and  taking  account  of  the
         appellant's age and vulnerability.

     14. There is no error of law by the FtT judge in his findings such that
         the decision is to be set aside to be remade.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision




    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Jane Coker
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
Date 05 June 2020
-----------------------
[1] 42.  Furthermore Home Office records show that you were encountered in
 Greece on 04-06-18 (Home Office records), 3 months before you left Iraq
 for the first time (AIR q151). It is considered internally inconsistent
 and implausible that you had these problems in Iraq at the time you say,
 when by your own assertion you had not left Iraq before 01-09-2018.
 ...
 46. As previously noted, you assert that you left Iraq shortly after the
 incident on 01-09-2018 (WS). Home Office records show that you were
 encountered by the authorities in Greece on 04-06-2018, 3 months before
 you claim to have left Iraq for the first time (AIR q151). However, given
 your age at this time it is considered that this will not be held against
 you. It is considered that your behaviour is not one to which section 8(2)
 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of claimants etc) Act 2004
 applies.

