
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06160/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House on              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|12 November 2020                     |On 2 February 2021                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     B O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


Representation:
For the appellant:           Mr B. Hawkin, instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the respondent:          Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated  11  June  2019
    to refuse a protection and human rights claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Wylie ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 04 December  2019.  The  judge  accepted  the
    appellant's account of past events but concluded that she would not  be
    at risk on return to Tunisia  because  the  authorities  could  provide
    sufficient protection from her persecutor.

3.    The Upper Tribunal reviewed the case following the start of the Covid-
    19 pandemic. Case management directions were sent on 20 April 2020. The
    directions  included  a  provisional  indication,  subject  to  further
    submissions, that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the  making
    of an error on a point of law.  The  directions  said  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal was of the preliminary view that the  error  of  law  decision
    could be decided without a hearing with reference to  rule  34  of  The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ("the Procedure Rules").
    Provision was made for the parties to object to the proposed course  of
    action.

4.    In a response to the directions sent on 07  May  2020  the  respondent
    accepted that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the  making  of
    an error of  law.  Although  the  appellant's  representatives  sent  a
    response to the directions on 11 May 2020 (outside the timeframe for  a
    response given in the directions) the court administration did not have
    time to forward it to the judge by the time the error of  law  decision
    was made on 14 May 2020. In any event, the appellant did not object  to
    the  decision  being  made  without  a  hearing.  The  Upper   Tribunal
    considered the overriding objective of the Procedure Rules and took the
    view that there would be no unfairness to the appellant  in  proceeding
    to determine the appeal without submissions (as it was thought) because
    the appeal would be decided in her favour.

5.    The Upper Tribunal set aside those parts of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision relating to sufficiency of protection and internal  relocation
    in a decision promulgated on 15 May 2020 (annexed). In view of the fact
    that the credibility of the appellant's account of past events had been
    accepted, the narrow issue for remaking was  likely  to  focus  on  the
    background evidence relating to the circumstances  in  Tunisia.  Taking
    into account the continued need to prevent the spread of  Covid-19  the
    Upper Tribunal indicated that its preliminary view  was  that  remaking
    could be done without a hearing by way of written  submissions.  Again,
    the directions  made  provision  for  the  parties  to  object  to  the
    suggested course of action. The appellant's representatives requested a
    hearing in correspondence dated 05 June 2020. The case was listed for a
    face to face hearing because the appellant required the  assistance  of
    an interpreter.

6.    The error  of  law  decision  summarised  the  preserved  findings  as
    follows:

           "7. ...The judge heard evidence from the appellant. She accepted
           the appellant's account of repeated rape and sexual  assault  by
           her persecutor [58]. She also appeared to accept that  he  comes
           from a family that has "amassed fortunes from  distributing  and
           selling medical machines and implants,  taking  excessive  money
           from state institutions,  and  obtaining  other  contracts  from
           contractors and major commercial institutions, and also owning a
           radio  station."  [63].  The  judge  also  accepted   that   the
           background evidence showed that there is corruption  in  Tunisia
           and that her persecutor's family  "have  been  engaged  in  such
           practices which have [accrued] them  substantial  wealth"  [72].
           Those findings of fact are preserved."

7.    The issues for remaking were outlined in the error of law decision  as
    follows:

                     "(i)      Whether  there  is  a  real  risk  that   the
                 appellant's   persecutor   might,   within   a   reasonably
                 foreseeable time, discover her whereabouts if she  returned
                 to Tunisia;

                         (ii)     Whether the appellant  would  be  afforded
                 sufficient protection by the authorities in  light  of  the
                 evidence relating to the particular characteristics of  her
                 persecutor and the  background  evidence  relating  to  the
                 level of protection  afforded  to  women  who  fear  sexual
                 violence in Tunisia."

8.    Appropriate social  distancing  measures  were  in  place  during  the
    hearing. I kept in mind that the  appellant  is  a  vulnerable  witness
    although no special measures were needed for her to give evidence.  The
    court requested a North African Arabic speaking  interpreter,  but  the
    interpreter who attended the hearing did not appear to speak  the  same
    dialect as the appellant. The appellant was able  to  communicate  with
    her in a mixture of French and local dialect. She also gave some of her
    answers in English. The appellant's representative had  an  interpreter
    at the hearing. I discussed with the  representatives  whether  it  was
    satisfactory to continue with the hearing.  Although  there  were  some
    instances when her evidence needed to be clarified, and  the  situation
    was not ideal, overall, I was satisfied that the appellant was able  to
    understand the questions put to her and could communicate her evidence.
    Mr Hawkin agreed. The matter was kept under review during the course of
    the hearing, but it was not deemed necessary to adjourn to another  day
    in order to resume with a different interpreter.

9.    The details of the evidence and the submissions made  by  the  parties
    are a matter of record. I will refer to the  evidence  and  submissions
    where relevant in my findings.

Decision and reasons

10.   The appellant is a 31-year-old woman from Tunisia. Her  father  passed
    away in or around 2001. She lived in Tunis with her mother and  younger
    brother who, according to patriarchal cultural norms, was the  head  of
    the household. She says that her family are conservative  Muslims.  The
    appellant's sister lives in Canada with her husband and  children.  The
    appellant completed the Baccalaureate. She worked as an  administrative
    assistant in a law firm for a few months after her father passed  away.
    Then she worked as a company receptionist for three years until  around
    2005. It is unclear whether she worked in a  different  capacity  after
    that or was dependent upon her brother.

11.   At the screening interview the appellant said that she  did  not  want
    to return to Tunisia because there "are no human rights, especially for
    women". She feared the government because she was detained for 8  hours
    when she attended a demonstration in 2015. She also feared a  man  "who
    abused and insulted" her.

12.   The appellant's account of  past  events  is  accepted.  In  order  to
    maintain her anonymity, I will refer to  her  persecutor  as  'A',  his
    father as 'B', and his brother as 'C'. In summary, the appellant met  A
    through a girlfriend on a night out in a hotel near Tunis. They went to
    his villa, where her friend abandoned her. A raped and threatened  her.
    Under continued threat she was  forced  into  a  coercive  and  abusive
    relationship with him over a period of six years. On one occasion, when
    she said that she wanted it to stop, he got out a pistol and threatened
    to kill her. She felt unable to  tell  her  family  what  had  happened
    because she feared that her brother would reject her or  kill  her.  At
    one point she ran away to stay with an aunt in Sfax, a small town about
    270 km away from Tunis.  She did not ask the police  for  help  because
    she was frightened that her family would find out  what  had  happened.
    She did not think that the police would do anything to protect her.

13.   Alison Pargeter has  prepared  an  expert  report.  She  is  a  Senior
    Research Associate  at  the  Royal  United  Services  Institute  and  a
    visiting Senior Research Fellow at the Institute of Middle East Studies
    at  King's  College.  Previous  academic  work  includes  a  study   on
    radicalisation in North Africa, which included Tunisia as a case study.
    She has conducted field work in Tunisia on numerous  occasions,  before
    and after the 2011 revolution, and says that she has a broad network of
    contacts in the country. Although her academic work appears to focus on
    the rise of political Islam in the Middle East and  North  Africa,  and
    not on gender related issues, I am satisfied that  Ms  Pargeter  is  an
    experienced researcher who is likely  to  have  a  broad  knowledge  of
    Tunisian affairs and the contacts required to research relevant issues.
    Where she refers to evidence it is referenced clearly and is consistent
    with other background evidence. The report appears to be well balanced.
    She states when she cannot comment on an issue and departs from aspects
    of the appellant's case if necessary. She confirms that she is aware of
    her duty to the court as an expert witness.  I  am  satisfied  that  Ms
    Pargeter has relevant expertise and that I  can  place  weight  on  her
    opinion.

14.   What Ms Pargeter says about the  treatment  of  women  in  Tunisia  is
    consistent with the background evidence. She says that although Tunisia
    is seen as a  country  which  is  more  progressive  regarding  women's
    rights, Tunisian society remains largely traditional  and  patriarchal.
    Women are expected to abide  by  conservative  social  norms.  Tunisian
    women, and in particular educated women, are active in the labour force
    and  have  more  freedom  than  their  counterparts   in   neighbouring
    countries. The authorities have made significant  efforts  to  progress
    women's rights in recent years through the introduction of the  Law  on
    Eliminating Violence against Women.

15.   However, despite  the  efforts  of  the  authorities  large  parts  of
    Tunisian society remain traditional and cling  to  conservative  social
    codes.  On the whole, women are still expected  to  conform  to  social
    norms, especially  where  sex  and  marriage  are  concerned.  Violence
    against women is  still  'highly  prevalent'.  A  report  by  Tunisia's
    National Office of Family and Population in May 2018 found  that  53.5%
    of women had  been  subjected  to  physical,  sexual  or  psychological
    violence either inside the family home or in public. In  2015,  Amnesty
    International reported  that  there  is  likely  to  be  a  significant
    underreporting  of  violence  against  women.  Obstacles  to  reporting
    included discriminatory police attitudes,  fear  of  prosecution  under
    laws criminalising indecent behaviour, evidentiary challenges, lack  of
    access to support services, including counselling, women's shelters and
    legal advice, economic barriers, social stigmatisation and distrust  in
    the criminal  justice  system.  There  were  reports  that  victims  of
    domestic abuse were often not taken seriously by the police. There were
    also some reports of abuse by police officers themselves.

16.   In 2017 the government introduced  legislation  aimed  at  eliminating
    violence against women.  The  law  was  particularly  far-reaching  and
    prohibits physical, economic and psychological abuse against  women  as
    well as outlawing harassment in public. The law also closed a  loophole
    which allowed rapists to avoid conviction by marrying their victims and
    made provision for police to be imprisoned if they  failed  to  file  a
    complaint. Ms Pargeter says that the  law  was  hailed  as  a  mark  of
    progress but there are still  many  problems  with  implementation.  An
    article in Time Magazine  from  July  2018  reported  that  significant
    investment is needed for the law to be translated into improved  safety
    for women. The legislation did not say how the projects would be funded
    and the 2018 budget did not account for it. At the end of November 2018
    a conference including government  officials,  NGOs  and  survivors  of
    domestic violence  assessed  how  the  law  is  being  implemented  but
    reported a 'host of shortcomings, from logistical barriers that prevent
    some women from filing complaints to social pressures that keep  others
    from even trying'. Amnesty International reported that many  women  did
    not report abuse because  they  fear  that  their  family  might  react
    violently or reject them.  Ms  Pargeter  concludes  that  despite  this
    legislative progress violence against women  is  still  commonplace  in
    Tunisia and there have been serious problems in getting the  police  to
    take women who report complaints seriously. This  is  one  of  the  key
    factors that hinders many women from going to the police when they have
    been raped or sexually assaulted.

17.   The Amnesty International report for 2019 reported that  the  Minister
    of Women, Family, Children  and  Seniors  announced  that  the  Justice
    Ministry had received around  40,000  complaints  from  women  who  had
    experienced domestic violence during the  first  seven  months  of  the
    year.  However,  the  government  failed  to   establish   a   national
    observatory to prevent violence against women as required by Article 40
    of the  Law  on  Eliminating  Violence  against  Women.  The  US  State
    Department Report for 2019 noted that the law  provided  penalties  for
    violence against women 'but enforcement was  rare'.  Domestic  violence
    remained a serious problem. Rape remained  a  taboo  subject.  Cultural
    pressures  often  dissuaded  victims  from  reporting  sexual  assault.
    Victims received services at two dozen social  centres  throughout  the
    country in addition to five centres dedicated  to  victims  of  gender-
    based violence. The law prohibits gender discrimination. The government
    generally enforced these prohibitions but women faced  societal  rather
    than statutory barriers to their economic and political participation.

18.   The Freedom House report for 2020 states that  corruption  in  endemic
    in Tunisia. Corrupt high level officials often act  with  impunity.  In
    2018 the government introduced a new law  designed  to  strengthen  the
    anticorruption legal framework. While several independent  bodies  have
    been approved to deal with corruption since 2011,  many  have  not  yet
    been established and those that have often lack sufficient resources to
    carry out their mandate effectively. The campaign has  been  criticised
    for concentrating largely on  emerging  elites  while  leaving  corrupt
    figures associated with  the  Ben  Ali  regime  largely  untouched.  In
    October 2019 Tunisia was removed from the Financial Action Task Force's
    blacklist  of  noncooperative  countries,  which  may   indicate   that
    anticorruption initiatives are beginning to result in positive change.

19.   The Freedom House report goes  on  to  state  that  Tunisia  has  been
    praised for relatively progressive social policies, especially  in  the
    area of family law and women's  rights.  However,  women  continued  to
    experience high rates of domestic abuse. There has  been  criticism  of
    the law because it allows accusers to drop charges  leaving  women  who
    are vulnerable to domestic abuse susceptible  to  pressure  from  their
    abusers  and  others  to  withdraw  allegations.  The  2018  conference
    mentioned above noted that implementation of the law has  been  limited
    by a shortage of trained agents to handle complaints, pressure on women
    from some agents to avoid taking their abusive husbands to court, and a
    number of logistical barriers to reporting abuse.

20.   I will not set out the details of the  articles  which  refer  to  her
    persecutor's family in order to preserve  anonymity.  The  parties  are
    aware of the evidence before the Upper  Tribunal.  The  evidence  shows
    that B was an influential physician with a military rank who was  close
    to the previous regime  of  President  Habib  Bourguiba  and  then  his
    successor President Ben Ali. The evidence  indicates  that  the  family
    profited from their position  and  were  likely  to  continue  to  have
    influence after President Ben Ali fell from power in  2011  because  of
    their wealth albeit close political connections to those in  power  may
    have dwindled. Family members are reported to have had  a  monopoly  on
    the import of certain medicines. C owned a  media  outlet.  The  family
    appears to have links with the military  and  are  influential  in  the
    health sector.

21.   Ms Pargeter's research is consistent with the other evidence  relating
    to the influence of A and his family. She confirms that A's  family  is
    well known. B was an important figure in the former regime. C is a well-
    known personality  in  Tunisia  with  a  public  profile.  Some  people
    suggested that he was only granted a licence to set up a  media  outlet
    because of  his  position  as  the  son  of  B.  A  is  an  influential
    businessman who imports medical  equipment  for  public  hospitals  and
    private clinics. He was able to amass a  fortune,  in  all  likelihood,
    because of his father's links with the previous regime. She noted  that
    another article suggested that the family owns large swathes of land in
    Tunisia. Although there was some suggestion that the state  might  have
    taken steps to reclaim land from certain individuals who had  exploited
    local agricultural development societies  (the  article  mentioned  the
    sons of B) Ms Pargeter could not find any more information  on  whether
    the land owned by A's family was retroceded by the state.  Ms  Pargeter
    concluded that A appeared to be a wealthy individual who,  although  he
    did not have the same public profile as B and C, was part  of  a  well-
    known family that had 'extremely powerful  connections'  prior  to  the
    2011 revolution.

22.   Although the appellant says that she had seen A travel in an  official
    car, the evidence suggests that his family is unlikely to have had  any
    official links to the  Tunisian  state  since  President  Ben  Ali  was
    overthrown in 2011. Ms Pargeter explains that many of  those  who  were
    linked to the former regime have lost much of their power and sway. She
    could find nothing in the public domain to suggest that A or his family
    form part of the new regime. Someone  with  considerable  wealth  could
    still have contacts within the  current  political  establishment,  but
    that would not give him carte blanche to act with impunity.  For  these
    reasons, Ms Pargeter considered that A was likely  to  be  a  non-state
    actor.

23.   Ms Pargeter was unable to comment on the authenticity of  the  summons
    from the General Administration Research Department of the Customs Unit
    of the  Finance  Ministry  because  she  was  not  familiar  with  such
    documents. She was also unable to comment on whether it was likely that
    A could have instigated the summons. In order to do so he would need to
    have connections in the relevant  department.  At  best  the  appellant
    speculates that it might have had something to do with A but  there  is
    no evidence to support this assertion.

24.   Ms Pargeter went on to consider whether there  was  a  potential  risk
    from the appellant's family if they discovered her  history.  She  said
    that the appellant's fears were  understandable  given  societal  views
    about women who have  been  raped  or  sexually  abused.  Her  family's
    response may depend on whether they have traditional views. However, it
    is likely that they would react negatively and would view  her  history
    as a source of shame and dishonour. To that extent she might be at risk
    but the risk was unlikely to extend to 'honour' killing, which is  rare
    in Tunisia. Nevertheless, the appellant could find herself 'shunned and
    excluded' from the family home and may be at risk of verbal or physical
    abuse from family members.

25.   In Ms Pargeter's opinion, the appellant might be able to  relocate  to
    another part of Tunisia but was likely to face 'significant challenges'
    in doing so, especially if she did not have  family  support.  Although
    some women live alone, especially in big cities,  living  as  a  single
    woman can be problematic. It is still unusual for  an  unmarried  woman
    not to live with her family. Single women tend to be more vulnerable to
    sexual harassment and abuse given that they have no  male  relative  to
    protect them and are viewed by some men as 'fair game'.  The  appellant
    could find herself subject to  social  stigma  and  sexual  harassment.
    Given the high rates of unemployment, she may struggle to find work  to
    support herself if her family refuses to assist her.

26.   An up to date psychiatric report has  been  prepared  by  Dr  Ali  Isa
    Alfaraj, a consultant psychiatrist who works in the private sector.  He
    has been a psychiatrist since 1996 and a consultant since 2010. He  was
    satisfied that he could assess the appellant's mental health adequately
    by video call where he could examine and assess her facial expressions,
    her reactions  and  interaction  with  him.  Dr  Alfaraj  outlined  the
    personal history taken from the appellant and her  psychiatric  history
    drawn from her  medical  records.  He  noted  that  the  appellant  was
    diagnosed with a depressive episode in 2018. She also scored  high  for
    depression and anxiety on a Patient Health  questionnaire.  Dr  Alfaraj
    summarised his clinical observations. Although his conclusions  do  not
    make specific reference to relevant diagnostic criteria, I am satisfied
    that as a consultant psychiatrist Dr Alfaraj is qualified to assess the
    appellant's psychiatric state. Dr Alfaraj concluded that the  appellant
    was likely to  suffer  from  a  combination  of  Post-Traumatic  Stress
    Disorder (PTSD), which was likely to be  closely  linked  to  her  past
    experiences, and Mixed Anxiety and Depressive  Disorder.  He  explained
    why  the  appellant's  symptoms   and   presentation   supported   this
    conclusion. He recommended that the appellant should continue with  the
    therapeutic work already been offered to her and  that  her  GP  should
    increase the anti-depressant medication she currently receives. In  his
    opinion, it is 'highly likely' that her mental state would  deteriorate
    if she were to be forced to return to Tunisia. She would be  vulnerable
    to similar abuse and was unlikely to report further abuse due  to  fear
    and shame. She reported that her brother had assaulted her in the past.
    She was too frightened to  tell  him  what  had  happened  to  her.  Ms
    Pargeter says that the appellant might also suffer social stigma  as  a
    result of her mental health problems. Mental health  care  is  woefully
    inadequate in Tunisia.

27.   I turn to consider how these  facts  fit  within  the  relevant  legal
    framework. It is trite law  that  the  threshold  for  persecution  may
    depend on the individual characteristics of the person concerned. First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Wylie accepted  the  appellant's  account  of  past
    events. Acts of persecution  must  be  sufficiently  serious  by  their
    nature or repetition as to constitute a severe violation of basic human
    rights. The ill-treatment the appellant describes involved rape, sexual
    assault, exploitation and threats to kill and were sufficiently serious
    by the nature and repetition to amount to persecution.

28.   The evidence shows that despite positive  developments  in  the  legal
    framework to eliminate violence against women in Tunisia, in  practice,
    violence against women  remains  widespread  and  there  are  practical
    obstacles to effective implementation of the law on the  ground.  Those
    obstacles include continuing widespread discriminatory social attitudes
    about the role of women in Tunisian society, which extend to members of
    the authorities.  Those  widespread  attitudes  act  as  a  barrier  to
    disclosing  abuse  to  family  members,  police  and  other   agencies.
    Implementation of the law on the elimination of violence against  women
    is hampered on the ground by failure to give effect to some provisions,
    lack of funding, and logistical barriers to reporting  abuse.  Although
    Tunisia is said to be more progressive  in  its  attitudes  than  other
    countries in the region, the evidence indicates that a  large  part  of
    Tunisian society still holds traditional patriarchal  views  about  the
    role of women. Those views  contribute  towards  the  vulnerability  of
    women to sexual and other violence, which remains widespread.

29.   The appellant's account is consistent with the  background  and  other
    evidence. As an unmarried women she was vulnerable to exploitation by a
    man from a wealthy and influential family. It is clear that he saw  her
    as 'fair game' as described by Ms Pargeter. Negative societal attitudes
    contributed towards the appellant's fear and shame. She felt unable  to
    disclose the abuse to her brother who  holds  conservative  views.  She
    felt unable to approach the authorities because she did  not  want  her
    brother to know. She feared being rejected and ostracised by her family
    if they found out what had happened. Although Ms Pargeter's opinion  is
    that there is a low risk of 'honour' killing, it is at  least  possible
    that she might be at risk of physical abuse from family members if  the
    history of abuse is perceived to bring 'dishonour' to the family.

30.   The  background  evidence  also  shows  that  discriminatory  societal
    attitudes extend to members of the authorities such as the police,  who
    often do not take complaints seriously. In addition  to  these  factors
    that might act as obstacles to effective  protection,  the  appellant's
    persecutor is a wealthy individual who may be protected to some  extent
    by his family's influence. Although there is some evidence  to  suggest
    that anticorruption measures are beginning to bear  fruit,  Tunisia  is
    still described as a country where corruption is endemic. Even  if  the
    appellant approached the authorities for assistance and was willing  to
    take the risk of being ostracised from her family, her persecutor is in
    a position to bribe and influence the police, which is likely to render
    protection ineffective.

31.   A central question is whether A is likely to discover the  appellant's
    whereabouts if she returned to Tunisia. The fact that the appellant has
    already been subject to  persecution  or  serious  harm  is  a  serious
    indication of a well-founded fear of current persecution in the absence
    of good reasons to consider that such persecution or serious harm  will
    not be repeated. The evidence indicates  that  despite  the  change  in
    regime A and his family continue to retain an influential  position  in
    Tunisian society as a result of  their  wealth  even  if  their  direct
    political influence might have waned.

32.   The appellant appears to come from an educated middle class family  in
    Tunis. Her social circle brought her into contact with A in  the  first
    place. Tunisia is not a large country. If the appellant were to  return
    to her family home in Tunis, it is at least reasonably  likely  that  A
    would find out through the local community. In such  circumstances  she
    would face the  same  risk  as  before.  She  could  not  approach  the
    authorities for fear of disclosing the abuse  to  her  brother  thereby
    risking ostracism. Even if she did approach the authorities  widespread
    discriminatory attitudes relating to women indicate that any  complaint
    may not be taken seriously because  the  legal  framework  still  faces
    significant  obstacles  to  implementation  in  practice.  Even  if   a
    complaint  was  registered,  the  evidence  of  widespread   corruption
    indicates that her  wealthy  persecutor  may  be  able  to  negate  any
    protection that might be available.

33.   The appellant says that she has had no contact with her brother  since
    she left Tunisia. If she lived away from  her  family  she  would  face
    numerous obstacles as a lone unmarried women. As  a  former  victim  of
    sexual abuse  she  is  vulnerable  to  further  abuse.  The  background
    evidence indicates that a lone woman is  likely  to  be  vulnerable  to
    harassment and abuse by men who see  women  who  live  alone  as  'fair
    game'.  The  fact  that  the  appellant  is  suffering  from  PTSD  and
    depression as a result of  her  past  experiences  only  increases  her
    vulnerability. Although she has been able to find work in the past  she
    was living with her family at the time. Even if she was  able  to  find
    work to support herself it would not be reasonable or would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect her to isolate herself from any  remaining  friends  or
    family that she  might  need  to  turn  to  for  support  in  order  to
    ameliorate the risk of A identifying her whereabouts.

34.   Although it is not possible to predict with any  certainty  whether  A
    would find out that the appellant had returned to Tunisia,  or  whether
    he would continue to exploit and  threaten  her  in  the  same  way  as
    before, the appellant  does  not  have  to  prove  her  case  with  any
    certainty. In my assessment it is at least reasonably  likely  that  if
    the appellant returned to Tunisia and sought  to  re-establish  herself
    there with the assistance of any remaining friends or family, that A is
    sufficiently influential to find out through their social  circles  and
    the local  community  that  she  has  returned.  His  past  persecution
    involved many years of exploitation and abuse. When she  told  him  she
    did not want it to continue he threatened her with a  gun.  Nothing  in
    this pattern of behaviour indicates that he is no longer likely to have
    an interest in her. If  nothing  else,  he  may  have  an  interest  in
    continuing to intimidate and threaten her as a means of preventing  her
    from reporting his past abuse to the authorities.

35.   Given the size of Tunisia and the influence that A's  family  has,  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate to  another
    area outside Tunis. Smaller towns and villages are likely to hold  even
    more traditional attitudes. The evidence indicates that a lone woman is
    likely to be vulnerable to abuse by  other  men,  may  be  viewed  with
    suspicion, and may find it more  difficult  to  find  work  to  support
    herself. Again, it would be unduly harsh to  expect  the  appellant  to
    have to divorce herself from contact with any remaining social  support
    that she may have in Tunisia for fear of A discovering her whereabouts.



36.   The fact that the appellant was subject  to  past  persecution  is  an
    indicator of the risk of future persecution. The appellant  only  needs
    to prove her case to the low standard of proof. I am satisfied that the
    evidence relating to the influential position that  A  and  his  family
    hold in Tunisia is sufficient to give rise to a  well-founded  fear  of
    continued persecution  if  she  returned  and/or  that  her  particular
    profile means that she would be vulnerable to similar ill-treatment  by
    other men.

37.   I turn to  consider  whether  there  is  a  causal  link  between  the
    treatment that the appellant is likely to suffer and one  of  the  five
    Convention reasons. At the date of the hearing Article 10(1)(d) of  the
    Qualification Directive still  applied.  In  any  event,  there  is  no
    material  difference  between  the  Qualification  Directive  and  well
    established principles of refugee law. Article 10(1)(d) states  that  a
    group shall be considered  to  form  a  'particular  social  group'  if
    members of the group share an innate or unchangeable characteristic,  a
    common background that cannot be changed or a shared characteristic  or
    belief that is so fundamental to a person's identity  that  the  person
    should not be forced to renounce it. In addition, the group must have a
    distinct identity in the relevant country, because it is  perceived  as
    being different by the surrounding society.

38.   The House of Lords in Islam v SSHD and R (ex parte Shah)  [1999]  INLR
    144 made clear that the concept of discrimination in matters  affecting
    fundamental rights and freedoms is central to a proper understanding of
    the Refugee Convention. The court found that a particular social  group
    did not need to be cohesive  nor  its  members  interdependent.  It  is
    distinguished by an immutable characteristic and should not be  defined
    by reference to shared  persecution.   Lord  Hope  made  the  following
    findings relating to 'women' as a social group in Pakistan:

           "The unchallenged evidence in this case  shows  that  women  are
           discriminated against in Pakistan. I think that the  nature  and
           scale of the discrimination is such that it can properly be said
           the women in Pakistan are discriminated against by  the  society
           in  which  they  live.  The  reason  why  the  appellants   fear
           persecution is not just because they are women.  It  is  because
           they are women in a society which discriminates  against  women.
           In the context of  that  society  I  would  regard  women  as  a
           particular social group within the meaning of article  1A(2)  of
           the Convention."

39.   In comparison to other countries in the region Tunisia  is  viewed  as
    having made progress in relation to women's rights and protection under
    the law. Despite these positive developments the evidence continues  to
    show that discriminatory views about the role of women  are  widespread
    in Tunisian society. Although the government had taken  positive  steps
    to improve the legal framework in  an  attempt  to  eliminate  violence
    against women, on the ground, implementation is weak due to a range  of
    obstacles  including   discriminatory   police   attitudes,   lack   of
    implementation  of  some  legal  requirements,  lack  of  funding   and
    resources, and widespread social attitudes that  act  as  disincentives
    for women to report abuse.  Despite  some  progress,  violence  against
    women remains 'highly prevalent'.

40.   When placed in the context of the evidence  relating  to  Tunisia  the
    appellant was vulnerable to abuse and exploitation  by  A  because  she
    comes from a society that discriminates against women. She was seen  as
    'fair game' by a man who holds discriminatory  attitudes  about  women.
    She was unable to report the abuse to her brother for fear of  physical
    punishment or ostracism because this would not conform with traditional
    attitudes about family  'honour'.  She  felt  unable  to  approach  the
    authorities because many members of those authorities  would  not  take
    the  complaint  seriously  because  they  hold  similar  discriminatory
    attitudes. It is obvious that 'women' are a particular social group.  I
    am satisfied that the evidence shows that  the  additional  element  of
    discrimination, which is at the heart of  the  Refugee  Convention,  is
    shown in light of the evidence relating to the treatment  of  women  in
    Tunisia.

41.   For the reasons given above I find that there is a  reasonable  degree
    of likelihood that the appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution
    for reasons of her membership of a particular social group if  returned
    to Tunisia. For the same reasons the appellant is at risk of Article  3
    ill-treatment.

42.   Although remaking was confined  to  the  protection  claim  Mr  Hawkin
    sought to make a late submission in relation to an  Article  3  medical
    claim. Whilst the appellant's  medical  condition  contributes  to  her
    vulnerability and risk on return to Tunisia, the nature and  extent  of
    her condition falls far short of the high threshold  required  to  make
    out a medical claim under Article 3.

43.   I conclude that removal of  the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
    would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and would be unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
    Act 1998.


DECISION

The appeal is ALLOWED on Refugee Convention and human rights grounds



Signed   M. Canavan          Date 21 January 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____

NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email

[ANNEX]
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration   and   Asylum   Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: PA/06160/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided on the papers                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                     B O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated  11  June  2019
    to refuse a protection and human rights claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Wylie ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 04 December  2019.  The  judge  accepted  the
    appellant's account of past events but concluded that she would not  be
    at risk on return to Tunisia  because  the  authorities  could  provide
    sufficient protection from her persecutor.

3.    Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan granted permission to  appeal  in  an
    order dated 26 February 2020 in the following terms:

                    "1.      It is arguable that the  Judge  has  failed  to
                 provide  adequate  reasons   for   determining   that   the
                 appellant's assailant is a non-state actor. The failure  of
                 the author of a document to refer to whether the  assailant
                 has access to a government care is not determinative of the
                 issue and it is arguable that this is the sole  ground  for
                 rejecting the applicant's evidence on  this  issues:  [60]-
                 [61] of the decision."

4.    The appeal was due to be heard by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  22  April
    2020. The hearing was vacated due to the circumstances surrounding  the
    Covid-19 pandemic. The  Upper  Tribunal  reviewed  the  case  and  sent
    further directions to the parties on 20 April 2020. The Upper  Tribunal
    encouraged the parties to discuss the case to see whether there was any
    agreement as to whether the First-tier Tribunal decision  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law such  that  all  or  part  of  the
    decision needed to be set aside. Subject to further submissions, I gave
    the following indication regarding the merits of the appeal.

           "In particular, the parties may  wish  to  note  my  preliminary
           indication of the merits of the appeal  (subject  of  course  to
           further submissions). The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  may  have
           failed  to  adequately  engage  with  the  background   evidence
           relating to (i) the level of influence that her  persecutor  and
           his family appear to hold; (ii) in combination with the evidence
           relating to  corruption  in  Tunisia;  and  (iii)  the  evidence
           relating  to  societal   discrimination   against   women.   The
           combination of these factors was relevant to the  assessment  of
           whether there is a serious possibility that her persecutor could
           influence the authorities to the extent that she  might  not  be
           afforded  sufficient  protection  from  further  serious  sexual
           abuse. Subject to further submissions, my initial assessment  is
           that the First-tier Tribunal's findings relating to  sufficiency
           of   protection   failed   to   take   into   account   relevant
           considerations and were inadequate."

5.    Although the directions were sent to  the  appellant,  her  solicitor,
    and to counsel, at the date this decision is made, I have not  received
    a response on behalf of the appellant. The respondent complied with the
    directions on 07 May 2020 in the following terms:

          "(1)   Further to the directions issued by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
              Canavan, the respondent agrees that there  appears  to  be  a
              material  error  in  law  in  the  FTTJ's  treatment  of  the
              evidence, as highlighted by UTJ Canavan at [her] paragraph 2)
              i).
            (2)  The respondent is of the opinion the matter  is  best  set
              aside, and returned to the FTT.  It  is  observed  that  very
              little in the way of credibility findings,  either  way,  are
              recorded by the FTTJ."


6.    Neither the appellant nor her representatives appear to have  complied
    with the directions made by the Upper Tribunal. However, the effect  of
    the concession made by the Secretary of  State  is  that,  despite  the
    appellant's failure to respond to the directions, I can find  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of errors of  law  for
    the reasons I indicated in the directions sent on 20 April 2020. In the
    absence of any engagement by the appellant,  I  need  to  consider  the
    appropriate forum and method for remaking the decision.

7.    I bear in mind that remaking  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  the  usual
    course of action even if some further fact finding needs to be done. In
    this case, I do not agree that the First-tier Tribunal judge failed  to
    make enough findings of fact such that the appeal must be heard  afresh
    in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  judge  heard  evidence  from   the
    appellant. She accepted the appellant's account of  repeated  rape  and
    sexual assault by her persecutor [58]. She also appeared to accept that
    he comes from a family that has "amassed fortunes from distributing and
    selling medical machines and  implants,  taking  excessive  money  from
    state institutions, and obtaining other contracts from contractors  and
    major commercial institutions, and also owning a radio station."  [63].
    The judge also accepted that the background evidence showed that  there
    is corruption in Tunisia and that her persecutor's  family  "have  been
    engaged in such practices which have [accrued] them substantial wealth"
    [72]. Those findings of fact are preserved.

8.    The crux of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  whether  the  judge
    erred in going on to dismiss the appeal on the ground that the evidence
    did not show that  her  persecutor  had  sufficient  influence  "to  be
    informed of the arrival of the appellant to the country, or  to  obtain
    telephone registration details" [72]. In doing so she failed to analyse
    whether the appellant's persecutor might, in time, find out  where  she
    was living given the history of past  events.  The  judge  went  on  to
    conclude that, even if he  did  find  her,  sufficient  protection  was
    available. However, she failed to take into account her earlier finding
    that the appellant's persecutor was likely to have used  corruption  to
    influence the authorities in the past [73]. I conclude that the aspects
    of the decision that require remaking are narrower than the  respondent
    suggests and are confined to the following questions:

       i) Whether there is a real  risk  that  the  appellant's  persecutor
          might,  within  a  reasonably  foreseeable  time,  discover   her
          whereabouts if she returned to Tunisia;


      ii) Whether the appellant would be afforded sufficient protection  by
          the  authorities  in  light  of  the  evidence  relating  to  the
          particular characteristics of her persecutor and  the  background
          evidence relating to the level of protection  afforded  to  women
          who fear sexual violence in Tunisia.

9.    In the light of the present  need  to  take  precautions  against  the
      spread of Covid-19, and the  overriding  objective  expressed  in  the
      Procedure Rules, I have reached the provisional view that the decision
      could be remade on the papers  without  an  oral  hearing,  remote  or
      otherwise.

DIRECTIONS

10.   The parties shall have regard to the Presidential Guidance Note: No  1
      2020: Arrangements During the Covid-19 Pandemic  when  complying  with
      these directions.

11.         If there is no objection to the decision being remade  based  on
      written submissions, the following directions shall apply:

        i) The appellant shall be responsible for compiling and serving  an
           agreed consolidated bundle of documents which both  parties  can
           rely on. The bundle should be compiled and served in  accordance
           with the Presidential Guidance Note [23-26] within  21  days  of
           the date these directions are sent (the date of  sending  is  on
           the covering letter or covering email).

       ii) The appellant shall file written submissions within 21  days  of
           the date these directions are sent.

      iii) The respondent shall file written submissions within 28 days  of
           the date these directions are sent.

       iv) The appellant shall file any response within 35 days of the date
           these directions are sent.

12.   The Upper Tribunal will then  consider  the  written  submissions  and
      remake the decision.

13.         If there is an objection to the decision being remade  based  on
      written submissions, the party who objects shall serve written reasons
      by email within 7 days of the date this  decision  and  directions  is
      sent by the Upper Tribunal (the date of sending  is  on  the  covering
      letter  or  covering  email).  Without  prejudice  to  the  Tribunal's
      consideration of any  such  objections,  any  objection  should  state
      whether the party is willing to proceed by way  of  a  remote  hearing
      instead. The parties shall also file and serve:

           (i)   Skype contact details and a contact telephone  number  for
                 any person who wishes to attend the hearing remotely, which
                 might include the advocates, the original appellant  or  an
                 instructing solicitor; and

           (ii)  dates to avoid in the period 01 July  2020  to  28  August
      2020.

14.   The parties are at liberty to apply to amend these directions,  giving
      reasons, if they face significant practical difficulties in complying.



15.   Documents and submissions filed in response to  these  directions  may
      be sent by, or attached to, an email to [email] using  the  Tribunal's
      reference number (found at the top of these directions) as the subject
      line.  Attachments must not exceed 15 MB.

16.   Service on the Secretary of  State  may  be  to  [email]  and  to  the
      original appellant, in the absence of any contrary instruction, by use
      of any address apparent from the service of these directions.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision will be remade in  due  course  following  receipt  of  further
submissions


Signed   M.Canavan                Date 14 May 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan










