
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06102/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st August 2017                            |On 9th August 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Mr Mamadou Diallo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION  NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Khan, Counsel, instructed by Morgan Dias


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    O'Hanlon made following a hearing at  Bradford  when  she  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse him asylum in the UK.

 2. It is the Secretary of State's case that the  claimant  is  one  Salieu
    Jalloh, born on 1st January 1984 and a national of Sierra Leone.

 3.  The  Secretary  of  State  relies  on  two  previous  entry  clearance
    applications made by that individual in 2010.   The  first  application
    for  a  visit  visa  was  refused  but  the  second  was  issued.   The
    application details were in the papers before the judge and record that
    biometrics were received  and  recorded  and  checks  started  and  all
    results received. It is the Secretary of State's case that  there  were
    no issues in relation to the passport which lawfully  belonged  to  the
    claimant.

 4. The fingerprints taken  by  the  claimant  match  those  on  the  entry
    clearance applications.

 5. The judge set out the evidence and concluded that the claimant had been
    able to give consistent and accurate answers in relation  to  questions
    about Guinea, where he says he is a national.  She  accepted  that  the
    claimant was not aware of  the  circumstances  of  the  Sierra  Leonean
    applications because he had been taken there by a friend  and  had  not
    been in control of the circumstances relating to that application.

 6. I am satisfied, in spite of Ms Khan's submissions, which were that  the
    challenge to the decision amounted to a mere disagreement with it, that
    the judge did not adequately engage with the evidence. It was incumbent
    upon her to set out clearly why she considered that concisitency in the
    answers at interview outweighed the  evidence  that  the  claimant  had
    produced a genuine Sierra  Leonean  passport.  Moreover  there  were  a
    number of other credibility issues raised in the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter which were not addressed. Moreover she appears to  have  allowed
    the appeal on the basis that the claimant had been  subject  to  arrest
    and ill-treatment and detention in Guinea in 2010  without  considering
    whether he would be at risk on return at the date of hearing.

 7. The judge erred in law by failing to consider all evidence relevant  to
    the decision.  It is set aside.  It will have to be remade by  a  judge
    other than Judge O'Hanlon at a date to be fixed in  Bradford.   A  Fula
    interpreter is required and the Secretary of State is directed  to  re-
    serve her bundle, which is in a state of confusion, on the Tribunal and
    the claimant's representatives fourteen days before the hearing



No anonymity direction is made.



Signed[pic]                             Date 8 August 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

