
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06160/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre     |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 19 October 2018                           |On 09 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     N A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, Counsel, instructed by Fountain
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on 1 January 2003.  He
appealed to a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of
State's decision of 13 June 2017 refusing his application for asylum.

2.   The judge set out the appellant's claim, which was on the basis that
his father had been killed by the Taliban and he was at risk from the
Taliban as a consequence.  The judge considered that the appellant relied
on sketchy and contradictory information relating to his claim.  His
account about what happened in Afghanistan was no more than speculative.
On his own account, his uncle had told him his father might have been
killed by the Taliban but it could be somebody else and the appellant at
interview alternated between saying it might have been, could have been or
was the Taliban.  He did not even know whether the Taliban were in his
village.  He gave a generic answer with reference to fighting.  He had not
seen people killing other people.

3.   He also stated that at interview he had initially said that he had
seen his father's death with his own eyes but then said he had not
witnessed the killing.  He claimed that after the death of his father he
was at his paternal uncle's house when "people" came looking for him and
alternatively referred to the people as the Taliban but then indicated he
did not know who they were.  He said that his mother did not even know
whether they were the Taliban.  He surmised that his father was probably
giving information to the government about the Taliban or other people that
came out of the area.

4.   The judge went on then to note that the appellant was a child and as
such his evidence should be approached with caution.  She went on
thereafter to find it implausible that, having come from a background of
tending to sheep and cattle with little or no education and no contact with
the outside world, his family were able to afford the services of an agent
who had been used to get him out of Afghanistan and to Europe.  He had not
claimed asylum anywhere else although he had lived in Calais for four
months.  The judge went on then to say that, having taken account of his
age, background and education and having approached his evidence with
caution, she did not find that he was credible in his claim.  She did not
accept that the police had taken his family telephone numbers written on a
piece of paper from him in Calais.  She found that he had been sent to the
United Kingdom at considerable cost and that that had been for his economic
betterment.

5.   She did not find it plausible that, having embarked on such a journey,
he had no means of contacting his family to let them know once he had
arrived in the United Kingdom.  Nor did she find that his circumstances in
Afghanistan were consistent with his uncle being able to afford to pay for
his migration out of Afghanistan.  With regard to family tracing, he had
contacted the Red Cross and they had confirmed in writing that their
enquiries were ongoing but she noted that any enquiries they made would
rely on the information he gave them about his family's address or
whereabouts.

6.   She referred to AK [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) to the effect that
relocation to Kabul remained a viable option for the appellant.  She
considered that Kabul was a viable option for the appellant.  He would be
returning as a failed asylum seeker with no family in the UK but continued
to have family in Afghanistan including his mother, siblings and uncle, who
would no doubt assist him on his return.

7.   The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the basis
that the judge had not had sufficient regard to the appellant's age in
assessing credibility and in focusing on his family's ability to raise
money to pay for the agent the judge had speculated as to the costs and
implausibility of the family being able to raise the funds to pay for an
agent.  It was inadequate to find implausible the claim that the French
authorities had taken the paper with his family's telephone numbers on it
from him.  The judge had also erred, it was argued, in placing reliance on
AK rather than considering AA [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC), which, unlike AK,
was concerned with the position of unaccompanied minors, and noting the
risk on return in that regard.

8.   At the hearing before me Mr Pipe relied on and expanded on the points
made in the grounds.  He argued that the judge had in her determination
already come to conclusions about credibility in stating at paragraph 11
that the appellant lacked credibility and relied on sketchy and
contradictory information and was speculative before coming on to note the
fact that he was a child and as such his evidence should be approached with
caution.  He argued that she had not properly taken into account the
appellant's vulnerability.  She had not considered if the discrepancies
arose out of vulnerability and that he was repeating what he had been told
as a young child.  On examining the interview notes it could be seen that
he had not clearly said that he had seen his father being killed and that
was an illustration of the need not to consider that there was a
discrepancy in the case.  There was also a lack of reasons as to why he
would not have had an agent.  The conclusions at paragraphs 14 about the
telephone numbers lacked the proper care needed.

9.   The judge had also erred in failing to consider risk on return as an
unaccompanied child.  The point had been made in the skeleton before the
judge and was not considered properly or at all.

10.  In her submissions Ms Aboni argued that the judge had directed herself
appropriately and came to adequate findings with proper reasons.  Account
had been taken of the appellant's age and background.  The evidence had
been treated with caution.  His evidence was sketchy and contradictory, as
the judge found, and it was implausible that his family could send him to
the United Kingdom if his circumstances were as he claimed.  His family
could travel to Kabul to receive him, so he would not be there as an
unaccompanied minor.

11.  By way of reply, Mr Pipe argued that the judge should have set out and
taken into account the Joint Presidential Guidance on child and vulnerable
witnesses at the outset rather than considering the matter subsequently.
The findings on credibility were flawed.

12.  I reserved my determination.

13.  I see force in the submissions made on behalf of the appellant.  It
would have been proper for the judge at the outset to set out, if not in
full detail then at least in outline and preferably the former, the
relevant parts of the Joint Presidential Guidance on child and vulnerable
witnesses rather than as she did, setting out elements of the evidence and
commenting on the sketchy and contradictory nature of that evidence at
paragraphs 11 and 12 before coming on at paragraphs 13 and 14 to note the
fact that he was a child and the need to approach his evidence with
caution.  What is necessary in a case such as this is to consider whether
the defects as they are perceived to be in the evidence are ones which can
properly be explained by the vulnerable nature of the witness rather than
simply noting the fact of their vulnerability and then commenting on the
discrepancies and other problems with the evidence.  Clearly, there are
problems with the appellant's evidence.  There are contradictions and
discrepancies but my understanding of the guidance is that there has to be
factored into an evaluation of the evidence a proper assessment of whether
it can be explained on the basis of the vulnerability of the witness or
whether despite that vulnerability concerns remain about the evidence.
That was not done in this case.

14.  I am also concerned that the judge did not consider the relevant case
law on risk as an unaccompanied minor.  The judge clearly had concerns
about the credibility of the claim that he did not have his family's phone
numbers with him any longer since they had been taken away by the French
authorities.  She did not investigate how contact with his family could be
made, as she made no clear finding that he had retained contact details.
This was again a matter that required more careful evaluation on the part
of the judge.  As a consequence, I find a material error of law in that
regard also.

15.  The nature and extent of the judge's errors in this case, and
particularly bearing in mind that the appellant is a child, are such that
in my view the matter will have to be reheard in its entirety before the
First-tier Tribunal and therefore I allow the appeal on the basis that it
is to be remitted for a full hearing before a different judge at
Birmingham.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 30 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
