
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06224/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th March 2019                            |On 7th May 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                      A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Slatter, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



           Rule 14: Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Background

 1. The Appellant, an Uzbek national, appealed against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who, in a determination  promulgated  on  the  4th
    July 2018, dismissed his claim for protection.

 2. In a decision made on the 3rd October 2018 I set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  decision  of
    the respondent to refuse his  protection  claim.  It  had  been  agreed
    between the parties that the decision demonstrated  the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law. The reasons given are set out in the  decision
    of the 3rd October 2018 and the salient parts are reproduced below:

         "13. Mr Walker, Senior Presenting Officer appeared on behalf of the
             Respondent. There was no rule 24 response from the Respondent.
             However, he conceded that there were  errors  of  law  in  the
             decision of the FtTJ and that as a  consequence  the  decision
             was unsafe and that it should  be  set  aside  and  for  fresh
             credibility findings to be made on the evidence.

         14.  I have taken into account the submissions of the parties  when
             reaching a decision on whether or not the  decision  discloses
             the making of an error on a point of law. I am satisfied  that
             the concession was correctly made concerning the evidence  and
             that the FTT's decision is vitiated by an  error  of  law  and
             therefore the decision shall be set aside, and no findings  of
             fact will be preserved.

         15.  In the light of the concession made it is  only  necessary  to
             provide  a  summary  of  the  reasons  why  I  consider   that
             concession was properly made.

         16.  One of the issues that the judge was required to consider  was
             whether or not the appellant was  a  genuine  convert  to  the
             branch of Islam known as Salafi Islam. The decision letter  as
             set  out  above  relied  upon  on  his  responses  during  the
             interview and reached the overall conclusion that he had given
             vague and inconsistent evidence which  led  the  Secretary  of
             State to consider that he had not demonstrated that he  was  a
             genuine  convert.  The  judge  considered  those  replies   at
             paragraphs [28 to 29] and reached the conclusion at [30]  that
             he was  not  a  genuine  convert.  However,  there  was  other
             evidence before the Tribunal which was relevant to this issue;
             the letter from X Islamic  centre  and  the  evidence  of  the
             appellant's brother, who had been accepted by  the  respondent
             to practice that religion. Whilst the judge made reference  to
             the evidence from the Islamic centre at [30 I] both  advocates
             agree that the assessment of the contents of that  letter  did
             not take into account what the letter had said. The judge gave
             no weight to that letter because the judge considered that  it
             was  not  clear  how  the  writer  had  ascertained  that  the
             appellant "follows the Salafi way". However as both  advocates
             agree, the letter made reference to having known the appellant
             for five years and the circumstances in  which  he  had  known
             him. The letter also made reference to having personally known
             him. The advocates agree that that was a factual  error  which
             led to that evidence being given no weight in  the  assessment
             overall.

         17.  Furthermore, it is accepted  that  the  judge  discounted  the
             evidence of the appellant's brother at [27] on the basis  that
             as it  was  a  family  member  he  was  not  "independent  and
             objective" and there was no assessment of  the  evidence  that
             expressly  dealt  with  the  issue  of  religion  within   the
             determination.

         18.  The appellant himself also gave evidence at his  religion  and
             as Mr Slatter  submits,  whilst  the  judge  relied  upon  the
             responses in the  interview  it  was  not  apparent  from  the
             decision what the judge found as to the more  recent  evidence
             given about the practice of his faith.

         19.  It is also the case that there was a relevant country guidance
             decision in the form of LM (returnees - expired  exit  permit)
             Uzbekistan CG [2012] UK UT00390. It appears from the  decision
             that neither advocate before the FtTJ made  any  reference  to
             this decision nor place it before  the  judge.  As  a  country
             guidance decision, failure to take it into account  is  likely
             to be an error of law.  The  decision  concerns  the  position
             relating to illegal exit and the consequences  of  failing  to
             have an exit permit.  One  of  the  issues  before  the  judge
             related to the evidence from the  appellant  relating  to  his
             passport and having an exit visa renewed. At [34]  the  judge,
             it appears,  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  evidence  and
             expressly found that there had been no background evidence  or
             evidence of the legal position in relation to when exit  visas
             would not be issued outside the country of origin.  Whilst  it
             is plain that the judge was considering that in the context of
             the appellant's evidence that he had  been  refusing  an  exit
             Visa on the  basis  that  he  was  told  to  obtain  one  from
             Uzbekistan, the country guidance decision did provide material
             which related to the issues of exit  visas.  Furthermore,  the
             headnote at paragraph 6 made reference to the ill-treatment of
             those who are detained and that if someone who is detained  on
             return, Article 3 will be engaged.  Furthermore,  at  headnote
             five, there was reference to individuals who had a  particular
             profile which would lead to adverse interest in them, which on
             the  appellant's  case  may  be   of   relevance   given   the
             circumstances of his brother. The decision also reaffirms  the
             country guidance decision given some time ago in  2007  in  OM
             (returning  citizens,  minorities,  religion)  Uzbekistan   CG
             [2007] UK AI 00045.

         20.  There were other points raised by Mr Slatter by  reference  to
             the determination and in particular, whether  the  appellant's
             evidence was in fact inconsistent with the  country  materials
             as the judge had so found. One area that  he  concentrated  on
             related to the findings  of  fact  made  as  to  the  lack  of
             interest in the family members at [35] however there had  been
             no consideration of the background material in the context  of
             the family members having been interviewed by the  authorities
             and having reached the conclusion that they should  leave  the
             country and having done so obtained residence in the  USA.  It
             is not necessary to consider the other points raised on behalf
             of the appellant given that it is common  ground  now  between
             the parties that the decision discloses the making of an error
             on a point of law and should be set  aside  and  I  have  made
             reference to the main points relied upon.

         21.  Consequently, I am satisfied the decision discloses the making
             of an error point of law and the decision should be set  aside
             with no findings of fact preserved. It will  be  listed  as  a
             resumed hearing on date  in  accordance  with  the  directions
             accompanying this decision. "

The re-making of the decision:

Evidence:

 3. For the purposes of the hearing the Tribunal  has  been  provided  with
    three bundles on behalf of the appellant;  bundle  A  consists  of  the
    material that was before the FtTJ, bundle B is the bundle submitted for
    this hearing, which contains witness statements from the appellant, his
    brother a witness and written evidence from his  parents  and  brother,
    messages/chat and translation and a number of reports. The last  bundle
    consists of more recent country materials. The respondent  relied  upon
    the bundle provided to the FtT which contained the material supplied by
    the appellant for this claim, his substantive  interview,  the  country
    information response dated March 2018 and the decision letter.

 4. I have also heard oral evidence from the appellant,  his  brother,  who
    will be referred to as "B" for the purposes  of  this  decision  and  a
    witness called to attest to the appellant's faith. It is not  necessary
    to set out that evidence in full as it is a matter of  record  and  set
    out in the record  of  proceedings.  I  shall  refer  to  the  relevant
    evidence in my analysis of the issues raised by the parties.

 5. In addition, I have received a written skeleton argument provided by Mr
    Slatter and also oral submissions from Mr Tufan which I confirm I  have
    taken into account in considering the context of the evidence before me
    and in reaching my conclusions. In my analysis I do not refer to  every
    point made but have taken them fully  into  account  when  reaching  my
    decision.

The Law:
 6. In reaching my decision I have borne fully in mind the relevant law and
    Immigration Rules, including the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
    of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, and the Handbook on  Procedures  and
    Criteria  for  Determining  Refugee  Status  ('The  Handbook)  (Geneva,
    January 2000).  By Article 1(a)(2) of the Refugee Convention  the  term
    "refugee" shall apply to any person who: -

           "Owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of
           race, religion, nationality, membership of a  particular  social
           group or political  opinion,  is  outside  the  country  of  his
           nationality, and is unable, or, owing to such fear, is unwilling
           to avail himself of the protection of that country; or who,  not
           having a nationality and being outside the country of his former
           habitual residence  is  unable,  or,  owing  to  such  fear,  is
           unwilling to return to it."


 7. The provisions of SI [2006] No.2525 "The Refugee or Person in  Need  of
    International Protection (Qualification) Regulations  2006"  now  bring
    into United Kingdom domestic law the  Council  of  the  European  Union
    Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 on 'minimum  standards'  for  the
    qualification and  status  of  third  country  nationals  or  stateless
    persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise need protection and the
    content of the protection granted, normally referred to in  the  United
    Kingdom as the Qualification Directive.  Commensurate changes were made
    in the Immigration Rules by  means  of  Statement  of  Changes  in  the
    Immigration Rules also taking effect on 9 October 2006.

 8. The determination I have made has approached the issues in this  appeal
    from the perspective of the 2006  Regulations  and  in  particular  has
    applied the  definitions  contained  there,  in  deciding  whether  the
    Appellant is a refugee under the 1951 Geneva Convention.  I  have  also
    applied the amended Immigration Rules.   These  have  permitted  me  to
    consider whether the Appellant is in need of Humanitarian Protection as
    being at risk of serious harm, as defined  in  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Rules.  Finally, I have gone on to consider whether the Appellant is at
    risk of a violation of her human rights under  the  provisions  of  the
    ECHR.

 9. The burden of proof is upon the Appellant.  The standard of  proof  has
    been  defined  as  a  'reasonable  degree  of  likelihood',   sometimes
    expressed as 'a reasonable chance' or  a  'serious  possibility'.   The
    question is answered by looking  at  the  evidence  in  the  round  and
    assessed at the time of hearing the appeal.  I regard the same standard
    as applying in essence  in  human  rights  appeals  although  sometimes
    expressed as 'substantial grounds for believing'.   Although  the  2006
    Regulations make no express reference  to  the  standard  of  proof  in
    asylum appeals, there is no suggestion  that  the  Regulations  or  the
    Directions were intended to introduce a change in either the burden  or
    standard of proof.  The amended Rules, however, deal expressly with the
    standard of proof in deciding whether  the  Appellant  is  in  need  of
    Humanitarian Protection.

10. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules defines a person  eligible  for
    Humanitarian Protection, as a person who does not qualify as a  refugee
    but in  respect  of  whom  substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for
    believing that the person concerned, if returned,  would  face  a  real
    risk of suffering serious harm.  It seems to me  that  this  replicates
    the standard of proof familiar in  the  former  jurisprudence  and,  by
    implication, applies the same standard in asylum cases.

11. Accordingly, where below I refer to 'risk' or 'real risk' this is to be
    understood as an abbreviated way of identifying respectively:

    i.       whether on return  there  is  a  well-founded  fear  of  being
         persecuted under the Geneva Convention;


    ii.      whether on return there are substantial grounds for  believing
         the person would face a real risk of suffering serious harm  within
         the meaning of paragraph 339C of the amended Immigration Rules; and


    iii.     whether on return there are substantial grounds for  believing
         that the person would face a real risk of being exposed to  a  real
         risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.




Summary of his claim:

12.  The appellant claims to have arrived in the UK in mid- September 2012.
    He was granted a visa to the United Kingdom on 28 August 2012 as a Tier
    4 general student. On 12 August 2013 he applied for leave to remain  as
    a general student and this was refused with a right  of  appeal  on  12
    September 2013. The appellant appealed the  decision  on  20  September
    2013 and the appeal was allowed on 15 September 2014. The  refusal  was
    re-considered, and he was granted leave to remain as a general  student
    on 23 October 2014 which was to expire on 29 August 2016.

13. On 5 October 2015 he made a claim for asylum. It was stated that he had
    moved to live with his brother and his  brother's  friend  (hereinafter
    referred to as "F") in 2012 in  United  Kingdom  and  that  he  started
    practising Islam and that they provided him with information about  the
    Salafi faith and that he attended the mosque three times per week  when
    he lived with F. He remained living there for a period of less than two
    months having left the property in early 2013.  He  did  not  have  any
    contact with him thereafter.

14. In 2013 his brother's friend F returned to Uzbekistan. According to his
    witness statement, he claimed that his problems began when he began  to
    practice Islam in the UK. He stated that he  was  not  aware  that  the
    government spied on people in the UK  and  monitored  their  activities
    until he received information that F was arrested  and  imprisoned.  He
    stated that when F returned, he was detained, and it was  claimed  that
    literature on his computer was found and details of others  in  the  UK
    who were being trained.

15. In June or July 2014, the appellant's brother informed him that  F  had
    been arrested on account of his practice of the Salafi religion.

16. In June or July 2014, the authorities in Uzbekistan began  looking  for
    the appellant's brother. In March  2014,  they  sentenced  him  in  his
    absence and the appellant did not know what had been  convicted  of  or
    how long he had been sentenced to. He could  give  no  details  in  his
    asylum interview which took place in January 2016.

17. In August 2015 the appellant's mother permanently left the country.

18. In September 2015 it is claimed  that  the  authorities  in  Uzbekistan
    began visiting his family home and asked where the  appellant  was  and
    told his family that he had to return.  They  visited  the  home  every
    three months. The appellant was  asked  in  interview  about  what  his
    parents had told him about the visits made by the authorities.  It  was
    stated by him that his father could not give him  details  because  the
    authorities put a recording device near the computer  and  would  check
    the device to see if his parents were giving him information  (see  AIR
    questions 164, 173 and witness statement paragraphs 6-7).

19. In March 2015 the  appellant  claims  that  he  applied  to  renew  his
    passport and exit visa at the  Embassy  but  whilst  they  renewed  his
    passport in May 2015 they refused his exit visa in September  2015.  He
    stated that the embassy told him to go back to  Uzbekistan  to  get  it
    renewed and that  this  was  "a  trap"  (see  paragraph  8  of  witness
    statement).

20. Following this, the appellant stated  that  a  spy  had  contacted  his
    brother and had asked questions about him  and  that  this  person  had
    asked his brother to work for them and spy on nationals in the  UK  and
    that this showed that they were on a watchlist (paragraph 8 of  witness
    statement).

21. On 5 October 2015 the appellant claimed asylum and was  interviewed  on
    26 January 2016. In  2016,  the  appellant's  father  permanently  left
    Uzbekistan.

22. In August 2014 the appellant's brother (hereinafter referred to as "B")
    made a claim for asylum. He provided to the respondent copies of  court
    documents dated March 2014 (exhibited in  the  respondent's  bundle  at
    E40) to demonstrate that he would be at risk on return. Those documents
    referenced to his religious beliefs and that he was a follower  of  the
    "Salafi" movement and that he was charged under the criminal  code.  In
    his witness statement he made referenced to  having  been  charged  and
    convicted in absentia (page 10). He also made reference to F  and  that
    he had been convicted and jailed for having religious material and that
    he had given names of different people involved including  himself.  He
    stated that as his brother was living with him and the government would
    be aware of that fact and will be at risk on return. In  his  statement
    he made reference to being contacted "recently" by an  agent  from  the
    authorities asking him to spy for them  (see  paragraph  3  of  witness
    statement at page 3).

23. B was granted asylum on 4 January 2018.

24. Since the appellant has been in the United Kingdom, he claims  to  have
    practised the Salafi School of Islam and has been a regular  attendance
    of the local mosque. In support of his claim, the chairman of his local
    mosque and cultural society provided a letter (page 22 and undated) and
    a witness statement (p3B) which he provided support for the  appellants
    claim to be involved in the practice of Salafi Islam in the UK.

The decision letter of the respondent:

25. In a decision letter of  2nd  May  2018,  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's protection claim. In relation to his claimed conversion  to
    Salafi Islam, it was  considered  that  he  had  failed  to  provide  a
    reasonable explanation for his interest in the religion  and  that  his
    responses in the interview were vague and lacking in detail  given  the
    significance of the event in his life. It was further  considered  that
    his responses in interview regarding the core belief of the faith  were
    vague and lacking in detail and that whilst  he  was  able  to  provide
    basic information about the praying practices of the  Salafi  this  was
    only after being prompted for further information.  It  was  considered
    internally inconsistent than given the importance the  religion  places
    on praying that the appellant could only provide limited information on
    how he prayed.  It  was  also  considered  that  his  responses  in  an
    interview failed to demonstrate an understanding of the  views  of  the
    Salafi and that the account given as to  the  differences  between  the
    religions was inconsistent with the external information. The appellant
    did not know if the Salafi were linked to any extremist groups nor able
    to provide names of any notable Salafi.  It  was  considered  that  his
    account was inconsistent with the  external  information  which  showed
    that Salafi jihadism had been linked to certain groups. Whilst  it  was
    accepted that he was able  to  provide  some  basic  knowledge  of  the
    Islamic faith, it was considered that  his  account  of  conversion  to
    Salafism was internally inconsistent, vague and lacking in  detail  and
    inconsistent with country information on the religion.

26. The  respondent  also  did  not  accept  that  he  was  wanted  by  the
    authorities in Uzbekistan  because  of  his  religion.  The  respondent
    considered that the knowledge of his brother and his friend's situation
    in  Uzbekistan  was  vague  and  lacking  in  detail.  The   respondent
    considered the documents supplied relating to his brother's problems in
    Uzbekistan noted that they had previously been assessed as genuine  but
    that they did not mention the applicant and did not relate directly  to
    his asylum claim the little weight was placed  on  them.  It  was  also
    considered that his account was speculative and  that  he'd  failed  to
    reasonably demonstrate that the authorities were interested in him  due
    to his religious beliefs.

27. As to assessment of risk  on  return,  it  was  not  accepted  that  he
    converted to Salafism  or  that  he  was  wanted  by  the  authorities.
    Consideration was given to whether he would be at risk on return due to
    his brother's conviction in his absence by  reference  to  the  country
    materials which was cited. It was noted that he claimed the authorities
    began to look him in September 2015  which  was  18  months  after  his
    brother was convicted in Uzbekistan. He was also unaware if  his  other
    brother in Uzbekistan had any problems with the authorities. But it was
    considered that in  the  light  of  the  delay  between  his  brother's
    conviction and in the  authorities'  interest  in  him,  it  failed  to
    demonstrate that there  was  a  clear  link  between  the  two  events.
    Furthermore, he failed to demonstrate that the authorities were putting
    pressure on the family in order to locate him based on the  information
    that the police attended the house every three months which was not  in
    line with the claimed treatment families of accused Salafi's  face.  It
    was therefore considered that he would not be at risk on return due  to
    his religion or to his brother's conviction.

Submissions of the advocates:

28. Mr Tufan on behalf of the respondent relied upon  the  decision  letter
    summarised above. He submitted that  in  terms  of  his  religion,  the
    appellant  could  not  be  described  as  a  member  of  an   extremist
    organisation but as a practising Muslim. He referred  the  Tribunal  to
    his interview in January 2016 in which the appellant was not  aware  of
    the basic fundamental tenants of Islam, as  recorded  in  the  decision
    letter. He submitted that whilst there  was  no  reason  to  doubt  his
    attendance at the local mosque as evidenced by the witness, he would be
    considered an ordinary Sunni Muslim.

29. As to whether the appellant had any profile that  would  place  him  at
    risk on return, he submitted that the Secretary of State accepted  that
    B was associated with F and that he had  been  granted  asylum  on  the
    basis of the documentation that had been provided. However,  there  was
    no risk to the appellant as a family  member  given  that  his  brother
    remained in Uzbekistan and no interest had been shown in him.

30. The evidence did not demonstrate that the absence of an exit visa would
    lead to the appellant being at  any  risk  of  harm  (see  the  country
    guidance decision of LM).

31. As to the evidence given by the appellant's brother in the form of text
    messages, the evidence was unreliable and not credible. In  particular,
    it was not credible that the authorities would have chosen to  use  the
    method of text messages rather than using a telephone call which  could
    not be kept or recorded. Nor was it credible that the B  would  provide
    voluntarily details of the appellant including his telephone number.

32. By reference to the background evidence in the  country  materials,  Mr
    Tufan submitted that the most recent  International  Religious  Freedom
    Report (dated 2017) made reference to 93% of the population  as  Muslim
    and that whilst there were  issues  that  related  to  those  who  held
    extremist views, the appellant did not fall  into  that  category.  The
    recent evidence highlighted a number of positive changes in the country
    which related to the practice of religion and that the appellant  would
    be able to practice his religion unhindered upon return.  He  submitted
    that it was not reasonably likely that the appellant would  be  on  any
    "watchlist" and that there would be no risk on return on the particular
    facts of his case.

33. Mr Slatter had provided a full skeleton argument set out in the  papers
    at D1-10. In addition, he  made  the  following  oral  submissions.  He
    submitted that the appellant was a genuine adherent to Salafi Islam and
    that whilst issues had been raised as to the level of his knowledge, at
    that time he did not claim to be as deeply involved. However,  applying
    the principles set out in the case  of  Dorodian,  the  leader  of  the
    mosque attended, and his evidence was unchallenged. Therefore,  it  had
    been established that he followed Salafi Islam.

34. It was submitted that there was evidence of a  clear  interest  in  the
    appellant by the authorities shown by the evidence of  the  appellant's
    brother (B) in the form of the recorded chat messages and the  evidence
    from his parents. Furthermore, the appellant's account of  the  refusal
    of his exit visa raised the inference that the authorities  were  aware
    of his profile.

35. He submitted that he did not seek to go behind the CG  decision  of  LM
    but that the point he relied upon was  set  out  paragraph  18  of  the
    skeleton argument and that the appellant was likely to be on  a  "watch
    list". He relied upon the references of the skeleton  argument  to  the
    country materials and that  the  appellant,  having  been  out  of  the
    country for an extended period would create a suspicion and a real risk
    of guilt by association in relation to his brother. He  made  reference
    to the ECHR decisions as to systemic  ill-treatment  of  returnees  and
    that the recent evidence had not changed in this respect.

36. Consequently, he submitted paragraph 94 of  LM  (as  cited)  was  still
    relevant in determining risk on return and that if  at  risk  of  being
    detained even for a short period this would lead to the appellant being
    at risk are prohibited ill-treatment for a Convention reason.

37. In the alternative, he had demonstrated to be  a  genuine  adherent  to
    Salafi Islam and given the respondent's own  evidence  as  to  how  the
    religion is viewed, this would give rise to a risk on return. He relied
    upon the matters set out in the skeleton argument in this respect.

Findings of fact:


38. In reaching my conclusions on the credibility of the appellant and  the
    witnesses I have taken into account the decision in HK v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1037  case  at  [28]-[30]
    where Neuberger LJ stated:

         "28. Further, in  many  asylum  cases,  some,  even  most,  of  the
             appellant's story may seem inherently unlikely but  that  does
             not mean that it is untrue. The ingredients of the story,  and
             the story as a  whole,  have  to  be  considered  against  the
             available country evidence and reliable expert  evidence,  and
             other familiar factors, such  as  consistency  with  what  the
             appellant has said before, and  with  other  factual  evidence
             (where there is any).


         29. Inherent probability, which may be  helpful  in  many  domestic
             cases, can be a dangerous, even a wholly inappropriate, factor
             to rely on in some asylum cases. Much of the evidence will  be
             referable to societies with customs  and  circumstances  which
             are very different from those of which the members of the fact-
             finding  Tribunal  have  any  (even  second-hand)  experience.
             Indeed, it is likely that the country which  an  asylum-seeker
             has left will be suffering  from  the  sort  of  problems  and
             dislocations with which the overwhelming majority of residents
             of this country will be wholly unfamiliar. The point  is  well
             made in Hathaway on Law of Refugee Status (1991) at page 81:


                  'In  assessing  the  general  human  rights   information,
                  decision-makers must  constantly  be  on  guard  to  avoid
                  implicitly recharacterizing the nature of the  risk  based
                  on their own perceptions of reasonability."


         30. Inherent improbability in  the  context  of  asylum  cases  was
             discussed at some length by Lord Brodie in Awala -v- Secretary
             of State [2005] CSOH 73. At paragraph 22, he pointed out  that
             it was "not proper to reject an applicant's account merely  on
             the basis that it is not credible or  not  plausible.  To  say
             that an applicant's account is not  credible  is  to  state  a
             conclusion" (emphasis added). At paragraph 24,  he  said  that
             rejection of a story on grounds of implausibility must be done
             "on reasonably drawn inferences and not simply  on  conjecture
             or speculation". He went on to emphasise, as did  Pill  LJ  in
             Ghaisari, the entitlement of the fact-finder to rely  "on  his
             common sense and his ability,  as  a  practical  and  informed
             person, to identify what is or is not plausible". However,  he
             accepted that "there will be cases  where  actions  which  may
             appear implausible if judged by...Scottish standards, might be
             plausible  when  considered  within   the   context   of   the
             applicant's social and cultural background".


39. The  Upper  Tribunal  in  KB  &  AH  (credibility-structured  approach)
    Pakistan [2017] UKUT 491 (IAC) stated at  paragraph  29  ".  Reflecting
    much the same caution, paragraph 5.6.4 of this Home Office  Instruction
    invokes, inter alia, what was said in Y v  Secretary  of  State  [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1223:

         "[I]n [ Y] the Court of Appeal stated that in regarding an  account
         as incredible the decision-maker must take care not to do so merely
         because it would not be plausible if it had  happened  in  the  UK.
         Again, underlying factors may well lead to behaviour and  responses
         on the part of the claimant which run  counter  to  what  would  be
         expected."


40. The reference by Neuberger LJ at [28] of HK to  the  need  to  consider
    factors related to plausibility along with "other  familiar  factors...
    such as consistency" is also illustrative of the need to  avoid  basing
    credibility assessment on just one indicator. We would  add  that  even
    when focusing just on plausibility, it is  not  a  concept  with  clear
    edges. Not only may there be degrees of (im)plausibility, but sometimes
    an aspect of an account that may be implausible in one respect  may  be
    plausible in another."


41. The basis of the appellant's claim is that he is  of  interest  to  the
    authorities. This arises in the following way; firstly, as a result  of
    his relationship to his brother, secondly ,as a result of his  interest
    in Salafi Islam supported by the written evidence of his  parents  (who
    state that the authorities had visited their home and asked them  about
    his whereabouts) and thirdly, the evidence of his brother  who  claimed
    that there has been interest shown in the appellant supported  by  text
    chats from an agent of the authorities.


42. In addition, the appellant relies upon his conversion to  Salafi  Islam
    (the "HJ(Iran)" argument set out paragraph 7 of the skeleton argument).


43. I have had the advantage of hearing the oral evidence of the  appellant
    and his brother as  to  the  claimed  events  and  have  also  had  the
    opportunity to read the written documentation  which  includes  country
    materials. Having done so, I  have  found  the  evidence  of  both  the
    appellant and his brother and that of his parents to been  inconsistent
    and not credible in a number of important aspects which I shall set out
    in my analysis of the evidence below.


44. The core of the appellant's claim is that  on  arrival  to  the  UK  he
    stayed with his brother B and a  friend  known  as  "F"  who  practices
    Salafi Islam. It is common ground that the appellant lived with F for a
    short period of two months having left the property in or  about  early
    2013 and has  had  no  further  contact  with  him.  According  to  the
    appellant's account, F returned to Uzbekistan on a date in 2013 and was
    later arrested by the authorities on account of his religion and  being
    suspected of being linked to religious extremism having had  literature
    found on his computer. It is asserted that he gave the name  of  others
    involved including the appellant's brother.


45. The appellant was interviewed in relation to his claim in January  2016
    and was asked a number of questions about F, and  his  arrest  and  the
    surrounding circumstances and his knowledge of events. It is clear from
    reading the interview that the appellant was not able to  give  details
    of what had happened and gave as an explanation that he  did  not  know
    because his parents could not say anything about this to him  on  Skype
    as a recording device had been placed on their computer (see Q139;AIR).
    He claimed that his father had held up a piece of  paper  on  Skype  to
    tell the appellant of the authorities' adverse interest but could  give
    no specific detail.


46.  A number of points arise from  this  evidence.  First  of  all,  I  am
    satisfied that there is no credible explanation as to  why  his  father
    could not have held up written information to communicate the appellant
    the circumstances surrounding the arrest of F or at any time thereafter
    to provide details  of  why  there  was  an  adverse  interest  in  the
    appellant.


47. Furthermore, the account the appellant gave in his interview in January
    2016 which  demonstrates that the appellant was unable to give any real
    detail as to what had happened in  Uzbekistan,  is  undermined  by  the
    contents of the  written  evidence  of  his  father.  In  that  witness
    statement his father claims to have sent the appellants mother  to  the
    UK  in  December  2014  to  "explain  everything  in  detail"  to   the
    appellant's brother. It is not credible that if the appellant's  mother
    knew  all  the  details  of  what  happened  in  Uzbekistan  with   the
    authorities and had gone to the  UK  with  the  purpose  of  explaining
    everything "in detail" that she or the appellant's  brother  would  not
    have told the appellant of details of everything that had occurred. The
    appellant's evidence was that he had spent time with his mother between
    December 2014 - March 2015 when she visited the UK and therefore  there
    was sufficient opportunity for that information to have  been  provided
    to him. There is no credible explanation for the lack of detail that he
    was able to give in his  substantive  interview  which  took  place  in
    January 2016.


48. The appellant stated in his interview that the Uzbek  authorities  were
    looking for his brother in June/July 2014. The documents relied  on  by
    his brother in his asylum claim refers to a  warrant  being  issued  in
    March 2014. Against that factual background and in  the  light  of  the
    country materials, I do not find credible that  the  authorities  would
    have permitted her exit to the  UK  as  claimed.  By  this  stage,  the
    authorities had an executed warrant against the appellant's brother and
    it was thought that he was  in  the  UK.  The  country  materials  make
    reference to the issue of exit visas as a way in which the  freedom  of
    travel of its citizens is curtailed (see paragraph 19:  page  186  AB),
    and that exit visas have been denied on "politically motivated grounds"
    to prevent people leaving the country to seek  asylum  and  used  as  a
    means of control. The material refers to the denial of  exit  visas  to
    relatives of dissidents abroad (see paragraph 29: page 188AB). However,
    the appellant's mother was  able  to  leave  the  country  without  any
    difficulty in December 2014  despite  the  outstanding  warrant  issued
    against the appellant's brother.

49. Furthermore,  the  country  materials  refer  to  the  law  enforcement
    agencies harassing or questioning people who  return  from  abroad  and
    that the police require  returning  travellers,  especially  women,  to
    undergo interview  at  police  stations  to  explain  where  they  have
    travelled and to justify the purpose of their trip (see  paragraph  20:
    page 186 AB).

50. There is no reference in the evidence from either  the  appellant,  his
    brother or from their parents themselves that she was either  prevented
    from leaving the country or that on return she was questioned about her
    son or the appellant in the way referred to in the  country  materials.
    Whilst the appellant stated in his oral  evidence  that  she  had  been
    given a Visa earlier in 2014, this does not satisfactorily explain  why
    she was still able to leave against the factual background claimed  and
    there being a warrant executed against him or  why  she  had  not  been
    questioned following her return.

51. The appellant's account is that  the  authorities  began  visiting  the
    home/raiding the home in 2015 and the  visits  directly  concerned  the
    appellant himself. The evidence as to when this occurred has  not  been
    consistent. His account in evidence  was  that  the  authorities  began
    visiting the house/raiding the house after "a few months of her return,
    approximately April/May 2015". In his written evidence,  the  appellant
    claims that the visit happened in September 2015 (see AIR  and  written
    evidence). However, in the screening interview at B7,  it  records  his
    reply that the authorities were looking for him in June/July 2014.

52. Notwithstanding the adverse material held by the authorities in respect
    of the appellant's family members, it is stated  that  the  appellant's
    mother was able to permanently leave the  country  to  live  abroad  in
    October 2015. I have assessed the likelihood of this occurring  against
    the account of the appellant and in the light of the country materials.
    Having done so I have reached the conclusion that her ability to  leave
    the country permanently at that time if the appellant  was  of  adverse
    interest, is not credible. At that time, the appellant's brother had  a
    warrant outstanding in  court  proceedings  which  had  been  commenced
    against him in absentia. According  to  the  appellant's  evidence  the
    authorities had gone to the extent of placing a device on or  near  the
    computer to monitor the contact  with  her  son,  yet  the  appellant's
    mother was able to exit country permanently with no difficulties. It is
    not suggested in the evidence that there were any difficulties  in  her
    leaving or that any steps were taken to either prevent her  leaving  or
    even to further question her. When asked questions in  evidence  as  to
    why there were no steps taken to stop her, the  applicant  stated  "she
    was going to see her son and she was an  old  woman  (age  62).  In  my
    judgement, that does not credible explain how she  was  able  to  leave
    with  no  interest  shown  in  her.  According  to  the  evidence   the
    appellant's father left the  country  permanently  in  early  2016.  In
    accordance with the materials, he would have to  have  applied  for  an
    exit Visa. No explanation is been given as to how he was able to obtain
    a Visa to leave the country permanently against the factual  background
    that has been given. To obtain a Visa for the country concerned is  not
    a quick process and there has been no explanation as to  what  evidence
    was given in support of permanent residence out of the country or  what
    evidence was provided in support of this application.

53. A further inconsistency in the evidence relates to the  interest  shown
    in the family members. The appellant's parents' evidence  is  that  the
    security services were visiting "once a week" whereas the  evidence  of
    the appellant was that they were visiting "every three  months."  Given
    the importance of this issue, it is reasonable to expect  the  evidence
    to have been consistent as to the frequency of the visits.

54. The appellant has a brother remaining in Uzbekistan. He  has  not  been
    subject to any imprisonment, or any  adverse  treatment.  The  evidence
    given by the appellant is that his brother had  previously  worked  for
    the government but had lost his job due to the arrest  of  his  sibling
    and he had been without employment since then. When  asked  to  explain
    why he had not been treated in the  same  way  as  the  appellant,  the
    appellant stated that he was not targeted because "he was one of them".
    However, he has not been employed by the government for the  last  four
    years. There is no evidence before the Tribunal that there has been any
    adverse interest shown in him beyond that claimed. In oral evidence and
    cross-examination, the appellant's brother said  that  the  authorities
    had no interest in him because "he is not a threat to  them".  However,
    that runs counter to the country materials  which  refers  to  interest
    shown in family members of those suspected  of  militant  or  extremist
    religious views.

55. I have considered the other evidence that has been advanced  on  behalf
    of the  appellant  to  demonstrate  that  he  is  of  interest  to  the
    authorities. The appellant relies upon events that he claims took place
    at the embassy. He stated that he had to change his passport by the end
    of 2015 to a  biometric  passport,  so  he  attended  at  the  embassy.
    According to his evidence (see witness statement: paragraph 8) in March
    2015 he renewed his passport, but the authorities refused is exit  visa
    in September 2015. He claims that he was told by them that  he  had  to
    return to his country of nationality to get this renewed and that  this
    was to "trap him."

56. I have set that  account  against  the  country  materials  before  the
    Tribunal. There is no dispute that the appellant did  have  a  passport
    issued on xxxxx 2015 and that it does not have an exit visa in it.  The
    country materials refer to the exit  Visa  system.  By  decree  of  the
    government No 8 of January 6th 1995 a system was  established  for  the
    departure of citizens travelling abroad and  that  was  they  have  the
    right to travel abroad for private and public  affairs,  residence,  as
    tourists,  for  work  or  for  medical  treatment,  they  must   obtain
    permission which is valid for only two years. Permission  is  given  in
    the form of an  authorisation  sticker  in  the  passport.  This  is  a
    practice inherited from the former USSR. Exit permits can be renewed at
    the Uzbek Embassy in the  third  country  where  an  Uzbek  citizen  is
    living.

57. It is not been argued by Mr Slatter on behalf of the appellant that the
    CG of LM (returnees - expired exit  permit)  Uzbekistan  CG  [2012]  UK
    UT00390, should not be followed or that the evidence that is set out in
    that decision is undermined by any new evidence.

58.  In LM (returnees -  expired  exit  permit)  Uzbekistan  CG  [2012]  UK
    UT00390, the country  guidance  issue  identified  in  that  case,  was
    whether  as suggested to the Court of Appeal in  LS  (Uzbekistan),  the
    current  country  evidence  supports  a  finding  that  Uzbek  citizens
    returning to Uzbekistan from abroad,  after  their  exit  permits  have
    expired,  are  at  real  risk  of  detention  or  of   disproportionate
    punishment on return. On this issue the Tribunal reached the conclusion
    that current country evidence did not.  The  conclusions  reached  were
    set out as follows:
    (1) Article 223 of the Uzbekistan Criminal Code (UCC) makes it an
    offence for a citizen to leave the country without permission - what is
    described as "illegal exit abroad". The basic offence of "illegal exit
    abroad" is punishable by a fine or by imprisonment for between three to
    five years.
    (2) In specified aggravating circumstances (a physical breach of the
    border, conspiracy, or the exit abroad of a state employee requiring
    special permission) the penalty for "illegal exit abroad" under Article
    223 of the UCC rises to five to ten years' imprisonment. It is unclear
    from the evidence before us whether a fine will also be imposed.
    (3) Uzbek citizens are required to obtain an exit permit prior to
    leaving the country. However, Annex 1 to the Resolution of the Council
    of Ministers No. 8, issued on 06.01.1995, provides that no penalties
    apply to someone who returns to Uzbekistan after the expiry of their
    exit permit. Normally, exit permits can be renewed at the Uzbekistan
    Embassy in the third country where an Uzbek citizen is living.
    (4) There are cases of Uzbek nationals, having left the country
    lawfully, nevertheless being charged with "illegal exit abroad" and
    prosecuted under Article 223 following their return to Uzbekistan with
    expired exit permits. However, those cases involved pre-existing
    interest by the authorities, association with the events in Andijan in
    2005, association with Islamic militant activity, travel to countries
    other than that authorised in the exit permit or other such
    distinguishing features.
    (5) There is no evidence of prosecutions under Article 223 of the UCC
    of ordinary returning Uzbek citizens with expired exit permits,
    including failed asylum seekers, where such individuals had no
    particular profile or distinguishing features which would otherwise
    have led to any adverse interest in them. It has therefore not been
    established that such returnees are at real risk of persecution on
    return.
    6) The ill-treatment of detainees is a pervasive and enduring problem
    in Uzbekistan, for which there is no concrete evidence of any
    fundamental improvement in recent years (Ergashev v Russia [2009] ECtHR
    12106/09 ECHR 2249). Therefore, where an Uzbek citizen is likely to be
    detained on return, Article 3 ECHR will be engaged.
    (7) The country guidance given by the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
    in OM (Returning citizens, minorities, religion) Uzbekistan CG [2007]
    UKAIT 00045 is re-affirmed.
59. The point made on his behalf is that he was being told to return to
    obtain an exit visa however, the country materials demonstrate that he
    would not face any penalty for returning without a renewed exit Visa.
    Whilst there is no exit Visa in the new passport, there is no evidence
    to support his account that he went to the embassy to ask for a visa or
    that it was in fact refused. No copy applications have been provided.
    Furthermore, no explanation has been advanced as to why he chose to
    submit an application for a new passport at the time he did. The
    passport he held prior to this was not due to expire until March 2019.
    The country materials also make reference to the country introducing
    new fully biometric passport in 2011 (see page 187;AB), which is
    inconsistent with the appellant's account that he was told he had to
    renew his passport for a biometric passport in 2015. Consequently,
    while the passport does not have an exit Visa in it, I am not satisfied
    that the appellant has established the reason is because the
    authorities asked him to return to obtain one.
60. The other evidence relied upon by the appellant is provided by the
    appellant's brother. In the appellant's witness statement he refers to
    the following information:-
    "recently some spy has contacted my brother and is asking about me. He
    is also asked my brother to watch for them and spy on Uzbek people in
    the UK but my brother has refused. It shows that we are on a watch
    list."
61. I have considered the evidence in the form of written text messages or
    "chats". In his witness statement dated 6 June 2018 the appellant's
    brother states:" recently some agent from Secret Service contacted me
    and asked me to spy for the Uzbek government. The asked for brother's
    phone number and asked me if brother is applying for settlement in the
    UK. He has not contacted my brother, but I think he will contact my
    brother soon. I've enclosed a copy of some of the phone chat here. I
    can show all of the chat if needed".
62. In June 2018 a document was provided exhibiting the "chat/test
    messages" (see p.12-16 bundle A). The content of the messages gives the
    caller's name and occupation; asks him about his brother -if he is
    married and studying and what course and is he returning or applied for
    citizenship and asks for his telephone number; Q also asked "are you
    regularly going to mosque" whenever I have time I go there. Who else do
    you know who goes (other Uzbeks').  Conversation then ends.
63. The same document was provided by letter dated 2nd of October 2018 from
    A's solicitors. However, in bundle for hearing further phone chats are
    set out at p. 41 - 62. This evidence shows that the chat/conversations
    are recorded in December 2017.
64. I have carefully considered the written evidence on the oral evidence
    in the context of the decision of Tanveer Ahmed to assess the
    reliability of that evidence and the weight that I can place upon it.
65. I draw the following conclusions from that evidence in my assessment of
    the evidence.
     i) There has been no supporting evidence concerning the telephone
        number concerned or from the phone that was used by the appellant's
        brother.
    ii) The chats now set out are different from those originally
        disclosed. For example, at page 57 there are conversations from the
        man telling A's brother that he is wanted and asking him if he
        claimed political asylum, asking him if he is a member of the
        Salafi movement (page 58) reference also to contacting people who
        wanted, can you continue communications with us? A's brother gives
        private details about his occupation. One of the chats (page 59)
        which is referring to A (is he returning finishing his studies or
        applying for citizenship) is not the same chat in terms of content
        as previously disclosed in bundle A as the same chat adds in
        different questions- is M.... also in London? Who is he? From
        Dxxxxxx ; who taught you religion .. ?" Therefore, the chats now
        provided are not the same in content/order as provided previously
        and no reasons are given as to why they are different in content if
        they are said to be the same chat messages.
   iii) I do not find it credible that someone who had been convicted in
        absentia would answer calls on a mobile phone in December 2017. At
        this stage both parents had left Uzbekistan and there was no reason
        to answer the phone knowing that his brother remained there.
    iv) Nor is it credible that he would give an unknown person the
        appellant's telephone number and personal details. It is recorded
        in the evidence given previously before the FTT J that his brother
        had given the information because the authorities already were in
        possession of it. However, if that were true, and they already had
        the details they could have contacted the appellant directly. In
        fact, there is no evidence from any source that the appellant has
        ever been contacted by anyone either before or since these text
        chats have taken place.
     v) The appellant has not been convicted of any crime in absentia and
        is not been referred to in any of the documents provided.
    vi) More recent chat messages demonstrate the appellant's brother has
        given information over the phone about his own personal
        circumstances and his family. I do not find that it is credible or
        easily likely that he would have done so having obtained a grant of
        asylum.
   vii) I do not find credible that the other party concerned would have
        used a form of text/chat messages which can be permanently kept by
        way of a screenshot when it was open to them to simply use the
        telephone.
  viii) In his oral evidence, the appellant's brother was asked in cross-
        examination why they would send text messages when a record could
        be kept. The reply was "they are stupid". I do not consider that
        this is a plausible or credible explanation for the use of this
        method by those he claims are involved in convert behaviour. Nor is
        it consistent with the previous evidence of the family that the
        authorities had placed a secret device on or near their computer.
    ix) It is also the case that whilst both refer to the text messages
        demonstrating that they have been asked to be "spies", this is not
        supported by the content of the messages themselves.
     x) In cross-examination when asked why he'd been asked to "spy", B
        said "they know I am innocent and I was to be freed. If I were
        really involved why would they free me from accusations? They know
        I am not guilty, and they are trying to convince me that they will
        close my case if I help them. They told me they would close my case
        if I help them.". I observed that there was nothing in the content
        of the chats to support that claim that they told him that they
        would "close the case" or otherwise help him.
    xi) Furthermore, in his oral evidence B stated that he was still trying
        to "fight my innocence" and that the authorities had told his
        lawyer that he needed to return. This came from his oral evidence
        and there was no reference in any previous written or oral evidence
        when the appeal was before the FTT J. He claimed that his parents
        obtained a lawyer in Uzbekistan to clear his name and  when asked
        when this had occurred, he said in March 2014. When asked to
        explain why his parents had not told him that they'd engaged a
        lawyer he stated, "I don't know I was in a depression; they said
        stay there and don't worry." He then volunteered that his father
        had a prominent role and claimed that his parents had only told him
        about engaging a lawyer in 2018.
   xii) I do not find B's evidence credible or consistent. The evidence
        advanced by the appellant is that his parents left in 2015 and
        2016. There has been no explanation as to why, if they had obtained
        the services of a lawyer to clear B's name why they would have
        failed to have informed him until 2018. As they had left well
        before that time there is no credible reason for the late
        disclosure of any such evidence. Furthermore, no evidence or
        reference be made to this when giving an account before the FTTJ.
  xiii) Having considered the evidence in the round, I do not find the
        evidence of B and the text message chats to be reliable credible
        evidence, consequently I attach no weight to that evidence to
        demonstrate that the authorities have been in contact with B in the
        UK. Nor is it credible evidence to support the account that the
        authorities have an ongoing interest in A.
66.  In summary, I am not satisfied that there is credible or reliable
    evidence to demonstrate to the lower standard of proof that the
    authorities have shown any interest in this appellant. I do not find
    the evidence given by the parties to be credible or consistent for the
    reasons given and in my analysis of the evidence. I do not accept that
    it is been demonstrated to the lower standard of proof that there has
    been any link shown between the appellant and F as a result of the
    authorities either becoming aware that they were in contact with each
    other or on the basis that they are aware that  A has become interested
    in the practice of  Salafi Islam. The appellant lived with F for a very
    short period of time namely two months. None of the written documents
    make reference to the appellant by name or otherwise and there is no
    evidence that he has been convicted in absentia. As the interview
    records set out when questioned in 2016, three years after he claimed
    to have lived with F, his answers concerning his practice of Salafi
    Islam were vague and lacking in detail. His responses demonstrated he
    was only able to provide basic information about the praying practices
    and only after being prompted further information (see paragraphs 24
    and 25 of the decision letter). He was unable to say if the Salafi sect
    linked to any other groups and unable to provide the names of any
    notable members (see paragraph 27 of the decision letter). The reason
    given for his lack of knowledge and interview set out page 5 of his
    witness statement and his oral evidence. It claimed that he was "still
    learning" at the time of the interview and that he had not been on any
    proper "Islamic course or education" and was "learning the basics".
    There is also no evidence that anyone knew of his religion at that
    time.
67.  It is common ground that whilst the claim for asylum was made in
    October 2015 and he was interviewed in January 2016, he did not receive
    a decision on the claim made until May 2018. I have therefore had more
    recent evidence from the appellant and witness called on his behalf
    attesting to his religion.
68.  In the decision of TF and MA [2018] Scot CSIH 58, was concerned, it
    was made clear that paragraph 59 that the evidence of church ministers
    in a conversion case is "a certain type of expert evidence" and this is
    "extra evidence based on personal observation or sensation" (paragraph
    59). The decisionmaker's approach to such evidence

         "should not start with any predisposition to  reject  the  evidence
         because it does not fit in with some a priori view formed as to the
         credibility of the Appellant. The evidence should be considered  on
         its merits and without any preconception" (paragraph 15).

69.  Second, where a Tribunal might have formed that the Appellant has  been
    dishonest in  certain  aspects  of  the  asylum  claim",  then  "it  is
    legitimate for the Tribunal to  regard  with  suspicion  evidence  from
    church witnesses which is based entirely upon what  the  Appellant  has
    told them". However, this is not the case "when the evidence  from  the
    church witnesses is based in substantial part on their observations  on
    the Appellant when he has been engaging  with  the  activities  of  the
    church" (paragraph 60).

70.  There is  no  evidence  in  the  appellant's  bundle  which  makes  any
    reference to Salafi Islam or its practice. Nor is there  any  reference
    to that form of Islam in the country materials or how  the  authorities
    view that faith. Much of the country materials that relate  to  freedom
    of religion  relate  to  Jehovah's  Witnesses,  the  Jewish  community,
    unregistered  Christian  groups  members  of   the   sheer   community,
    Pentecostals evangelical Baptists and Seventh-day Adventists' (see 2017
    international religious  freedom  report).  However,  in  the  decision
    letter at paragraph 27 refers to  evidence  of  them  being  linked  to
    groups such as IS.

71.  There is evidence from his supporting witness as set out in an  undated
    letter (see page 22AB) and in a more recent witness statement.  In  his
    oral evidence in chief he confirmed that the appellant had continued to
    practice Salafi Islam. In cross-examination, Mr Tufan and behalf of the
    respondent asked a  number  of  questions  concerning  the  differences
    between the  practice  of  Salafi  Islam  and  "mainstream  Islam".  He
    accepted that the  mosque  attended  by  the  appellant  which  he  was
    concerned was not involved in any extremist organisations nor  was  the
    appellant. It was not suggested by way of any examples given by  either
    the appellant or the witness called that he had been  involved  in  any
    form of proselytising or encouraging others to follow  the  faith  that
    was  simply  involved  in  cultural  events  which  involved   sporting
    activities.

72.  The witness refers to knowing the appellant's brother for "five  years"
    and following the "Salafi school of thought". No further  details  were
    given as to either the general practice of Salafi Islam or  importantly
    how the appellant follows the "Salafi school of thought". He was  asked
    a number of questions in cross-examination and any differences and  all
    he was able to advance was that they are asked to pray five  times  per
    day and engage with the community. He gave as an example that they  had
    a cultural event where all religions came to the mosque  and  that  the
    appellant taught martial arts and took place in sporting activities. He
    said that "this is the difference for us we believe in rituals and want
    to affect change."

73.  Whilst I am not satisfied  that  at  the  time  of  his  interview  the
    appellant could properly be  described  as  someone  who  converted  to
    Salafism in the way claimed, having  considered  the  evidence  in  its
    totality and that three years have  elapsed  since  that  interview,  I
    accept that he now practices that faith.

Assessment of risk on return:

74.  I have set out my findings of fact in my assessment of the evidence  as
    a whole. It is against that background that  I  turn  to  consider  the
    issue of risk on return. For the reasons given, I am not satisfied that
    the evidence relied upon by the appellant  is  credible,  plausible  or
    consistent to support his account that the authorities have an  ongoing
    adverse interest in him. I  have  placed  no  weight  on  the  evidence
    contained in the supporting written documents from his parents  nor  on
    the evidence of the appellant's brother as to  interest  shown  in  him
    whilst in the United Kingdom.

75.  It is a matter of fact that the appellant's brother  has  been  granted
    asylum and it follows that the documentary evidence submitted has  been
    accepted by the UK authorities. Whilst that might be so,  it  does  not
    necessarily follow that B has given reliable  evidence  concerning  the
    details in relation to his brothers claim. Notwithstanding  my  adverse
    findings on  credibility,  I  have  to  consider  whether  there  is  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant would be detained on
    return whether by way of questioning or otherwise on the basis  of  his
    relationship with his brother.  It  is  submitted  and  behalf  of  the
    appellant that the risk exists irrespective of any non-acceptance  that
    the state authorities have shown interest in the appellant or  that  he
    has converted to Salafi Islam.

76.  Mr Tufan submits that there is no risk on return on the basis that  his
    brother remains there and that a family connection per se will not lead
    the authorities to have any adverse interest in  him.  However,  it  is
    argued on behalf of the appellant that there  is  reference  to  "watch
    lists" in existence, in the CG decision of OM and also material set out
    in the respondent's bundle at D37 which expressly  makes  reference  to
    such lists and the risk arising from them.

77.   The  Upper  Tribunal  in  the  decision  of  OM  (returning  citizens,
    minorities, religion) Uzbekistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00045  (23  May  2007)
    considered the risk on return in the context of  the  appellant  having
    overstayed her exit visa and in addition to having no current passport.
    The question posed was whether she would come  under  suspicion  having
    been away for so long? On the particular facts of that  appellant,  she
    had left the country in 1996 and therefore had been absent for a period
    of in excess  of  11  years  at  the  time  of  the  hearing  in  2007.
    Notwithstanding the length of her absence, the Tribunal concluded  that
    there was no evidence in support of that assertion save  from  evidence
    emanating from Germany relating to two deportees. No evidence had  been
    provided of their particular circumstances and thus the Tribunal  could
    place no weight on that material. The appellant  did  not  succeed  and
    either the Refugee Convention on human rights grounds.

78.  I take into account that  the  decision  was  promulgated  in  2007  is
    therefore of some age and since that date there has been a  further  CG
    decision and updated country materials. In the decision of LM (as cited
    above), the Upper Tribunal confirmed that there are cases of those  who
    have been charged with illegal exit and therefore detained but that  in
    their cases it involved a pre-existing interest by the authorities,  or
    being associated with the events in Andijan  in  2005,  in  association
    with Islamic militant activity, or travel to countries other than  that
    authorised in the  exit  visa  or  other  distinguishing  features.  It
    therefore depends on the  profile  of  the  person  concerned.  On  the
    findings of fact made pertaining to this particular appellant, he would
    not be associated with the events in  2005  nor  has  he  travelled  to
    countries other than that  authorised  in  the  exit  permit.  However,
    whilst I have rejected his account of adverse  interest  shown  in  him
    whilst in the United Kingdom based on the evidence relied upon,  it  is
    necessary to consider whether he would still fall within  the  category
    of a person who could reasonably be described as being associated  with
    Islamic militant activity or that the authorities  would  have  a  pre-
    existing interest in him as a result of  his  brother's  conviction  in
    absentia.

79.  I have therefore considered the most recent country materials  relating
    to this issue that are contained in the appellants bundle and  also  in
    the respondent's bundle.

80.  The first point made by Mr Slatter is that the appellant is  likely  to
    be on a "blacklist" on account of being out of the country for  a  long
    period of time. The materials themselves do not indicate what length of
    time would qualify as a "long period". He relies upon material  in  the
    respondent's bundle exhibited at D36-D39 which is  in  response  to  an
    information request dated 20 March 2018. The source of the material  is
    a radio free Europe, radio Liberty report dated 27  November  2016  and
    makes reference to young men being "among a growing number of  citizens
    thought  to  be  living  abroad  and  blacklisted  as   extremists   by
    authorities in Uzbekistan, according to police also provided  one  such
    district list to RFE/RL's Uzbek service. It quotes  that  there  is  an
    instruction whereby those who are absent from the country  for  a  long
    time put on a "wanted list". It is stated that this is a  "question  of
    security" and that such people face "immediate arrest on their return".
     However, it is also quoted that it is "it is  all  but  impossible  to
    verify the claim" but that locals contacted via details on one list and
    interviewed for the report have expressed concern at their  own  family
    members presence on the blacklist. The report makes  reference  to  the
    history of extremist activity including explosions in  the  capital  in
    1999 blamed on the IMU group that pledged allegiance to IS in 2015.  It
    also sites that there is ample evidence that citizens  fight  alongside
    the Taliban in Afghanistan and Pakistan  and  that  there  is  evidence
    pointing to nationals having joined ISO militants in Syria and Iraq and
    thus it is insisted that measures are justified in pursuit of  security
    and stability and that "the government has taken tough steps to  target
    religious extremism by arresting and  persecuting  suspected  followers
    and supporters of radical movements."

81.  Whilst the report is dated November 2016, Mr Slatter  points  to  other
    evidence contained in the country materials which supports existence of
    such a list. In the respondent's own bundle, there is an  extract  from
    the HRW report 2018 which makes reference to the government maintaining
    a  "blacklist"  made  of  a  thousand  of  individuals   belonging   to
    unregistered or extremist groups. It makes reference to the authorities
    in August announcing a reduction of the total number of people  on  the
    list from 17,582 to 1352  but  that  despite  the  move,  thousands  of
    religious believers,  religious  Muslims  to  practice  their  religion
    outside strict state controls, remain imprisoned on  vague  charges  of
    extremism.

82.  Other evidence is contained in the AI report dated 2017  (p85AB)  which
    makes further  reference  to  the  review  of  charges  against  people
    detained on suspicion of possessing  banned  religious  or  "extremist"
    materials. The President also called for people who  regretted  joining
    such  movements  to  be  "rehabilitated".  Mr  Slatter  points  to  the
    paragraph which states that the  security  forces  continue  to  detain
    dozens of people including labour migrants returning from  abroad  (see
    p85) and at page156AB  there  is  reference  to  treating  unregistered
    religious activity is a criminal offence and the suspected  members  of
    banned Muslim organisations and their relatives have faced  arrest  and
    interrogation.

83.  At page 171, there is reference to the  "preventative  register"  which
    had over 17,000 persons on it but that the number has now been  reduced
    as part of the reform measures initiated by the president, to just over
    1000. It also refers to June  2017,  when  the  President  ordered  the
    review of individual cases of detention of persons in  custody  and  at
    least  6000  people  were  removed  from  the  register.  The   special
    rapporteur  welcomed  the  removal  of  those  people.  It   was   also
    encouraging to see that the  government  embarked  on  a  programme  of
    reintegration  into  the  community  of  its  citizens  that  had  been
    stigmatised or ostracised for alleged religious extremism. At page  172
    at paragraph 67 the circumstances of "religious detainees" is  referred
    to further.

84.  I conclude from that evidence that the preventative  measures  referred
    to have been in place historically and that many state bodies are  able
    to place individuals on that preventative register and that  particular
    attention is given to advocates of  new  strains  of  Islam  (see  page
    171AB). At its peak the register listed  over  17,000  people  but  the
    material demonstrates that as part of the reform measures initiated  by
    the President it is been reduced to just over 1000. It is also recorded
    that there were encouraging  signs  of  change  having  embarked  on  a
    programme of reintegration into the community of those suspected. It is
    however unclear who is remaining on the list or be likely to  be  added
    to it. The evidence relied upon by Mr Slatter at page 186 refers to law
    enforcement agencies also questioning those who return from abroad  and
    that the Uzbek - German forum refer to  having  interviewed  travellers
    subjected to interview and inspection where officials interrogated them
    as to their religious practices.

85.  Mr Tufan on behalf of the respondent relies on the  2017  International
    Religious Freedom Report. He submits that 93%  of  the  population  are
    Muslim and that the present circumstances demonstrate positive changes.
    At page 7 it is recorded that the government-sponsored Muslim board  of
    Uzbekistan plans to open half a-dozen religious  education  schools  in
    2018, that the madrassa granted  diplomas  are  considered  now  to  be
    equivalent to other diplomas, enabling madrassa graduates  to  continue
    to university level education and universities provide higher education
    religious programmes. At p11 he refers to  the  material  which  states
    "President Mirziyoyev took several steps regarding improving  relations
    with the sunny Muslim community; the government cleared 16,000  persons
    from security watch list of potential religious extremists;  dispatched
    imams to present to begin a course with the  religious  prisoners;  and
    lifted sanctions on the day-to-day practice of Islam, including  public
    prayer to youth participation in mosques. A  dedicated  Islamic  prayer
    room with a separate place was opened at the airport for the first time
    and the government has also announced plans for  such  rooms  in  train
    stations.  The  authorities  recently  allowed  major  mosques  to  use
    loudspeakers for the call to prayer for the first time in more  than  a
    decade....  In  December  7,  the  President  pardoned  2700  convicts,
    including 763 "religious prisoners", the largest  one-time  release  of
    prisons of conscience of the country's history." He refers to page  17,
    whereby Muslims could openly celebrate Ramadan  iftars  for  the  first
    time in recent memory and according to the NGO Freedom  House  for  the
    first time in many years, the  government  allowed  all  night  prayers
    during Ramadan. He further submits at page 19 further positive  changes
    were outlined in that report.

86.  However to balance those points, Mr Slatter identifies  other  evidence
    in the report at  pages  1,2,4  8  and  9,  including  the  authorities
    continuation  post  penalties  on  individuals    worshipping   outside
    unauthorised location and that  NGO  sources  reported  the  government
    continued physical abuse of persons arrested and jailed on suspicion of
    "religious extremism" or participating in underground Islamic activity.

87.  Whilst Mr Tufan submits that the appellant would be  viewed  on  return
    as a Sunni Muslim and at its highest would not be in possession  of  an
    exit visa, and that those facts by themselves would  not  lead  to  any
    risk of detention or further questioning, that is not reflected in  the
    material or the evidence. Nor does it take into account any  link  that
    is made to his brother. As Mr Slatter submitted  the  respondent's  own
    evidence at paragraph 27 of the  decision  letter  makes  reference  to
    followers of Salafi Islam as being linked to the extremist groups  that
    are listed at paragraph 27. Therefore, it  is  reasonably  likely  that
    those were suspected of being members of such  an  un-authorised  group
    would be questioned and detained  on  return.  On  the  facts  of  this
    particular case, the UK authorities  have  accepted  that  B  has  been
    convicted in absentia and therefore there  is  a  real  risk  that  the
    appellant is like to be questioned on return as a family  member  of  B
    and as someone who has been out of the country for an extended period.

88.  That being the case, Mr Slatter relies upon paragraph 93 and 94  of  CG
    which states as follows:
    "93. In Ergashev v Russia, the Court said this about the treatment of
detainees in  Uzbekistan:
         "112. As regards the applicant's allegation that detainees suffer
         ill-treatment in Uzbekistan, the Court has recently acknowledged
         that a general problem still persists in that country in this
         regard (see, for example, Karimov v. Russia, no. 54219/08,  79-
         85, 29 July 2010; Ismoilov and Others v. Russia, no. 2947/06, 
         120-121, 24 April 2008; and Muminov v. Russia, no. 42502/06,  93-
         96, 11 December 2008). No concrete evidence has been produced to
         demonstrate any fundamental improvement in this field in
         Uzbekistan in the last few years (see paragraphs 100, 101, 103 and
         104 above). The Court therefore considers that the ill-treatment
         of detainees is a pervasive and enduring problem in Uzbekistan.
         ...
         114. ... Given that the practice of torture in Uzbekistan is
         described by reputable international sources as systematic, the
         Court is not persuaded that the assurances from the Uzbek
         authorities offered a reliable guarantee against the risk of ill-
         treatment.
         115. Accordingly, the applicant's forcible return to Uzbekistan
         would give rise to a violation of Article 3 as he would face a
         serious risk of being subjected there to torture or inhuman or
         degrading treatment. Therefore, the Court decides to maintain the
         application of Rule 39 of the Rules of Court."
         94.     In the light of that decision and of the support for it in
         both expert reports, in the ARC , and country background
         information before us, it is accepted that where an appellant is at
         risk of detention on return to Uzbekistan, whether as a result of
         charges and pending prosecution, or on a short-term basis pending
         enquiries on the basis of suspicion of illegality, such appellant
         would be entitled to succeed under Article 3 of the ECHR."
89.  Neither advocate submit that this Tribunal should depart from those
    findings although I observe that there has been more recent country
    evidence that refers to a number of positive changes brought in by the
    government. Therefore, having considered the evidence in its totality,
    I accept the submission made by Mr Slatter that it is been demonstrated
    that there is a reasonable likelihood that the appellant upon return
    would be detained and questioned for having been out of the country for
    an extended period, due to his family links with B and that during
    questioning his practice of Salafi Islam would be elicited. On the
    evidence relied upon by both parties, even detention for short time
    basis would demonstrate a reasonable likelihood of ill-treatment. I
    therefore allow the appeal.
Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and the decision is set aside.

    The decision is remade as follows: the  appeal  is  allowed  under  the
    Refugee Convention/Article 3.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
                                Date:  4/ 5/2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
