
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA 06816 2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21 August 2017                          |On 13 November 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                Shawn Simpson
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E W Daykin, Counsel instructed by DWFM Beckman
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I see no need for and do not make any  order  restricting  reporting
       about this appeal. Although the decision touches on the welfare of a
       child I see no risk of harm to that child if the details are known.

    2. This is an appeal brought with the permission of First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Shimmin against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (First-
       tier Tribunal Judge P S Aujla) who dismissed the appellant's  appeal
       against the decision of the respondent on 12 May 2016 to refuse  him
       international  protection  and  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
       grounds.  It is a feature of the case that the appellant is  subject
       to deportation proceedings.  The Secretary of State has decided that
       his presence is not conducive  to  the  public  good  under  Section
       5(1)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.

    3. It was made clear before the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
       that the appellant was not maintaining his  asylum  claim.   As  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge explained at paragraph 13 of his decision,
       the appeal before him was based on two grounds.  It  was  said  that
       the respondent had no power to deport the appellant for the  reasons
       given  because  the  requirements  of  paragraph  398(c)  were   not
       satisfied and, secondly, that even if there was power to deport  the
       appellant his deportation would  interfere  disproportionately  with
       the appellant's private and family  life  particularly  the  private
       life the appellant had established in the  United  Kingdom  and  his
       relationship with his daughter.

    4. Although I do  not  criticise  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  for
       considering the Immigration Rules his primary attention should  have
       been on Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
       2002 because Parliament requires this to be considered where a court
       or Tribunal has to determine  whether  a  decision  made  under  the
       Immigration Acts breaches a person's rights under Article 8  of  the
       European Convention on Human Rights.

    5. The Act prescribes various ways in which a person can be  a  foreign
       criminal.  Probably the most common way, that the  person  has  been
       sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at  least  twelve  months,
       does not apply here, but a person is a foreign criminal  if  he  has
       been convicted "of an offence that has caused serious harm" or if he
       is a "persistent offender".

    6. The First-tier Tribunal found  that  the  appellant  was  a  foreign
       criminal in two ways.  He had been  convicted  of  an  offence  that
       caused serious harm and he is a persistent offender.

    7. The First-tier Tribunal concluded clearly  that  the  appellant  had
       caused serious harm when he engaged in sexual activity with a female
       under the age of 16 years.  The appellant was 23 years old  when  he
       committed the offence so he was eight years older than  his  victim.
       Clearly it was not the very worst example of that  kind  of  offence
       because the sentence of nine months' imprisonment was suspended  but
       the sentencing judge outlined the circumstances of the offence which
       involved touching a 15-year-old girl  and  the  judge  said  of  the
       offence that it "was unpleasant and she was frightened".  It was  on
       that basis that the First-tier Tribunal  decided  that  the  offence
       caused serious harm and whilst it is right that  the  harm  was  not
       particularised or expressly evidenced, for example  by  a  statement
       from the victim, Judge Shimmin  refused  permission  to  appeal  the
       finding that the offence was  one  that  caused  serious  harm.   It
       follows therefore that that point was not challengeable  before  me,
       there being no application to the Upper Tribunal to extend the scope
       of commission,  and  that  the  appellant  is  therefore  a  foreign
       criminal.

    8. It follows therefore that the challenge to the finding  that  he  is
       also a persistent offender  rather  loses  its  force.  Even  if  he
       succeeds on that point he is still a foreign criminal.  Nevertheless
       it was arguable before me that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in
       regarding the appellant as a persistent offender.

    9. The First-tier Tribunal summarised the appellant's  criminal  record
       at  paragraph  4  of  its  decision.   This  shows   the   following
       convictions and punishments which I outline below:

(1)  September  2004,  Robbery,    Detention  and  training  order  for  six
months;

(2)  November 2008, Theft from employer,  Community  service  order  for  80
hours;

(3)  February 2012,    Sexual activity with a female child under the age  of
16, Nine months' imprisonment suspended for twelve months;

(4)  March 2012, Driving a motor vehicle with excess  alcohol,  Disqualified
and fined

(5)  May 2013 For offence of battery, Fined

(6)  July 2013    Failing to  comply  with  a  sex  offender's  notification
requirement, Fined

(7)  March 2017 Driving a motor vehicle  with  too  much  controlled  drugs,
Fined and disqualified from driving.

   10. It is a requirement of the Immigration Rules, although  not  Section
       117, that in order to qualify for deportation the  foreign  criminal
       must not only be a persistent offender but a persistent offender who
       shows a "particular  disregard  for  the  law".   I  have  read  the
       decision of this Tribunal in  Chege  ("is  a  persistent  offender")
       [2016] UKUT 00187 (IAC).  It is not clear to me precisely  what  the
       words "particular disregard for the law" add to the requirement that
       a person is a persistent offender because, as is clearly  the  case,
       being a persistent  offender  at  the  least  implies  a  particular
       disregard for the law.  The First-tier Tribunal was  satisfied  that
       the appellant was described properly as a persistent  offender  with
       particular disregard for the law and I see  no  sensible  basis  for
       challenging that finding.   There  are  breaks  in  the  appellant's
       criminality, in particular there is a significant break between  the
       convictions in 2008 and 2012 but the offence was  committed  at  the
       end of 2010 and so the gap there is  shorter  than  it  seems.   The
       appellant's conviction in March 2017 for  an  offence  committed  in
       September 2016 kills off any suggestion that he had  finally  learnt
       his lesson and I find reinforces the legitimacy of the finding  that
       the appellant is somebody who keeps getting into  trouble.   I  also
       take a particularly dim view of his being convicted  of  failing  to
       comply with his obligations under the  sex  offender's  notification
       requirements.  This is I find a clear indication of someone who does
       not appreciate the importance of obeying the  law  and  puts  beyond
       argument any lingering  concerns  that  he  might  be  a  persistent
       offender who does not show a particular disregard for  the  law.  He
       does show a particular disregard for the law.

   11. There are, no doubt, worse examples of persistent offenders than  is
       this  appellant  but  despite  the  careful  grounds  and  realistic
       submissions by Ms Daykin I see no fault in the First-tier Tribunal's
       finding that the appellant is a  persistent  offender  and  that  is
       sufficient for the purposes of Section 117C.

   12. I also accept that he is a persistent  offender  with  a  particular
       disregard for the law.

   13. Before me Ms Daykin concentrated her challenge on grounds  4  and  5
       which are related.  In summary  the  appellant  maintains  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal was  wrong  to  decide  that  there  was  not  a
       "genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a child under the
       age of 18" and wrong to decide that it would be unduly harsh for the
       child to remain in the United Kingdom without the appellant.

   14. I set out below paragraph 47 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision:

  "The appellant claims that he was seeing his daughter regularly.  He  was
  not living in the same household as his daughter.  He was living with his
  sister for the last five years.  He was no longer in a relationship  with
  his ex-partner, the child's mother.  He stated that the child  loved  him
  and he  loved  her.   He  saw  her  every  week.   Those  were  his  bare
  assertions.  I remind myself that Appellant had every reason to frustrate
  the Respondent's efforts to remove him from the United Kingdom.  In  view
  of that, I am not prepared to place undue weight on his bare  assertions.
  I needed something more than that.  Whilst I accept that  his  ex-partner
  had provided a written statement dated 26 May 2017, that in my  view  was
  not sufficient.  Her evidence and the assertions made  by  the  Appellant
  could only be tested and scrutinised if she attended the hearing to  give
  evidence and was cross-examined in my presence.  She did not  attend  the
  hearing.  Having considered the totality of the evidence in this respect,
  I am not prepared to accept the appellant's uncorroborated  account  that
  he was in a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his  daughter.   I
  find that the appellant was not in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
  relationship with his daughter."

   15. I remind myself that a judge has considerable discretion in  finding
       facts and it is hard to say that a  decision  could  not  have  been
       reached on the evidence.  For all of that, the  finding  that  there
       was no parental relationship is at least surprising.  The claim  was
       made clearly  by  the  appellant  and  by  the  child's  mother  and
       supported in part by other witnesses and referees.

   16. I find paragraph 24 of the appellant's witness  statement  dated  25
       May 2017 particularly significant.  It says there:

  "I see my daughter weekly supervised but I speak to her every single  day
  and we look forward to seeing one another.  She is 4 years old and we are
  very close.  She fully knows who her father is and if for whatever reason
  I am unable to visit her,  her  mother  informs  me  that  her  behaviour
  changes and that she becomes very withdrawn and low  in  her  mood.   She
  keeps going to the window and the door and even wets herself and  doesn't
  tell anyone."

   17. The mother's witness statement was dated 26 May 2017.  It is in some
       ways perhaps surprisingly supportive  of  the  appellant  given  his
       criminal past and that one of  the  criminal  offences  involved  an
       attack on her and I can understand the judge's reluctance to  accept
       all of it without hearing from the witness.   However  it  wrote  in
       tender  terms  about  her  desire  for  the  appellant  to  have   a
       relationship with  his  daughter  for  the  sake  of  his  daughter,
       commenting that there  was  "no  way  I  am  going  to  be  able  to
       facilitate trips  to  Jamaica".   However  although  that  statement
       refers  in  some  detail  about  her  aspirations  for  the   future
       relationship between the appellant and their  daughter,  all  of  it
       entirely plausible and responsible if truthful, the  statement  does
       not have much to say about the present relationship.  As  far  as  I
       can make out it consists of  weekly  contact  at  the  home  of  the
       claimant's sister.

   18. Nevertheless the judge was only deciding the case on the balance  of
       probabilities.  The paragraph set out above reads to me as if he had
       in mind the criminal standard of beyond all reasonable doubt.   With
       respect to the First-tier Tribunal Judge I find the conclusion  that
       there was not an existing parental relationship on this evidence  to
       be perverse.

   19. It follows therefore that I set aside the decision of the First-tier
       Tribunal.

   20. However this criticism, although significant, is related only to one
       part of the decision and  it  is  the  finding  that  there  was  no
       parental relationship.  I am prepared  to  accept  on  the  evidence
       before me that there is a parental relationship but it is a parental
       relationship that consists of frequent contact  usually  every  week
       albeit supervised and additional communication.  This  is  important
       in the life of a little girl but it is not the same as  the  contact
       that comes with living together in  a  nuclear  family.   Parliament
       recognises that deportation  has  harsh  consequences.   These  only
       become a reason to  avoid  deportation  when  the  consequences  are
       "unduly harsh".  I bear in mind that the appellant can  continue  to
       be in touch with his daughter regularly by electronic means.   I  am
       not so crass as to equate communication by Skype (or  similar).  The
       appellant can talk to his daughter  and  show  an  interest  in  her
       progress and her activities easily and  frequently  and  it  is  not
       unrealistic to think that on some future occasion she  may  even  be
       able to visit him in Jamaica.  I am not so crass as  to  think  that
       this is in any way comparable to the fun and hugs that can come with
       even weekly contact but the harshness of separation  is  not  in  my
       judgment unduly harsh.  Rather it is the likely natural consequences
       of deporting a man who has children and it is not  the  law  that  a
       father cannot be deported.

   21. I see no need for a further hearing although  that  is  something  I
       have considered.  For the purposes of this decision I am prepared to
       accept the evidence that was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
       conclude that there is occasional contact albeit  regular  and  that
       removal will be upsetting for the child but  her  father  can  still
       have a place in her life and that the evidence does  not  support  a
       conclusion that the consequences of removal are unduly harsh.

   22. This is not in the child's best interests. As far as I can see  they
       would be best served by preserving  the  status  quo  but  the  best
       interests of a child are frequently incompatible  with  the  greater
       public good and this is such a case.

   23. It follows therefore that although I see  error  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's decision so I have to set it aside, I can remake the part
       of the decision that is decided unsatisfactorily and  having  remade
       it I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

   24. The appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  is  DISMISSED
       albeit for  not  all  the  same  reasons  given  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 10 November 2017              |
|Judge                                |                                     |

