
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06766/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 June 2019                       |On 27 June 2019                      |
|Prepared 4 June 2019                 |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 mr S A S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Draycott, counsel, instructed by Paragon Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant and  the
    Appellant is referred to as the Secretary of State.

2.   The Claimant a national of Egypt, date of birth 1  July  1998  appealed
    against the Respondent's decision of 14 May 2018 to refuse a protection
    claim.  His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge C  Andrew  who
    on 10 October 2018 allowed his appeal on Refugee Convention grounds and
    on Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

3.   Permission was sought by the Secretary of State in grounds  settled  by
    the specialist appeals unit and permission was  granted  by  Designated
    Immigration Judge Shaerf on 30 October 2018.

4.   The decision of the Judge it is fair to say is somewhat marked  by  its
    brevity and the core ground 1 of the Secretary of State's challenge was
    essentially that the Judge had failed to resolve  issues  which  raised
    doubts about the reliability of the claim.

5.   There was no  doubt  that  the  Judge  identified  issues  relating  to
    inconsistency and resolved them, in the context of unchallenged medical
    evidence describing  the  impact  of  ill-treatment  sustained  by  the
    Claimant as a minor at the hands of the state or agents of the state as
    claimed.  The Judge accepted the basis of  claim,  applying  the  lower
    standard of proof applicable in protection based claims, and  concluded
    that the Appellant had given a credible account  of  the  general  ill-
    treatment. Although it was fair to say the issue of  the  inconsistency
    of his presence at the time his father was killed  or  not  was  really
    somewhat immaterial to the issue which did  not  seem  to  trouble  the
    Judge, namely the extent to which the  Claimant  had  himself  suffered
    injuries and ill-treatment at the hands of those State third parties.

6.   I agree with Mrs Aboni that the decision was by  no  means  perfect  in
    terms of meeting and dealing with every issue that was raised with  the
    Judge, but on the other hand I am mindful of the fact that decisions of
    the First-tier should not be interfered with unless there is clearly an
    error of law or a lack of reasons or adequate and sufficient reasons to
    justify the decision. There were cited to me the cases of  KU  Pakistan
    [2012] EWCA Civ  107  and  Shizad  [2013]  UKUT  00085  addressing  the
    sufficiency of reasons and the extent to which  the  Judge  making  the
    primary findings should not be interfered with  unless  those  findings
    were not reasonably open to the Judge to make.

7.   In the normal course of events reading the  Judge's  decision  I  could
    undoubtedly have been critical of the sufficiency of reasons but I  did
    not find them so inadequate that any other Tribunal seized of the  same
    material would have likely come to a different conclusion.   Rather  it
    seemed to me the Judge concluded, albeit briefly,  that  the  Appellant
    was at  risk  from  the  authorities  in  Egypt  and/or  perhaps  their
    surrogates but also because of an imputed political opinion.  The Judge
    does not actually address if there was a risk from  Muslim  Brotherhood
    save insofar as referring to it as a basis of fear  of  the  Appellant.
    The Judge made  no  clear,  if  any,  finding  on  whether  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood posed a risk, but the Judge did assess this in the  context
    of the current US State Department Report for 2017 issued in April 2018
    and noted  the  extent  to  which  the  government  or  agents  of  the
    government committed arbitrary and unlawful killings and the extent  to
    which the authorities acted against perceived terrorists.

8.   I therefore conclude that although it is  a  somewhat  less  than  full
    resolution of the points raised by the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
    Judge applied the correct burden and  standard  of  proof  and  reached
    conclusions that she was entitled to reach: Simply redoing the exercise
    served no real purpose.  In fairness to Mr Draycott he provided a  very
    substantial and lengthy skeleton argument in response to the  Secretary
    of State's grounds and it seemed to me the realities of it were that in
    terms of internal relocation and sufficiency of protection,  given  the
    findings that the Judge reached on who posed a risk and why a risk  was
    posed to the Appellant, that the absence of the Judge expressly dealing
    with it in the circumstances did not  actually  matter.   It  would  in
    effect, were it to be looked at  again,  simply  resolve  to  the  same
    points that the basis of the risks posed came from the state or  agents
    of the state. Therefore the reality was  that  neither  sufficiency  of
    protection nor internal relocation would be a realistic  or  reasonable
    option.

9.   For these reasons  I  conclude  then  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    complaints whilst superficially attractive ultimately have  encountered
    a decision which was sufficient for the purposes of properly  disposing
    of the appeal.

Decision

The Original Tribunal's decision stands.  The appeal  of  the  Claimant  was
allowed on Refugee Convention and Articles 2 and 3 ECHR grounds. The  appeal
of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Anonymity

The anonymity order made by the Original Tribunal stands and  is  continued.


DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                                Dated 20 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore any fee award stands.

Signed                                  Dated 20 June 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
