
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/06255/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |        Decision and reasons         |
|                                     |Promulgated                          |
|On 2 October 2018                    |            On 1 November 2018       |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                                   MR K T
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr S Muquit of Counsel
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a national of  Sri  Lanka  born  on  31  July  1974.  He
   appealed against the decision of the respondent refusing his  application
   for asylum and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.

2.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Doyle  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
   decision dated 13 August 2018. The  permission  Judge  said  that  it  is
   arguable that the decision which is not only poorly structured  what  the
   credibility assessment is flawed. It is also inadequate in its  reasoning
   and the assessment of risk on  return  is  inadequate.  The  decision  is
   confusing and does not contain adequate findings of fact.

3. At  the  hearing,  the  Senior  Presenting  Officer  said  that  she  has
   difficulties understanding the decision of the first-tier Tribunal is not
   able to defend the decision.


4. I agree with that  submission  that  the  decision  it  is  difficult  to
   understand and is not safe. This is an  appeal  for  protection  and  the
   appellant is entitled to a fair and reasoned decision. The decision  does
   not adequately set out the evidence and make  coherent  findings  on  the
   facts. In the circumstances the appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal for findings of fact to be made.



5. I direct that the appeal be placed before any first-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   other than Judge Andonian for a hearing de novo.

Decision

The appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal



Signed by,

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................

Ms                                  S                                  Chana
           Dated this 22nd day of October 2018

