
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06321/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 February 2020                  |On 3 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Boyle, instructed on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a  court
    directs otherwise the Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  refer  to  him.   This
    direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. The Appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Fisher)  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
    "FtTJ") who, in a determination promulgated  on  the  1st  April  2019,
    dismissed his claim for protection.

The factual background:

 3. The background to the Appellant's protection claim is set  out  in  the
    determination of the FtTJ at paragraphs 1-8 and in the decision  letter
    of the Secretary of State issued on 24 May 2019.

 4. The Appellant is a national of Iraq. He entered the United  Kingdom  on
    14 April 2016 and made an application for  asylum  and/or  humanitarian
    protection. The basis of his claim was that he had left Iraq because he
    had been kidnapped by two men in September 2015  due  to  his  father's
    position in the peshmerga. It was asserted that they were  working  for
    Daesh due to their appearance. He  was  hit  and  kicked  and  then  he
    managed to escape from the car.

 5. He did not report the incident to the authorities as he was unwell.  He
    told his father who did make a report to  the  security  services.  The
    appellant had no further problems in Iraq following the  incident.  The
    family did not receive any threats in Iraq.

 6. The appellant claimed that his father would be the main target of Daesh
    due to his role  but  confirmed  that  he  had  never  been  threatened
    directly by them.

 7. The appellant left Iraq on 23  September  2015  and  travelled  through
    several countries until his arrival in the United Kingdom.

 8. The  decision  letter  considered  that  he  did  not  have  a  genuine
    subjective fear on return to Iraq. It was not accepted that he had come
    to the adverse attention to Daesh and kidnapped  by  them  due  to  his
    father's employment. The decision letter considered the CG decision  of
    AA (Article15 (c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 but  reached  the  conclusion
    that the appellant had failed to demonstrate that he  did  not  already
    possess Iraqi ID documents or that he could not reacquire  them  either
    by having them sent to him in the UK or collect them on return to Iraq.
    It was considered feasible he could approach the authorities in Baghdad
    to obtain his CSI or any other identity documents that he  may  require
    on return to Iraq if unable to approach the  authorities  in  the  home
    province. It was considered that as he was a relatively  young  healthy
    adult male and spoke Kurdish Sorani, he could return to xxx where Daesh
    were not in control and are not present. He confirmed that  he  held  a
    civil ID card which he left in Iraq and therefore he could apply for  a
    CSID father document centre in his home region or via  the  embassy  in
    Baghdad. It would not be unreasonable for him to  return  to  the  home
    area in xx, Erbil.

 9. The appeal came before the first-tier Tribunal before FtTJ Jones. In  a
    decision promulgated on 27 April 2017, the FTTJ dismissed  his  appeal.
    It had been argued on behalf of the appellant that it would not be safe
    for him to return and live  anywhere  in  Iraq  including  the  IKR  as
    nowhere would be out of reach of Islamic groups. Whilst his father  had
    protection as a result of his status, he would be at risk of harm  from
    ISIS. The FtTJ accepted that there had been an attempt  to  kidnap  the
    appellant and that he had escaped but did not accept that he had  taken
    his bed for three days or that when he did seek help on behalf  of  the
    authorities they declined to help him on the basis that too  much  time
    had gone by (see paragraphs 45 and 46). He accepted that his father was
    a very high ranking man and presumably an  influential  individual  and
    rejected his account because of the passage  of  time  nothing  further
    could be done. Furthermore, he did not accept that he was kidnapped  by
    ISIS but that it was from others to extort some favour or  payment.  In
    the alternative, even taking the claim at its highest in  that  it  was
    ISIS who had sought to kidnap him and was in fear, the FTTJ found  that
    there was sufficiency of protection.

10. As to return to Iraq, there was some  discussion  about  the  place  of
    return but the judge concluded that if return was to Baghdad  it  would
    be a simple matter for the appellant to obtain a passport to enter  the
    IKR and that given his background he would not be therefore any  length
    of time. He therefore dismissed the appeal.

11. Following that decision further submissions were lodged  on  behalf  of
    the appellant on 18 September 2018. The respondent treated  them  as  a
    fresh claim but refused those submissions in a decision letter dated 24
    May 2019.

12. In the  decision  letter  the  respondent  took  into  account  further
    documentation provided by the appellant (set out at paragraphs 6  -  25
    which included medical evidence as to the appellant's  condition).  The
    respondent applied  the  principles  in  Devaseelan  and  set  out  the
    findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal judge. It  noted  that
    the basis of his claim was that he continued to maintain his fear  upon
    return to Iraq from ISIS who had kidnapped  him  as  a  result  of  his
    father's position as a high-ranking officer in the ministry and it  was
    claimed that it would be unreasonable  and  unduly  harsh  for  him  to
    relocate to the IKR.

13.  The  decision  letter  considered  the  various  police  records   and
    translations of the documents from 2017 but reached the conclusion that
    it had not been explained how his father was originally unable to  make
    a report as it was too late but was then able to make a report  over  a
    year after the alleged offence took place. Notwithstanding the  matters
    raised about the documentation, the respondent took the view  that  the
    report did not confirm that ISIS were behind the  attempted  kidnap  as
    claimed but had documented a report that had been made by his father.

14. The respondent to set out the country  materials  and  the  CPIN  dated
    November 2018 and  consideration  was  also  to  the  country  guidance
    decisions in AA (Article15 (c ) Iraq CG [2015] KUT 544  as  amended  by
    the Court of Appeal in AA Iraq v SSHD[2017] EWCA Civ 944 and AAH (Iraqi
    Kurds-internal relocation) CG [2018] UKUT 0212. Specific  consideration
    was given to documentation  and  feasibility  of  return.  Taking  into
    account the factors identified in the case law and  country  materials,
    it was noted that he had confirmed that he was from Kirkuk but that the
    objective information confirmed the security situation  in  Kirkuk  did
    not engage Article15 ( c) and that he had not  provided  evidence  that
    his family had approached any government department in Iraq to obtain a
    CSID card on his behalf. He had therefore failed  to  provide  evidence
    that he made attempts to obtain  documentation  either  through  family
    members in Iraq or via the Iraqi embassy in the UK. As he was not  from
    an area that engaged Article15 (c ) and he  had  family  who  could  be
    given power of attorney to obtain a CSID card on his behalf,  he  would
    be able to obtain one before return to Iraq or on his  return.  It  was
    concluded that he had the opportunity to depart directly to  Erbil  and
    that upon securing his CSID he could make the onward journey to Kirkuk.
    The decision letter also  referred  to  his  medical  circumstances  at
    paragraphs 138 - 186 but concluded that the  conditions  the  appellant
    had were not sufficiently serious to reach the high threshold  required
    for a breach of Article3. His claim  was  therefore  dismissed  on  all
    grounds.

15. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  against  that  decision.  The
    appeal against that decision came before the FtTJ in August 2019 and in
    the decision promulgated on 29th August 2019 his appeal was dismissed.

16. The FtTJ set out his findings of fact at paragraphs 14-19. They can  be
    summarised as follows:

      a) He took as his starting point the findings of  fact  made  by  FtTJ
         Jones that there had been an endeavour to kidnap him after which he
         escaped. He recorded that the appellants father's rank and position
         had been accepted but that the claim that he had been kidnapped  by
         ISIS was speculative.

      b) As regards the  new  documentary  evidence  which  consisted  of  a
         complaint made in 2017 by  the  appellant's  father  following  the
         kidnapping and the  action  taken  on  that  complaint,  the  judge
         rejected the submission  that  the  appellant  had  any  continuing
         problems. The judge found that the  kidnapping  was  said  to  have
         occurred in September 2015 but that the authorities  had  not  been
         prepared to register a complaint as his father had been too late in
         doing so, even though was any three days  later.  The  judge  found
         that there was no explanation as to how he would have been able  to
         file a complaint over a year later. He  noted  that  the  documents
         only  referred  to  threats  made  against  the  appellant  and  no
         reference to any kidnapping. There was no satisfactory evidence  to
         show that ISIS were involved.

      c) At its highest, he  considered  that  they  demonstrated  that  the
         authorities were  willing  and  able  to  offer  a  sufficiency  of
         protection. He observed that no arrests are made as it  was  simply
         impossible to identify those involved.

      d) The judge rejected the submission that the authorities were  unable
         to offer protection. The judge found that whilst they  were  unable
         to make an arrest as the perpetrators was unknown; it did not  show
         that they were unable to provide a sufficiency of protection.

      e) For those reasons, he was not persuaded that the new  evidence  led
         to any departure from the findings previously made  by  FtTJ  Jones
         and that the new  evidence  supported  the  findings  in  terms  of
         sufficiency of protection.

17. At paragraphs 17 - 19 the judge considered the  circumstances  relating
    to Kirkuk as the appellant had said that his CSID and his passport were
    issued there. The judge concluded at [17] that time had moved on  since
    the height of the conflict and having considered the decision in R  (on
    the application of Amin) v SSHD [2017] EWHC 2417, that  the  respondent
    was entitled to take the position that Kirkuk was no longer a contested
    area and that there was nothing to suggest that the appellant could not
    obtain a CSID from the Kirkuk civil affairs office. The  judge  applied
    the decision in AA (Iraq) v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944  and  that  a
    relative, friend or lawyer could be given  the  power  of  attorney  to
    obtain a CSID on behalf of an Iraqi citizen whose CSID had been lost or
    had elapsed. He recorded the evidence given by Dr Fatah  who  described
    the process of giving a power of  attorney  to  a  lawyer  in  Iraq  as
    "commonplace". As the appellant had a friend in Iraq who was a  lawyer,
    he could see no reason why the appellant could  not  arrange  for  that
    friend to act as a proxy and to obtain a new CSID for him. According to
    the case law, such proxy did not need to be a member of the applicant's
    paternal family. Thus, even if the appellant had lost contact with  his
    family, the judge was satisfied that he could obtain documentation from
    his friend.

18. As to the appellant's assertion that he had contacted the consulate  in
    Manchester, the judge reached the conclusion at [17] that  it  was  not
    surprising that the staff were unable to assist  him,  given  that  the
    contact was "solely telephonic".

19. At [19] he concluded that the appellant could return to the xxx,  Erbil
    area where he had been living prior to his departure from  the  country
    and for most of his life. He had demonstrated  his  resourcefulness  in
    being able to travel to the UK. He took into account  the  material  in
    his interview that he had been working in a restaurant before  he  came
    to the UK and the judge found that he would  have  some  experience  of
    employment which would assist him on return.  The  judge  rejected  any
    submission that he would face mistrust by  prospective  employers.  The
    judge found that given his father's previous high-ranking role  in  the
    Peshmerga, that would not apply to this appellant. He took into account
    the appellant's medical history and his treatment but that the evidence
    related to a period from 2016 - 2017 and there was  no  further  up-to-
    date material. Whilst the appellant was being treated also for  anxiety
    and depression, the appellant's evidence in the bundle  (CPIN  at  page
    184) demonstrated that treatment would be available in Iraq even if  it
    were not to the same standard. He was therefore not satisfied that  the
    appellant's health issues would not impact upon his ability  to  return
    and relocate if necessary.

20.  At  [19]  the  judge  considered  the  issue  again  of   humanitarian
    protection. He returned to the question in the as to whether there  was
    cogent evidence which would justify him in departing from the  existing
    country guidance given in AA (Iraq) and  reached  the  conclusion  that
    there was such evidence which he went on to identify. The judge went on
    to conclude "in any event, as I have already observed, I  am  satisfied
    that the appellant could relocate to the Erbil/xx  area  where  he  was
    living prior to his departure. In  all  the  circumstances,  he  cannot
    qualify for a grant of subsidiary protection

21. There was no claim made on Article3 as a free-standing ground  nor  any
    Article8 grounds (see [20]). He therefore dismissed the appeal  on  all
    grounds.

22. Permission to appeal that decision was sought and granted  and  on  the
    13th May 2019 by FtTJ Swaney.

23. The appeal was therefore listed before the Upper  Tribunal.  Mr  Boyle,
    who did not appear before the FtTJ, appeared on behalf of the appellant
    and Ms Petterson, senior presenting officer, appeared on behalf of  the
    respondent.

GROUND 1:

24. Mr Boyle relied upon the written grounds in which it was asserted  that
    the FtTJ erred in law in his assessment of the humanitarian  protection
    claim in respect of  Kirkuk  and  that  it  was  fundamentally  flawed.
    Firstly, it is said that the test of "strong and cogent  evidence"  had
    not been met and secondly, it is asserted that the judge failed to have
    proper regard to the objective material.

25. In support of that submission he referred the Tribunal to pages  150  -
    151 of the appellant's bundle  which  was  an  extract  from  the  CPIN
    November 2018. In particular, he  referred  to  paragraph  2.3.6  which
    stated that 80% of those in humanitarian need are  in  Ninewah,  Kirkuk
    and Anbar (46% are in Ninewah alone) and 2.3.8  that  food,  employment
    and medical care are the top three humanitarian  needs  in  nearly  all
    governorates. He also made reference to paragraph 2.3.10 that  as  self
    August 2018 nearly 4 million people had returned to their home areas, a
    continuing upward trend, particularly to  Ninewah,  Kirkuk,  Anbar  and
    Saleh al-Din, explained by  improvements  in  the  security  situation,
    although there is some secondary displacement. Return trends are stable
    in Baghdad, Diyala and Erbil. He also referred the Tribunal to the EASO
    report (p178) which referred to the position of Kirkuk and the  extract
    that was copied into  the  written  grounds  at  page  178  which  made
    reference to ISIL no longer  controlling  a  territory  in  the  Kirkuk
    governorate but retained pockets of fighters especially in  Hawija  and
    the Hamerrin mountains. There was also reference  to  the  position  of
    Kirkuk in the first 10 months of 2018 as ISIS's  most  prolific  attack
    location ( reference Michael Knights a specialist of  security  issues)
    although further on according to  land  info,  the  level  of  security
    incidents and violence was still relatively high although the situation
    was "somehow improving". Mr Boyle did not refer  the  Tribunal  to  any
    other parts of the report save that his  general  submission  was  that
    "severe conditions existed in Kirkuk".

26. He further submitted that the FtTJ did not grapple with the issue  save
    for his assessment at paragraph 18 of his decision. He  later  conceded
    that paragraph 19 also addressed the issue of  humanitarian  protection
    but he submitted that it did not  identify  a  significant  or  durable
    change in the conditions of Kirkuk.

27. Ms Petterson on behalf of the respondent submitted that  there  was  no
    error of law in the FtTJ's decision. She submitted  at  [17)  the  FtTJ
    referred to the decision in R (Amin) which considered the  CG  decision
    in the context of the changes in Kirkuk. Whilst it was  a  decision  of
    the administrative court, the FtTJ was entitled to  take  into  account
    that decision in assessing whether to depart from the CG in AA(Iraq).

28. She further submitted that the FtTJ had  regard  to  all  the  material
    before him and that he was not required to rehearse every single matter
    and set out all of the  material  he  placed  weight  on.  At  [19]  he
    referred to the material relied upon by the  appellant  which  included
    the EASO report and considered it also in the light of the CPIN.

29. She submitted that whilst  Mr  Boyle  had  referred  to  the  issue  of
    humanitarian need by reference to the extracts set out in the  grounds,
    that this did not by itself equate to an  Article15  (c)  risk  to  the
    general population. She submitted that the CPIN 2018  referred  to  the
    security situation changing and referred to paragraphs 2.3.30 which set
    out that since 2005 Daesh's territorial control and collapsed and their
    operational capability had significantly degraded. The Iraqi government
    officially declared victory against Daesh in  December  2017  and  that
    whilst the threat had not disappeared entirely, the group were confined
    to small pockets and that the conflict of change  in  nature  from  the
    open conflict to periodic asymmetric attacks. At 2.3.31 that the  Iraqi
    security forces and the Shia militia and the Kurdish Peshmerga had  re-
    establish control over most of Iraq territory  and  that  the  security
    incidents, the  fatalities  and  injuries  had  significantly  declined
    across all governorates and were 10 times lower than they were in  mid-
    2014. At 2.3.33  it  was  recorded  that  since  2015  displacement  is
    significantly declined and that there had been a  significant  increase
    in people returning to their homes. She also referred to page 3 of  the
    EASO report which it said there were a limited number  of  areas  where
    ISIS still had some sway. Accordingly,  she  submitted,  the  FTTJ  was
    entitled to place weight on that material and to reach  the  conclusion
    that he did.

30. I remind myself that I can only interfere with the decision of  a  FtTJ
    if it is demonstrated that he made a decision which involved the making
    of an error on a point of  law.  Ground  1  relates  to  the  issue  of
    departing from the country guidance.

31. The test to be applied when considering whether to depart from  country
    guidance is set out in SG (Iraq) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940 Lord Justice Stanley Burnton said this:

         "45. There are simply not the resources for a detailed and reliable
         determination of conditions in foreign countries to be made  on  an
         individual basis on each decision on the application or  appeal  of
         persons seeking protection. There are far too many such  cases,  as
         is demonstrated by the Secretary of State's use of charter  flights
         to accommodate the large numbers of returnees to countries such  as
         Afghanistan and Iraq.  Neither  those  representing  those  seeking
         protections nor the Secretary of State herself have  the  resources
         for the detailed, lengthy and costly investigation of conditions on
         return that  is  appropriate,  given  the  potential  risk  to  the
         returnees, in every case. Even if the resources were available,  it
         would be wasteful to have such an investigation, involving much the
         same evidence, in every  case.  There  would  also  be  a  risk  of
         inconsistent  decisions,  a  consideration  that  is   particularly
         important in the present context since it follows from  a  decision
         that one person requires protection, if correct, that a  person  in
         the same situation  who  has  been  returned  may  have  risked  or
         suffered ill treatment or worse.

         46.   The  system  of  Country  Guidance   determinations   enables
         appropriate resources, in  terms  of  the  representations  of  the
         parties to the Country Guidance appeal, expert and factual evidence
         and the personnel and time of the Tribunal, to be  applied  to  the
         determination of conditions in, and therefore the risks  of  return
         for persons such as the appellants in the Country  Guidance  appeal
         to, the country in question. The procedure is aimed at arriving  at
         a reliable (in the sense of accurate) determination.

         47.  It is for these  reasons,  as  well  as  the  desirability  of
         consistency, that decision makers and tribunal judges are  required
         to take Country Guidance determinations into account, and to follow
         them unless very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence,  are
         adduced justifying their not doing so."

32. The Upper Tribunal elaborated upon this test in the subsequent decision
    in CM (EM country guidance; disclosure ) Zimbabwe CG   [2013]  UKUT  59
    (IAC) [at §72]:  [We] recognise that where a previous  assessment  has
    resulted in the conclusion that the  population  generally  or  certain
    sections of it may  be  at  risk,  any  assessment  that  the  material
    circumstances have changed would need to demonstrate that such  changes
    are well established evidentially and durable.

33. Having carefully consider the competing submissions of the advocates in
    the light of the material before  the  FtTJ  and  his  decision,  I  am
    satisfied that the FtTJ did not fall into error. The FtTJ  was  clearly
    aware of the CG in AA (Article15(c)) Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC)
    which had held that Kirkuk was  a  contested  area  which  reached  the
    Article15(c) threshold. The volatility of the situation in those areas,
    the number of displaced persons and the tactics of warfare used,  meant
    that an individual simply by virtue of his or her presence in  such  an
    area would be at a real risk of suffering harm of the  type  identified
    in Article15 (c) of the Qualification Directive.

34. AA (Article15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) as amended by the Court
    of Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944, confirmed that there was  a
    state of internal armed conflict in certain parts  of  Iraq,  involving
    government security forces, militias of various kinds, and the Islamist
    group known as ISIL.

35. However, it is plain that he was aware of the correct test to apply  in
    deciding whether there was sufficient material upon which he could rely
    to depart from that guidance and properly directed himself to  that  at
    [19]. I am satisfied that the FtTJ  considered the background  material
    relied upon which was set out in the appellant's bundle which  included
    the respondent's CPIN of November 2018 at [18] and [19] and   also  the
    EASO report to which he had been referred ( see [19]). On his  analysis
    he found that Kirkuk was no longer a contested area  and  that  it  was
    feasible for the appellant to return  to  Kirkuk.  At  [19]  the  judge
    expressly considered the  issue  of  humanitarian  protection.  He  had
    previously set out at paragraph [18] the High court  decision  in  Amin
    He returned to the question in the  as  to  whether  there  was  cogent
    evidence which would justify him in departing from the existing country
    guidance given in AA (Iraq). He referred to the EASO report at page 174
    in the appellant's bundle and the key passage index at page 302 -  303.
    He contrasted this with the material in the CPIN at  paragraphs  2.3.10
    (page 151 of the appellant's bundle) that 4 million people had returned
    to  their  home  areas,  including  Kirkuk,  which  was  explained   by
    improvements in the security situation. He reached the conclusion  that
    the EASO report at page 178  confirmed  that  ISIS  was  no  longer  in
    control of  any  territory,  although  it  retained  attack  cells.  He
    returned to the decision in Amin and having considered the evidence  as
    a whole reached the conclusion that he was persuaded  that  there  were
    "good grounds for departing from the existing country guidance  on  the
    basis of the evidence which I have  highlighted".

36. There is no dispute that cogent reasons must be given for  a  departure
    from Country Guidance  as  Mr  Boyle  has  submitted.  However,  in  my
    judgment the FtTJ  considered  whether  there  was  fresh  evidence  to
    justify such a departure.

37. The evidence relied on was set out in the decision letter and reference
    was made to the CPIN, which  was  also  exhibited  in  the  appellant's
    bundle. The CPIN drew on multiple sources of  background  material  and
    country information to found its conclusion that Kirkuk  is  no  longer
    afflicted by high levels of violence such as to  make  return  there  a
    general risk contrary to Article15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive.
    That CPIN set out that ISIS was no longer in  control  and  that  there
    were only sporadic incidents of violence. The material set out  in  the
    grounds and referred to by Mr Boyle  (see  paragrphs  2.3.6  and  2.3.8
    refers to humanitarian need but this needs to be viewed in the  context
    of all the evidence.

38. At paragraph 17 the FtTJ  noted that in R(on the application of Amin) v
    SSHD [2017] EWHC 2417 , Sir Ross Cranston had found that Kirkuk  is  no
    longer a contested area, and that although there are  apparently  still
    dangers there, that is  nothing  like  the  position  as  when  AA  was
    decided. There is no error of law in taking into account this  decision
    and it was not the case that the FtTJ did  so  in  isolation  from  the
    other evidence that was before him.

39. In KK (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 172, that a judge had  not  erred  in
    her approach when concluding that new  evidence,  including  a  Country
    Information and Guidance report, justified a departure from an  earlier
    country guidance case when assessing the risks of returning  an  asylum
    seeker to Sri Lanka. The Court of Appeal confirmed that the  Judge  was
    not  required  to  go  through  each  section  of  the  report  in  her
    determination, or to set out a list of positive  and  negative  factors
    from it.

40. Consequently, I have reached the conclusion that it  was  open  to  the
    FtTJ to conclude that Kirkuk was no longer a contested area.  There  is
    no error in that approach.

Ground 2:

41. The written grounds set out that the FtTJ failed to  adequate  consider
    the appellant's position in respect  of  relocation  to  Erbil/xxx.  it
    expressly states, "the appellant does not originate from this  area  so
    the IJ was required to carry out an assessment of reasonableness  under
    the country guidance caselaw of AAH".

42. In his oral submissions Mr Boyle submitted that there was  no  analysis
    of this issue. When asked to identify the area that the  appellant  had
    lived in prior to his entry into the United Kingdom and for most of his
    life, Mr Boyle stated that that was in xxx/Erbil which was in the IKR.

43. Ms Petterson submitted that the area identified by the FtTJ was in fact
    his home area which was in the IKR and therefore someone who originated
    from the IKR would be able to return there. She submitted that the FtTJ
    made clear findings as to his ability to return there and  taking  into
    account his father's high-ranking role in the Peshmerga and at [18] the
    FtTJ reached the conclusion that as he  was  of  Kurdish  ethnicity  he
    could live in that area. There was evidence that  the  appellant  still
    had contact with his family in the IKR as demonstrated by the documents
    that had been sent from Iraq including a police report  which  referred
    to his father living in Erbil. As the findings set out,  the  FtTJ  did
    not accept that he was estranged from his family members  thus  it  was
    open to him to conclude that he could return to the IKR.

44. Mr Boyle by way of reply submitted that the decision letter referred to
    relocation to the IKR and therefore it was necessary for the  judge  to
    consider relocation in the context of the criteria set out in AAH.

45. As to the possibility of relocation to the IKR,  the  Country  Guidance
    then applicable and before the FtTJ stated as follows:

         "E. IRAQI KURDISH REGION

         17.  There are currently no  international  flights  to  the  Iraqi
         Kurdish Region (IKR). All returns from the United  Kingdom  are  to
         Baghdad.

         18.  For an Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish  origin  in
         possession of a valid CSID or  Iraqi  passport,  the  journey  from
         Baghdad to the IKR, whether by  air  or  land,  is  affordable  and
         practical and can be made  without  a  real  risk  of  P  suffering
         persecution, serious harm, Article3 ill  treatment  nor  would  any
         difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.

         19.  P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the
         IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.

         20.  P will face considerable  difficulty  in  making  the  journey
         between Baghdad and the  IKR  by  land  without  a  CSID  or  valid
         passport. There are numerous checkpoints en  route,  including  two
         checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of  the  airport.  If  P  has
         neither a CSID nor a valid passport there is a real risk of P being
         detained at a checkpoint until such time as the security  personnel
         are able to verify P's identity. It is not reasonable to require  P
         to travel between Baghdad and IKR by land absent the ability  of  P
         to verify his identity at a checkpoint. This normally requires  the
         attendance of a male family member and production of  P's  identity
         documents but may also be achieved by  calling  upon  "connections"
         higher up in the chain of command.

         21.  Once at the IKR border (land  or  air)  P  would  normally  be
         granted entry to the territory. Subject to security screening,  and
         registering presence with the local mukhtar, P would  be  permitted
         to enter and reside in the IKR with no further legal impediments or
         requirements. There is no sponsorship requirement for Kurds.

         22.  Whether P would be at particular risk of ill-treatment  during
         the security screening process must be assessed on  a  case-by-case
         basis. Additional factors  that  may  increase  risk  include:  (i)
         coming from a family with  a  known  association  with  ISIL,  (ii)
         coming from an area associated with ISIL and (iii) being  a  single
         male of fighting age. P is likely to be able to evidence  the  fact
         of recent arrival from the UK, which would dispel any suggestion of
         having arrived directly from ISIL territory.

         23.  If P has family members living in the IKR cultural norms would
         require that family to  accommodate  P.  In  such  circumstances  P
         would, in general, have sufficient assistance from the family so as
         to lead a 'relatively normal  life',  which  would  not  be  unduly
         harsh.  It  is  nevertheless  important  for   decision-makers   to
         determine the extent of any assistance likely to be provided by P's
         family on a case by case basis.

         24.  For those without the assistance of  family  in  the  IKR  the
         accommodation options are limited:

             (i)  Absent special circumstances it is not reasonably  likely
             that P will be able to gain access to one of the refugee camps
             in the IKR; these camps are already extremely overcrowded  and
             are closed to newcomers.  64%  of  IDPs  are  accommodated  in
             private settings with the vast  majority  living  with  family
             members.

             (ii) If P cannot live with a family member,  apartments  in  a
             modern block in a new neighbourhood are available for rent  at
             a cost of between $300 and $400 per month;

             (iii)    P could resort to a 'critical  shelter  arrangement',
             living in an  unfinished  or  abandoned  structure,  makeshift
             shelter, tent, mosque, church or  squatting  in  a  government
             building. It would be unduly harsh to require P to relocate to
             the IKR if P will live in a critical housing  shelter  without
             access to basic necessities such  as  food,  clean  water  and
             clothing;

             (iv) In considering whether P would be able  to  access  basic
             necessities, account must be taken of  the  fact  that  failed
             asylum seekers are entitled to apply for  a  grant  under  the
             Voluntary Returns Scheme, which could give P access to  �1500.
             Consideration should also be given to  whether  P  can  obtain
             financial support from other sources such as  (a)  employment,
             (b) remittances from relatives abroad, (c) the availability of
             ad hoc charity or by being able to access PDS rations.

         25.  Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed  on  a
         case-by-case basis taking the following matters into account:

             (i)  Gender. Lone women are very unlikely to be able to secure
             legitimate employment;

             (ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the IKR is
             70%;

             (iii)    P cannot work without a CSID;

             (iv) Patronage and nepotism continue to be  important  factors
             in securing employment. A returnee with family connections  to
             the region will have a significant advantage in that he  would
             ordinarily be  able  to  call  upon  those  contacts  to  make
             introductions to prospective employers and to vouch for him;

             (v)  Skills, education and experience. Unskilled  workers  are
             at  the  greatest  disadvantage,  with  the  decline  in   the
             construction industry reducing the number  of  labouring  jobs
             available;

             (vi) If P is from an area with a marked association with ISIL,
             that may deter prospective employers.

46. Having considered the submissions as set out above, I am satisfied that
    there is no error of law in the FtTJ's decision that  was  material  to
    the outcome in his assessment that the appellant could  return  to  the
    xx/Erbil area which is in the  IKR.  Whilst  there  seems  to  be  some
    confusion as to his home area, in my judgment  the  grounds  are  wrong
    where it is stated that the appellant does not originate from the  IKR.
    The evidence before the FtTJ was that he was born in Kirkuk but that he
    had been living for most of his life in the IKR where his  parents  and
    siblings also resided and where his father held the  post  of  a  high-
    ranking official in the ministry. In his  evidence,  he  clarified  how
    long he had lived in the IKR and he stated, "I  have  always  lived  in
    xxx" (at  Q  21).  He  later  identified  the  place  of  his  father's
    employment which was also in the xxx which is  in  the  IKR.  This  was
    accepted by the FtTJ who referred to the appellant having left the  IKR
    before he entered the UK.

47. In the light of the findings of fact made by the FtTJ which are not the
    subject of challenge in the grounds, the appellant was not found to  be
    risk of harm or persecution on  return  to  his  home  area  which  was
    xx/Erbil in the IKR. The FtTJ did not depart from the  finding  of  the
    previous judge which accepted that whilst there had been  an  endeavour
    to kidnap him, the appellant's father was a high-ranking member of  the
    Peshmerga  and  that  they  was  sufficiency  of  protection  for  him.
    Consequently,  on  the  factual  situation  as  found,  the  issue   of
    relocation did not apply.

48. Even if it did, the FtTJ  gave  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  in
    accordance with the CG as to why he could return to the IKR  which  was
    set out at paragraph 18. The judge did take into account  that  he  had
    lived there prior to his departure and on his own factual background he
    had lived in the IKR  for  most  of  his  life.  The  country  guidance
    decision refers to family relatives living in the IKR. In this  context
    the FtTJ was not satisfied that the appellant had lost contact with his
    family. For the purposes of the hearing, he had provided  documentation
    that was said to originate from the  IKR.  Whilst  the  judge  did  not
    necessarily except the contents of those documents, there was  evidence
    before the judge that he had been in contact with others in the IKR for
    those documents to be provided. One of those documents  refers  to  his
    father living in the  IKR.  That  being  the  case,  it  would  not  be
    necessary for the appellant to live alone or be considered  as  an  IDP
    but to live with his family.

49. However, in the alternative at [18] the FTT J  took  into  account  his
    employment skills and that he had worked  in  a  restaurant  previously
    (also the appellant's  own  evidence  was  that  he  had  been  at  the
    University and was therefore educated). The judge was invited  to  take
    into account that he  came  from  an  area  previously  held  by  ISIS.
    However, that could not be the position factually for the  reasons  set
    out above. However, in any event  the  FtTJ  rejected  that  submission
    correctly in my judgement because the appellant's father held  a  high-
    ranking position in the Peshmerga who were opposed to  ISIS.  The  FtTJ
    also considered the appellant's medical condition and  did  so  in  the
    context of the objective  material  and  reached  the  conclusion  that
    treatment would be available on return. The grounds do not  take  issue
    with that factual assessment either.

50. The FtTJ had also considered the issue of  documentation  at  [17].  No
    submissions have been made as to any asserted error in the  conclusions
    reached in that paragraph.

51. As explained by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ
    944 "A CSID is generally required in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access
    financial  assistance  from  the  authorities,  employment,  education,
    housing and medical treatment. If P shows there are no family or  other
    members likely to be able to provide means of support, P is in  general
    likely to fail and face a real risk of destitution amounting to serious
    harm if by the time any funds provided to P by the Secretary  of  State
    or agents to assist .  return have been  exhausted;  it  is  reasonably
    likely that P will still have no CSID.

52. On the evidence before the FtTJ the appellant can  provide  details  of
    the CSID card. In his interview he confirmed that he had a personal  ID
    card on his phone and the other documents were in Kurdistan.  The  FtTJ
    at [17] also reached the conclusion that even if his CSID had been lost
    or elapsed, a relative, friend or lawyer could be given  the  power  of
    attorney to obtain a CSID on behalf of an Iraqi citizen. The judge took
    into account that the appellant had stated that he had a friend who was
    a lawyer and thus the FtTJ concluded there was no reason why  he  could
    not arrange for that friend to act as his proxy to obtain  a  new  CSID
    for him if it were required.

53. Consequently, the judge considered that the appellant would be able  to
    obtain a CSID within a reasonable timeframe if in Iraq. Looking at AAH,
    the guidance states that:

          1. Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee  (P)
             to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to  do  so,  or  do  so
             within a reasonable time frame, will depend on the  individual
             circumstances. Factors to be considered include:

               i)  Whether  P  has  any  other  form  of  documentation,  or
                  information about the location of his entry in  the  civil
                  register. An INC, passport, birth/marriage certificates or
                  an expired CSID would all be  of  substantial  assistance.
                  For  someone  in  possession  of  one  or  more  of  these
                  documents the process should be straightforward. A laissez-
                  passer should not be counted for these purposes: these can
                  be issued without any other form of  ID  being  available,
                  are not of any assistance in 'tracing back' to the  family
                  record and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;

              ii) The location of the relevant civil registry office. If  it
                  is in an area held  or  formerly  held,  by  ISIL,  is  it
                  operational?

             iii) Are there male  family  members  who  would  be  able  and
                  willing to attend the civil registry with P?  Because  the
                  registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant  to
                  consider whether  the  relative  is  from  the  mother  or
                  father's side. A maternal uncle in possession of his  CSID
                  would be able to assist in locating the original place  of
                  registration of the individual's mother,  and  from  there
                  the trail would need to be followed to the place that  her
                  records were transferred upon marriage. It  must  also  be
                  borne in mind that a significant number of  IDPs  in  Iraq
                  are themselves undocumented; if that is  the  case  it  is
                  unlikely that they could be of assistance. A woman without
                  a  male  relative  to   assist   with   the   process   of
                  redocumentation would face very significant  obstacles  in
                  that officials may refuse to deal with her case at all.

54. The FtTJ concluded that he could obtain  a  replacement  CSID  in  Iraq
    based on his own factual circumstances. It was therefore  open  to  the
    FtTJ to reach the conclusion that it had  not  been  made  out  to  the
    required standard that the appellant would not  be  able  to  obtain  a
    replacement CSID.

Conclusion:

55. In summary, the FtTJ gave adequate and sustainable reasons for reaching
    his conclusion that there was cogent evidence before him which entitled
    him to depart from the country guidance then in force  in  relation  to
    Kirkuk. For the reasons that I have set out above, the appellant's home
    area was not in fact Kirkuk but the IKR.

56. Even if the FtTJ was wrong to depart from  the  country  guidance,  any
    error of law in that  respect  could  not  be  material  because  I  am
    satisfied that ground 2 is not made out as there is no error of law  in
    his  decision  to  consider  return  to  the  IKR  on  this  particular
    appellant's  factual  circumstances  and  which  I  am   satisfied   is
    consistent with the country guidance then in force before the FtTJ.

57. The assessment made  was  one  reasonably  open  to  the  FtTJ  on  the
    evidence, both oral and documentary, and I am not  satisfied  that  the
    decision of the FtTJ demonstrates the making of an error on a point  of
    law. The decision to dismiss the appeal shall stand.



Notice of Decision

58. The decision of the FtTJ did not involve the making of an  error  on  a
    point of law; the appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 14/2/2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

