
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06074/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18th September 2017                    |On 28th September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     d z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson of Counsel, Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Monson of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 9th February 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a male national of Iran born 11th September 1986.  His
    asylum and human rights claim was refused on  2nd  June  2016  and  his
    subsequent appeal heard by the FtT on 31st January 2017.

 3. The FtT did not find the Appellant credible and did not accept that  he
    had genuinely converted  to  Christianity.   The  FtT  found  that  the
    Appellant would not be at risk if returned to Iran.

 4. The FtT declined to consider Article  8  on  the  basis  that  although
    Article 8 was raised as a ground of appeal, submissions were  not  made
    by Mr Hodson in relation to Article 8, as public funding  only  covered
    the Appellant's protection claim.  Mr Hodson  submitted  that  the  FtT
    nevertheless had to consider Article 8, but the FtT declined to do  so.
    The appeal was dismissed.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The Appellant did not challenge the FtT findings in relation to risk on
    return.  The challenge was made with reference to the  refusal  of  the
    FtT to consider Article 8.

 6. It was submitted that Article 8 had been considered at some  length  in
    the Respondent's refusal  decision,  with  fifteen  paragraphs  of  the
    refusal decision being devoted to Article 8.  It was contended the  FtT
    was wrong to refuse to consider Article 8, and because  Article  8  had
    been raised as a ground of appeal, the FtT was obliged to consider it.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Robertson  in  the  following
    terms;

         "At the hearing, the Appellant's  representative  did  not  include
         submissions in relation to the Appellant's appeal under  Article  8
         ECHR because his public funding only covered the appeal  on  asylum
         grounds.  He submitted, however, that the judge must  grapple  with
         the Article 8 claim in light  of  the  evidence  presented  in  the
         appeal.  The judge declined to do so, because no case  was  put  in
         the skeleton argument and because it would not be  the  Appellant's
         advantage for the Article 8 claim to  be  decided  on  the  primary
         facts found on his asylum appeal.  The only ground  of  application
         is that the judge erred in failing to decide the Appellant's appeal
         under Article 8.  This is clearly an arguable error of law  as  the
         ground of appeal was  available  to  the  Appellant  and  had  been
         pleaded in the grounds.  It may be that for the  purposes  of  that
         part of the hearing, the judge may have had to treat the  Appellant
         as an unrepresented Appellant."

 8. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, contending, in summary, that the FtT  did  not  err  in  law  and
    directed itself appropriately.  It was contended that in  view  of  the
    adverse credibility findings made by the FtT, the Appellant  would  not
    be in a position to have an arguable Article 8 claim.

 9. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

10. Mr McVeety did not rely upon the rule 24 response,  but  accepted  that
    the FtT had materially erred in law in failing to consider  Article  8.
    Mr McVeety accepted that the decision of the FtT should  be  set  aside
    and remade by the FtT in relation to Article 8.  Mr Hodson agreed.

My Conclusions and Reasons

11. I find that the FtT materially erred in law in  declining  to  consider
    Article 8.  It is common ground that Article 8 was raised as  a  ground
    of appeal.  Section 86 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 provides that the FtT must determine any matter raised as a ground
    of appeal.  The FtT was therefore obliged to consider Article  8,  even
    though the Appellant's representative, because of  the  constraints  of
    public funding, had no submissions to make on that point.

12. Both representatives submitted that it would  be  appropriate  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the FtT.   I  find  that  it  is  appropriate,
    having considered paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements.  This is because I accept  the  submissions  made  by  both
    representatives, that it would be  appropriate  for  the  FtT  to  make
    primary findings in relation to Article 8, rather  than  those  primary
    findings being made by the Upper Tribunal,  which  if  adverse  to  the
    Appellant, would only afford a limited right of appeal to the Court  of
    Appeal.

13. In my view it is fair and appropriate for the Article  8  claim  to  be
    considered by the FtT and therefore it is  appropriate  to  remit  this
    appeal back to the FtT.

14. As I made clear at the hearing, and as accepted by Mr Hodson, there had
    been no challenge to the comprehensive findings  made  by  the  FtT  in
    relation to risk on return.  Those findings are  preserved.   The  only
    issue to be considered by the FtT relates to  Article  8  of  the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights.

15. As the Appellant resides in Manchester, the FtT hearing will take place
    at the Manchester Hearing Centre.  The parties will be advised  of  the
    time and date of the hearing in due course.  The appeal is to be  heard
    by an FtT Judge other than Judge Monson.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT for Article 8 to be considered.

Anonymity

The FtT made an anonymity direction.  I continue that direction pursuant  to
rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   Unless  and
until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 20th September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FtT.


Signed                              Date: 20th September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

