
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06488/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 February 2020                  |On 9 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Boyle, instructed on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a  court
    directs otherwise the Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  refer  to  him.   This
    direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. The Appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Fisher)  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
    "FtTJ") who, in a determination promulgated  on  the  1st  April  2019,
    dismissed his claim for protection. Permission to appeal that  decision
    was sought and granted and on the 1 October 2019 by FtTJ Swaney.

The background:

 3. The Appellant is a national of Iraq. He arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    and claimed asylum on 7 March 2008. His application was  refused  on  8
    July 2010 and an appeal against that decision was dismissed following a
    hearing before a judge on 23 August 2010.

 4. The basis of his claim was that he was born in Kirkuk  where  he  lived
    with his parents and brother. The appellant is Kurdish but speaks  both
    Kurdish Sorani and Arabic. He attended 3 to 4 years of  primary  school
    for helping in the family grocery shop.

 5. The appellant claimed that his father was a member of the  Baath  party
    and that he had cooperated with the former  regime  having  joined  the
    party in 1986. It was stated that  his  work  involved  acting  against
    Kurdish citizens. The appellant claimed that after the collapse of  the
    regime, his father disappeared, and he did not see him for six months.

 6. The appellant first had problems in 2006 and a threatening  letter  was
    thrown into the yard of the family home addressed  to  the  appellant's
    father. It was  stated  that  five  or  six  threatening  letters  were
    received, and nothing was on the letters to say who they were from  but
    the appellant thought  they  were  from  Kurds  as  they  were  written
    Kurdish, apart from one or two letters in Arabic.  The  appellant  also
    refers to further letters in 2006, 2007/2008. The appellant  stated  he
    was beaten up by other Kurds and that this happened three or four times
    from October 2007 to the beginning of 2008.

 7. The appellant claimed that his father and brother were shot in February
    2008 and both had died. The appellant was taken to the  Turkish  border
    and was then informed that his father had died.

 8. The appellant left Iraq on the 25th February 2008 and arrived in the UK
    on 7 March 2008.

 9. The appeal was heard by FtTJ Balloch.  In  a  decision  promulgated  in
    September 2010, the FtTJ dismissed his appeal. The judge did  not  find
    that the appellant had demonstrated even to the lower standard of proof
    that his father was involved with the Baath party and that as a  result
    the family had received threats or  that  the  appellant's  father  and
    brother were killed in the way that  the  appellant  had  claimed.  The
    judge made reference at paragraphs 75 to the vagueness in his  evidence
    regarding his father's activities but that even if it had been the case
    that his father did have some involvement with  the  Baath  party,  the
    judge did not find it reasonably likely  that  the  appellant  and  his
    family had only started suffering as a result  of  this  in  2006  -  a
    period of three years after the fall of the  regime.  Furthermore,  the
    judge did not find it reasonably likely that of the appellant's  family
    members if at a real risk from the threats that  they  would  not  have
    sought protection or at least have attempted  to  move  away  from  the
    area. Nor did the judge find it reasonably likely to be true that if  a
    person seriously wanted to harm the appellant and his family that  they
    would have sent threats over a period  of  two  years  before  actually
    carrying out the threats.

10. At paragraphs 80 - 82 the judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  been
    "quite vague" regarding the threatening letters, he did  not  know  the
    letters came from and had not provided them though  he  stated  he  did
    have three of them. Nor had he provided his father's death  certificate
    which he stated had been destroyed in a fire in March 2010. However the
    judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  not  provided  any  reasonable
    explanation as to why, if he had the letters  and  his  father's  death
    certificate and  they  supported  his  claim,  he  had  not  previously
    provided them when he made his claim for asylum in March 2008.

11. On the factual findings, the judge concluded that the appellant was not
    at risk in his home area but even if the appellant had established that
    he would be, there was a viable option of relocation to the KRG.

12. The judge therefore dismissed his claim. By  10  January  2011  he  had
    exhausted his appeal rights.

13. Following that decision further submissions were lodged  on  behalf  of
    the appellant in October 2014 which were  refused  an  application  for
    settlement protection made on 11 January 2018 was also  refused  on  23
    May 2018.

14. Further submissions were made on his behalf on the  14  May  2019.  The
    respondent treated them as a fresh claim but refused those  submissions
    in a decision letter dated 18 June 2019.

15. In the  decision  letter  the  respondent  took  into  account  further
    representations made on behalf of the appellant including  the  updated
    CG, and two articles relating to the position of  Kirkuk  (set  out  at
    paragraph 7 of the decision letter).

16. At  paragraphs  9  -  17  the  respondent  applied  the  principles  in
    Devaseelan and set out  the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  earlier
    Tribunal judge and that the judge had found that the appellant's father
    was not a member of the  Baath  party  or  that  the  family  had  ever
    received threats.

17. The respondent set out the basis of the  appellant's  claim  which  was
    that he was unable to return to Iraq due to the country  situation  and
    that the situation in Kirkuk was still a "contested one" and  it  would
    be unduly harsh for him to internally relocate to the  IKR  as  he  did
    not have any identity documents and have no contact with his family.

18. Reference was made to the country materials and the CPIN dated November
    2018 and consideration was also given to the country guidance decisions
    in AA (Article15 (c) Iraq CG [2015]  KUT  544  and  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds-
    internal relocation) CG [2018] UKUT 0212. The respondent concluded from
    the country information that the situation in Kirkuk  had  changed  and
    that whilst it was accepted that Iraq still had internal conflict  that
    had resulted in civilian death, the level of   indiscriminate  violence
    was not high enough to engage article 15 ( c).

19. At paragraphs 31 onwards consideration was given to  documentation  and
    feasibility of return in the light of his claim that he was  unable  to
    internally relocate to the IKR as he had no identity documents and  had
    no contact with his family.

20. The respondent made reference to the  CPIN : internal relocation, civil
    documentation returns February 2019; and that it  demonstrated  he  was
    able to internally relocate to the IKR and that he  would  be  able  to
    travel from Baghdad to  the  IKR  without  suffering  a  real  risk  of
    persecution. It was noted that  the  appellant  had  not  provided  any
    reliable  evidence  to  demonstrate  that   he   did   not   have   any
    documentation.

21. At  paragraph  33,  applying  the  CPIN  dated  February  2019  it  was
    considered that there were multiple avenues through which he could  get
    re-documented and he had not provided any substantial evidence that  he
    was unable to obtain documentation. It was noted that during his appeal
    the judge determined that he was still in contact with  his  family  in
    Iraq and he had not provided any independent  evidence  to  demonstrate
    that he was unable to obtain identification all that he was  no  longer
    in contact with his family.

22. As to the appellant's claim that he not lived in Iraq for over 11 years
    and because he had no contact with his family had been unable  to  rely
    upon the financial help upon arrival in the IKR, the respondent applied
    the CPIN November 2018 and in the light of the country guidance case of
    AAH and concluded that whilst it was accepted that assistance of  those
    without family would be limited in the IKR, it would be considered that
    his return would not be unduly harsh as he had family in  the  IKR  and
    that he had not demonstrated that he had lost contact with his family.

23. As to his personal circumstances, it was noted that he  was  a  healthy
    young male with no known medical conditions, having  been  educated  in
    Iraq and having employment history in a grocery  store.  There  was  no
    evidence of his claim that he  had  no  family  in  Iraq,  and  it  was
    considered that he had a  support  network  that  he  could  access  on
    return.

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal:

24. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  against  that  decision.  The
    appeal against that decision came before the FtTJ (Judge Fisher) on  15
    August 2019 and in the decision promulgated on  29th  August  2019  his
    appeal was dismissed.

25.  The FtTJ set out his findings of fact at paragraphs 14-23 They can  be
    summarised as follows:

      a) He took as his starting point the findings of  fact  made  by  FtTJ
         Balloch applying the guidance in Devaseelan.  At  paragraph  16  he
         recorded that Judge Balloch had not found the  appellant's  account
         to be credible and had not  been  satisfied  that  his  father  was
         involved with the Baath party, that the family were  threatened  or
         that his father and brother had been  killed.  The  judge  observed
         that the appellant had not adduced  any  new  evidence  before  the
         tribunal concerning that aspect of his case and therefore the judge
         treated  those  findings  as  settled.  However,  he  recorded  the
         following "for the avoidance of any doubt, I do not accept that the
         appellant's father and brother are  dead.  This  conclusion  is  of
         significance  when   I   go   on   to   consider   the   issue   of
         redocumentation."

      b)  At paragraphs 17 - 18 the judge considered the issue of return  to
         Iraq. He began that assessment by referring to the CG  decision  in
         AA (article 15(c) Iraq [2015] UKUT 00544 and the  areas  which  the
         decision had  referred  to  as  "contested  areas"  which  included
         Kirkuk. He  also  referred  to  the  decision  in  TM,  KM  and  LZ
         (Zimbabwe) which concerned the issue of country guidance cases.  At
         [18] then addressed the submission made on behalf of the  appellant
         that Kirkuk remained a contested area and that there were no  "good
         grounds" to depart from the country guidance in AA  (Iraq).  Having
         considered the country materials  and the decision  in  R  (on  the
         application of Amin) v  SSHD  [2017]  EWHC  2417,  he  reached  the
         conclusion that  there  had  been  significant  changes  since  the
         promulgation of AA (Iraq) and that there was good reason to  depart
         from that country guidance. As Kirkuk was  no  longer  a  contested
         area, he found that there was nothing to suggest that the appellant
         could not obtain a CSID from the Kirkuk civil affairs office.

      c) At [19] the FtTJ referred to  the  decision  in  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds
         -internal relocation) Iraq CG  UKUT 00212 (IAC)  and the submission
         made on behalf of  the  appellant  that  the  appellant  could  not
         relocate in view of the lack of documentation and  that  the  judge
         should attach weight to the evidence of attempts  he  had  made  to
         replace them.

      d) At [20] the FtTJ considered the evidence advanced on behalf of  the
         appellant that he had attended the  consulate  in  Manchester.  The
         FtTJ stated that it was  not  surprising  that  his  visit  to  the
         embassy was not fruitful as he had arrived unannounced and that the
         "business card and the  pictures  outside  the  consulate  did  not
         advance his case to any meaningful extent". He went on to find that
         there was no satisfactory evidence that the appellant had  reported
         the loss of his passport and ID documents at the fire at this  home
         nor that there was even such a fire. He concluded that he could not
         be satisfied that the  appellant  was  not  in  possession  of  his
         passport and his ID documentation. In  the  alternative,  he  found
         that on the basis that his father and brother had not died, he  had
         male  family  members  who   could   assist   him   in   terms   of
         redocumentation as he was not persuaded that he  had  lost  contact
         with his family relatives.

      e) At [21-22] he concluded that there was no  sponsorship  requirement
         for Kurds and the IKR and so they would normally  be  permitted  to
         enter after security screening and registering their presence  with
         the local Mokhtar. In AAH the tribunal said that whether a returnee
         was at risk during the screening process was  fact  sensitive,  but
         that coming from a family associated with ISIS, from Isis territory
         and being a single male of fighting age may increase the risk.  The
         judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  did  not  have   any   ISIS
         affiliation within his family and would be able to show from the UK
         documents that he arrived from there and  would  therefore  not  be
         returning from ISIS territory immediately.

      f) The judge found that the appellant  would  have  support  from  his
         family if he wished to relocate to the IKR as he had shown  himself
         to be resourceful in travelling to the UK and being  able  to  find
         support. Whilst the submission was made that  he  had  no  relevant
         skills in the employment market, the judge found that his  evidence
         was that he worked in the family's grocery business so he would  in
         fact have experience of employment. He concluded that  he  was  not
         satisfied that it  would  be  unreasonable  for  the  appellant  to
         relocate, although his principal finding  was  that  the  appellant
         could return to his family in Kirkuk.

      g)  He  recorded  at  [23]  the  submissions  made  by  the   advocate
         representing the appellant that the Article 3 claim would stand  or
         fall with the Article 15 (c) argument and recorded that no separate
         Article 8 issues were raised

      h) He therefore dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

26. The appeal was therefore listed before the Upper  Tribunal.  Mr  Boyle,
    who did not appear before the FtTJ, appeared on behalf of the appellant
    and Ms Petterson, senior presenting officer, appeared on behalf of  the
    respondent.

27. Mr Boyle relied upon the written grounds in which it was asserted  that
    the FtTJ erred in law in his assessment of the humanitarian  protection
    claim in respect of  Kirkuk  and  that  it  was  fundamentally  flawed.
    Firstly, it is said that the test of "strong and cogent  evidence"  had
    not been met and secondly, it is asserted that the judge failed to have
    proper regard to  the  objective  material  (see  paragraph  4  of  the
    grounds).

28. At paragraph 5  of  the  grounds,  a  general  reference  was  made  to
    "objective material "which was said did not demonstrate that  the  area
    of Kirkuk was "very secure" which is what  the  judge  had  stated  and
    therefore did not justify departure from the country guidance  caselaw.
    By making that statement, the judge had taken the term out  of  context
    and in isolation. That term "very secure" was in respect of the current
    Isis control and not an overview of the position within the province of
    Kirkuk itself.

29.  Reference was made to an extract  from  the  CPIN  November  2018.  In
    particular, he referred to paragraph 2.3.6 which  stated  that  80%  of
    those in humanitarian need are in Ninewah, Kirkuk and Anbar (46% are in
    Ninewah alone) and 2.3.8 that food, employment and medical care are the
    top three humanitarian  needs  in  nearly  all  governorates.  He  also
    referred the Tribunal to the EASO report extract which referred to  the
    position of Kirkuk and the extract that was  copied  into  the  written
    grounds  which made reference to ISIL no longer controlling a territory
    in the Kirkuk governorate but retained pockets of  fighters  especially
    in Hawija and the Hamerrin mountains.

30. Mr Boyle did not refer the Tribunal to any other parts  of  the  report
    save that his general submission was that "severe conditions existed in
    Kirkuk".

31. Ms Petterson on behalf of the respondent submitted that  there  was  no
    error of law in the FtTJ's decision. She  submitted  that  the  grounds
    took issue with the security situation but that failed to take  account
    of the information in the EASO report at  pages  80  -  81  which  made
    reference to the overall drop in  the  average  number  of  attacks  in
    Kirkuk by the third quarter  of  the  year  and  that  ISIL  no  longer
    controlled any territory in the Kirkuk Governorate but that there  were
    pockets of fighters in Hawija and the Hammrin mountains.  She  referred
    to the evidence at page 80 that the level  of  security  incidents  the
    level of violence was still relatively high although the situation  was
    improving.

32. She submitted at [17) the FtTJ referred to the  decision  in  R  (Amin)
    which considered the CG decision in  the  context  of  the  changes  in
    Kirkuk. Whilst it was a decision of the administrative court, the  FtTJ
    was entitled to take into account that decision in assessing whether to
    depart from the CG in AA(Iraq).

33. She further submitted that the FtTJ had  regard  to  all  the  material
    before him and that he was not required to rehearse every single matter
    and set out all of the  material  he  placed  weight  on.  At  [19]  he
    referred to the material relied upon by the  appellant  which  included
    the EASO report and considered it also in the light of the CPIN.  Thus,
    she submitted, the FtTJ was entitled to place weight on  that  material
    and to reach the conclusion that he did.

34. The first issue to resolve relates to whether the FtTJ was entitled  to
    depart from the country guidance set out in AA (Article15(c))  Iraq  CG
    [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) as amended by the Court of Appeal  in  AA  (Iraq)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 944, which confirmed that there was a state of internal
    armed conflict in certain parts of Iraq, involving government  security
    forces, militias of various kinds, and  the  Islamist  group  known  as
    ISIL, which included Kirkuk.


35. There is no dispute as to the applicable law. The test  to  be  applied
    when considering whether to depart from country guidance is set out  in
    SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA  Civ
    940 Lord Justice Stanley Burnton said this:
         45. There are simply not the resources for a detailed and  reliable
         determination of conditions in foreign countries to be made  on  an
         individual basis on each decision on the application or  appeal  of
         persons seeking protection. There are far too many such  cases,  as
         is demonstrated by the Secretary of State's use of charter  flights
         to accommodate the large numbers of returnees to countries such  as
         Afghanistan and Iraq.  Neither  those  representing  those  seeking
         protections nor the Secretary of State herself have  the  resources
         for the detailed, lengthy and costly investigation of conditions on
         return that  is  appropriate,  given  the  potential  risk  to  the
         returnees, in every case. Even if the resources were available,  it
         would be wasteful to have such an investigation, involving much the
         same evidence, in every  case.  There  would  also  be  a  risk  of
         inconsistent  decisions,  a  consideration  that  is   particularly
         important in the present context since it follows from  a  decision
         that one person requires protection, if correct, that a  person  in
         the same situation  who  has  been  returned  may  have  risked  or
         suffered ill treatment or worse.
         46.  The  system  of  Country   Guidance   determinations   enables
         appropriate resources, in  terms  of  the  representations  of  the
         parties to the Country Guidance appeal, expert and factual evidence
         and the personnel and time of the Tribunal, to be  applied  to  the
         determination of conditions in, and therefore the risks  of  return
         for persons such as the appellants in the Country  Guidance  appeal
         to, the country in question. The procedure is aimed at arriving  at
         a reliable (in the sense of accurate) determination.
         47. It is for  these  reasons,  as  well  as  the  desirability  of
         consistency, that decision makers and tribunal judges are  required
         to take Country Guidance determinations into account, and to follow
         them unless very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence,  are
         adduced justifying their not doing so.


36. The Upper Tribunal elaborated upon this test in the subsequent decision
    in CM (EM country guidance; disclosure ) Zimbabwe CG   [2013]  UKUT  59
    (IAC) [at §72]:  [We] recognise that where a previous  assessment  has
    resulted in the conclusion that the  population  generally  or  certain
    sections of it may  be  at  risk,  any  assessment  that  the  material
    circumstances have changed would need to demonstrate that such  changes
    are well established evidentially and durable.


37. Having carefully consider the competing submissions of the advocates in
    the light of the material before the FtTJ and his decision, I am
    satisfied that the FtTJ did not fall into error as asserted in the
    grounds.



38. As set out earlier he undertook that assessment at paragraphs 17  -  18
    of his decision. He began that assessment by quoting  the  decision  in
    AA(Iraq) [2015] and reminding himself that that decision did  refer  to
    Kirkuk as a "contested area". He then went on to set out  correct  test
    to apply in deciding whether there was sufficient material  upon  which
    he could rely to  depart  from  that  guidance  and  properly  directed
    himself to that at [17].



39. In that assessment he took account of the competing submissions made on
    behalf of the appellant and  the  respondent  (see  paragraph  18).  He
    referred to the EASO report at page 76 in the  appellant's  bundle  and
    referred to page 80 of that report where it acknowledged that  ISIS  no
    longer controlled any territory in the  Kirkuk  governorate.  The  FtTJ
    also acknowledged that incidents did continue to occur although as  the
    report stated, the situation was improving.  The  FtTJ  considered  the
    background material relied upon which included the material sent to the
    respondent to support his fresh claim.  The  FtTJ  cited  the  Diyaruna
    article dated 26 April 2019 at paragraph 18 which referred to the Iraqi
    forces having launched a military operation to clear a remote  area  in
    southern Kirkuk province. The judge quoted  the  police  command  media
    director who was quoted as saying that the province  had  become  "very
    secure as a result of coordinated operations between all military units
    and security and intelligence services."  Whilst  Mr  Boyle  sought  to
    argue that that was taken out of context, from reading the material, it
    demonstrates that this was an article relating  to  ongoing  operations
    targeting ISIS remnants in Kirkuk. The judge was not saying that Kirkuk
    itself had become "very secure" but was quoting what the Kirkuk  police
    command director had stated.



40. I do not consider that there was any error in his  approach  by  making
    reference to the decision of the High Court in R (on the application of
    Amin) v SSHD 2017 EWHC 2417 which had made reference  to  the  material
    relied upon by the respondent to justify a departure from  the  country
    guidance decision. In that decision, Sir Ross Cranston had  found  that
    Kirkuk was no longer a contested area,  and  that  although  there  are
    apparently still dangers there, that is nothing like  the  position  as
    when AA was decided. There is no error of law in  taking  into  account
    this decision and it was not the case that the FtTJ did so in isolation
    from the other evidence that was before him.





41. I have set out earlier the relevant test and accept the submission made
    by Mr Boyle that cogent reasons must be given. However, in my  judgment
    the FtTJ considered whether there was fresh evidence to justify such  a
    departure which consisted not only of the CPIN which was set out in the
    decision letter which could  accurately  be  described  as  drawing  on
    multiple sources of background material  which  provided  a  conclusion
    that Kirkuk was no longer afflicted by high levels of violence such  as
    to make return there a general risk contrary to article 15 ( c) of  the
    QD. The CPIN set out that ISIS was no longer in control and that  there
    were only sporadic incidents of violence. The material set out  in  the
    grounds and referred to by Mr Boyle  (see  paragrphs  2.3.6  and  2.3.8
    refers to humanitarian need but this needs to be viewed in the  context
    of all the evidence.





42. In KK (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 172, that a judge had  not  erred  in
    her approach when concluding that new  evidence,  including  a  Country
    Information and Guidance report, justified a departure from an  earlier
    country guidance case when assessing the risks of returning  an  asylum
    seeker to Sri Lanka. The Court of Appeal confirmed that the  Judge  was
    not  required  to  go  through  each  section  of  the  report  in  her
    determination, or to set out a list of positive  and  negative  factors
    from it.






43. Consequently, I have reached the conclusion that it  was  open  to  the
    FtTJ to conclude that Kirkuk was no longer a contested area.  There  is
    no error in that approach.



44. It is further submitted on behalf of the appellant that the FtTJ failed
    to  adequately  consider  the  appellant's  position  in   respect   of
    replacement identity documentation. In this context it is submitted  by
    Mr Boyle that the FtTJ did  not  give  adequate  consideration  to  the
    appellant's attendance at the Iraqi consulate. In his oral  submissions
    he argued that there was evidence in the decision of AAH  at  paragraph
    27 that the embassy staff are unhelpful and obstructive.



45. He further submitted that at paragraph 20 the FtTJ stated that he could
    not be satisfied that he was not in possession of the  passport  or  ID
    documents. It is asserted  that  he  had  failed  to  provide  adequate
    reasoning and that this was not a finding.



46. I have considered that those submissions in the light of the  evidence.
    As to the appellant's attendance at the embassy, his witness  statement
    at paragraph 6 (page 4) simply stated that  he  went  the  embassy  and
    explained he needed his Iraqi documents to be reissued  and  that  they
    would not do that for him. The evidence in support of that claim was  a
    business card and a photograph of him outside of the embassy.



47. I accept the submission made in behalf of the respondent that  this  is
    not evidence that he had been rejected but simply demonstrates that  he
    went to the embassy. In my judgment it was open to the  FtTJ  to  reach
    the conclusion that the business card and picture consequently did  not
    advance his case to any meaningful extent. It was not  evidence  as  to
    the nature of the conversation that took place nor was  it  known  what
    information he had provided to the embassy staff. Whilst Mr  Boyle  has
    submitted that the decision AAH refers to the staff being unhelpful and
    obstructive, that paragraph does refer to  them  being  unhelpful  (not
    obstructive )but that does not necessarily mean that in the context  of
    this appellant's claim that it was made out in his case.



48. As to the issue of documents, I am satisfied that it was  open  to  the
    FtTJ to find that he was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  no
    passport or ID documentation. Contrary to the submissions  made  by  Mr
    Boyle, the FtTJ did have an evidential foundation for that  conclusion.
    The FtTJ had previously referred to the decision of Judge  Balloch  who
    had rejected the appellant's factual account  in  its  entirety.  Judge
    Balloch  found  that  the  appellant  had  not  provided  a  reasonable
    explanation as to why he had not  provided  certain  documents  to  the
    respondent which he claimed to have had prior to the  alleged  fire  in
    March 2010. Consequently, the judge did not accept  that  he  had  been
    truthful in his evidence concerning  important  documentation.  Against
    that background, in my judgment it was open to the FtTJ  to  reach  the
    conclusion that there had been no evidence, either at the time  of  the
    decision of the judge in 2010 or subsequently, that he had reported the
    loss of his passport or ID  documents  in  the  fire  or  provided  any
    evidence that there was in fact a  fire.  As  they  were  documents  of
    importance, the judge was entitled to find that the lack of evidence in
    reporting their loss was not credible.






49. The last ground advanced on behalf of the appellant is  that  the  FtTJ
    failed to apply the CG in AAH (Iraq)  when  considering  the  issue  of
    internal relocation to the IKR.



50. Mr Boyle relied upon the grounds in which it was asserted that the FtTJ
    at paragraph 21 - 22 was in error by stating that he did not come  from
    a family with ISIS affiliation and that he had experience of employment
    with the family's grocery business. The  submission  was  that  he  had
    misapplied the country  guidance  as  this  actually  referred  to  the
    individual originating from a place previously held by Isis rather than
    the family and that this was relevant to the appellant had  no  special
    employment skills.



51. In his oral submissions he expanded on that ground and  submitted  that
    the FtTJ had not considered how the appellant could obtain a  CSID  and
    that he would need to obtain one and as he  was  unable  to  travel  he
    would not be able to secure a CSID and would therefore be at risk.



52. I am satisfied that there is no error in the FtTJ's assessment  of  the
    appellant's ability to relocate to the IKR. The FtTJ expressly consider
    the submission made on behalf the appellant that he could not  relocate
    in view of his lack of documentation (see paragraph 19). However as set
    out above, it was open to the FtTJ to reject the evidence that  he  had
    lost his identity documents including his  passport  in  light  of  the
    general lack of credibility found by  Judge  Balloch  and  also  before
    himself concerning events both in Iraq and in the UK.



53. At paragraph 20 the judge considered the issue in the  alternative  and
    that even if he  was  not  in  possession  of  the  documents,  he  had
    remaining family in Iraq who were male family members who would be able
    to assist him in this regard. The judge plainly rejected that either of
    those family members were dead or that he had lost contact with them.



54. In the light of those factual findings, the judge went on  to  consider
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the  appellant  to  relocate.  The
    judge considered that the appellant would be  able  to  obtain  a  CSID
    within a reasonable timeframe if in Iraq because he was  not  satisfied
    that it lost contact with his male family relatives and that they would
    be able to assist him in obtaining documentation in the event  that  he
    did not have his original passport and ID documents.  Looking  at  AAH,
    the guidance states that:





   1. Whilst it remains possible for  an  Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  to
      obtain a new CSID whether P is able to  do  so,  or  do  so  within  a
      reasonable time frame, will depend on  the  individual  circumstances.
      Factors to be considered include:

        i) Whether P has any other form of  documentation,  or  information
           about the location of his entry in the civil register.  An  INC,
           passport, birth/marriage certificates or an expired  CSID  would
           all be of substantial assistance. For someone in  possession  of
           one  or  more  of  these  documents  the   process   should   be
           straightforward. A laissez-passer  should  not  be  counted  for
           these purposes: these can be issued without any other form of ID
           being available, are not of any assistance in 'tracing back'  to
           the family record and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;
       ii) The location of the relevant civil registry office. If it is  in
           an area held or formerly held, by ISIL, is it operational?
      iii) Are there male family members who would be able and  willing  to
           attend the civil  registry  with  P?  Because  the  registration
           system is patrilineal it will be relevant  to  consider  whether
           the relative is from the mother or  father's  side.  A  maternal
           uncle in possession of his CSID  would  be  able  to  assist  in
           locating the original place of registration of the  individual's
           mother, and from there the trail would need to  be  followed  to
           the place that her records were transferred  upon  marriage.  It
           must also be borne in mind that a significant number of IDPs  in
           Iraq are themselves undocumented; if that  is  the  case  it  is
           unlikely that they could be of assistance.  A  woman  without  a
           male relative to assist  with  the  process  of  redocumentation
           would face very significant  obstacles  in  that  officials  may
           refuse to deal with her case at all.





55. As to the possibility of relocation to the IKR,  the  Country  Guidance
    then applicable and before the FtTJ stated as follows:


         " E. IRAQI KURDISH REGION


         17. There are currently  no  international  flights  to  the  Iraqi
         Kurdish Region (IKR). All returns from the United  Kingdom  are  to
         Baghdad.


         18. For an  Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish  origin  in
         possession of a valid CSID or  Iraqi  passport,  the  journey  from
         Baghdad to the IKR, whether by  air  or  land,  is  affordable  and
         practical and can be made  without  a  real  risk  of  P  suffering
         persecution, serious harm, Article3 ill  treatment  nor  would  any
         difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.


         19. P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and  the
         IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.


         20. P will face  considerable  difficulty  in  making  the  journey
         between Baghdad and the  IKR  by  land  without  a  CSID  or  valid
         passport. There are numerous checkpoints en  route,  including  two
         checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of  the  airport.  If  P  has
         neither a CSID nor a valid passport there is a real risk of P being
         detained at a checkpoint until such time as the security  personnel
         are able to verify P's identity. It is not reasonable to require  P
         to travel between Baghdad and IKR by land absent the ability  of  P
         to verify his identity at a checkpoint. This normally requires  the
         attendance of a male family member and production of  P's  identity
         documents but may also be achieved by  calling  upon  "connections"
         higher up in the chain of command.


         21. Once at the IKR border  (land  or  air)  P  would  normally  be
         granted entry to the territory. Subject to security screening,  and
         registering presence with the local mukhtar, P would  be  permitted
         to enter and reside in the IKR with no further legal impediments or
         requirements. There is no sponsorship requirement for Kurds.


         22. Whether P would be at particular risk of  ill-treatment  during
         the security screening process must be assessed on  a  case-by-case
         basis. Additional factors  that  may  increase  risk  include:  (i)
         coming from a family with  a  known  association  with  ISIL,  (ii)
         coming from an area associated with ISIL and (iii) being  a  single
         male of fighting age. P is likely to be able to evidence  the  fact
         of recent arrival from the UK, which would dispel any suggestion of
         having arrived directly from ISIL territory.


         23. If P has family members living in the IKR cultural norms  would
         require that family to  accommodate  P.  In  such  circumstances  P
         would, in general, have sufficient assistance from the family so as
         to lead a 'relatively normal  life',  which  would  not  be  unduly
         harsh.  It  is  nevertheless  important  for   decision-makers   to
         determine the extent of any assistance likely to be provided by P's
         family on a case by case basis.


         24. For those without the assistance  of  family  in  the  IKR  the
         accommodation options are limited:


             (i) Absent special circumstances it is not  reasonably  likely
             that P will be able to gain access to one of the refugee camps
             in the IKR; these camps are already extremely overcrowded  and
             are closed to newcomers.  64%  of  IDPs  are  accommodated  in
             private settings with the vast  majority  living  with  family
             members.


             (ii) If P cannot live with a family member,  apartments  in  a
             modern block in a new neighbourhood are available for rent  at
             a cost of between $300 and $400 per month;


             (iii) P could resort  to  a  'critical  shelter  arrangement',
             living in an  unfinished  or  abandoned  structure,  makeshift
             shelter, tent, mosque, church or  squatting  in  a  government
             building. It would be unduly harsh to require P to relocate to
             the IKR if P will live in a critical housing  shelter  without
             access to basic necessities such  as  food,  clean  water  and
             clothing;


             (iv) In considering whether P would be able  to  access  basic
             necessities, account must be taken of  the  fact  that  failed
             asylum seekers are entitled to apply for  a  grant  under  the
             Voluntary Returns Scheme, which could give P access to  �1500.
             Consideration should also be given to  whether  P  can  obtain
             financial support from other sources such as  (a)  employment,
             (b) remittances from relatives abroad, (c) the availability of
             ad hoc charity or by being able to access PDS rations.


         25. Whether P is able to secure employment must be  assessed  on  a
         case-by-case basis taking the following matters into account:


             (i) Gender. Lone women are very unlikely to be able to  secure
             legitimate employment;


             (ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the IKR is
             70%;


             (iii) P cannot work without a CSID;


             (iv) Patronage and nepotism continue to be  important  factors
             in securing employment. A returnee with family connections  to
             the region will have a significant advantage in that he  would
             ordinarily be  able  to  call  upon  those  contacts  to  make
             introductions to prospective employers and to vouch for him;


             (v) Skills, education and experience. Unskilled workers are at
             the  greatest  disadvantage,   with   the   decline   in   the
             construction industry reducing the number  of  labouring  jobs
             available;


             (vi) If P is from an area with a marked association with ISIL,
             that may deter prospective employers.



56. I find no error in the judge's assessment at  paragraph  21  where  the
    judge considered  the  particular  risk  of  ill-treatment  during  the
    security screening process. The judge properly had regard to  the  fact
    that whether a returnee was at risk during the  screening  process  was
    "fact sensitive" and properly had regard to 1 of the factors which  was
    coming from a family associated with ISIS. Contrary to  the  submission
    made that was one of the relevant factors and as  the  FtTJ  found,  he
    does not have an Isis affiliation within his family. As to  the  second
    part which relates to coming from ISIS territory, the FtTJ  dealt  with
    that at paragraph 21 by stating that he would be able to show from  his
    UK documents that he arrived from the UK and therefore not  immediately
    from ISIS territory. There is no error of law in that approach.






57. The judge went on to consider how he would support himself in  the  IKR
    in accordance with the country guidance decision. At  paragraph  22  he
    was satisfied that the appellant would have support from his family  if
    he relocated. In addition  to  that  he  took  into  account  that  the
    appellant had skills upon which he could draw which  included  that  he
    had been resourceful in travelling to the  UK  and  was  able  to  find
    support. The judge took into account the submission made on his  behalf
    that he had no relevant skills and the employment market but the  judge
    was entitled to take into account that he had experience of  employment
    in Iraq by working  in  the  family's  grocery  business.  The  country
    guidance case also states that account must be taken of the  fact  that
    he would be able to  apply  for  a  grant  to  assist  in  establishing
    himself.





58. Having considered the submissions as set out above, I am satisfied that
    there is no error of law in the FtTJ's decision that  was  material  to
    the outcome. Whilst I have reached the conclusion that it was  open  to
    the FtTJ to depart from the country guidance, in the event  that  I  am
    wrong in that conclusion, I am satisfied that the  FtTJ  gave  adequate
    and sustainable reasons by reference to the applicable CG  decision  of
    AAH that it would not be unduly harsh for him to relocate to the IKR in
    the light of his personal circumstances. On  that  basis  there  is  no
    material error of law in the overall decision reached.


59. In my judgment the assessment made was one reasonably open to the  FtTJ
    on the evidence, both oral and documentary, and I am not satisfied that
    the decision of the FtTJ demonstrates the making of an error on a point
    of law. The decision to dismiss the appeal shall stand.



Notice of Decision

60. The decision of the FtTJ did not involve the making of an  error  on  a
    point of law; the appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date     3/3/2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

