
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06289/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 May 2019                        |On 24 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     NN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Levine
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision which I promulgated on 8 March 2019,  I  found  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to  be
    set aside. My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant was born in  1982  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
         Vietnam. He first entered the United Kingdom in 2003. He was  first
         encountered in 2007 and on, 6 August 2008, was convicted of  'being
         concerned in the production by another of cannabis'  and  sentenced
         to 12 months imprisonment. In 2008,  he  made  an  application  for
         asylum based on religious affiliation.  On  17  October  2008,  the
         appellant was served with a liability  to  deportation  notice.  He
         subsequently withdrew his asylum application. On 19 March  2009,  a
         signed deportation  order  was  served  on  the  appellant  and  he
         returned to Vietnam on 1 April 2009.

         2.   The appellant was apprehended on 22 June 2014 attempting to re-
         enter the United Kingdom.  Further  representations  were  made  in
         December 2015 that the  appellant  had  been  trafficked  into  the
         United Kingdom. On  3  March  2016,  the  Family  Court  granted  a
         residence order in favour of the appellant in respect of his  child
         HN, a British citizen born in 2015. Pursuant to the order, both the
         appellant and  HN's  mother  retain  parental  responsibility.  The
         appellant made further human rights submissions  on  five  separate
         occasions between 2016 -  2017.  The  Secretary  of  State  made  a
         decision to refuse the  appellant's  protection  and  human  rights
         claim on 23 June 2017. The appellant appealed against  the  refusal
         of the human rights claim to the First-tier Tribunal  which,  in  a
         decision dated 12 June 2018,  dismissed  the  asylum,  humanitarian
         protection in articles 2/3ECHR appeals but allowed  the  appeal  on
         Article 8 ECHR grounds. The Secretary of  State  now  appeals  with
         permission to the upper tribunal.

         3.   There are two challenges to the decision of the judge.  First,
         the Secretary of State asserts that the judge carried out a  flawed
         assessment of credibility in  reaching  his  findings  of  fact  in
         respect of Article 8 ECHR. The judge found that  the  appellant  is
         the sole carer of his British children (a  second  child,  H,  also
         British was born in 2016). The Secretary of State argues  that  the
         judge placed excessive  weight  on  the  outcome  of  Family  Court
         proceedings (see above) and failed also to consider the  fact  that
         the appellant's partner did not give evidence operated against  the
         credibility of his claim. Further, the judge  had  no  grounds  for
         finding that the appellant's cannabis conviction had probably  been
         committed whilst the appellant was under duress.

         4.   I find the ground has no  merit.  The  judge  has  given  very
         detailed analysis of the evidence and has  reached  findings  which
         were available to him. The observations regarding the background to
         the offence were, on the evidence, not unreasonable. I acknowledge,
         however, that a defence  of  duress  did  not  succeed  before  the
         criminal court. Further, I find that the joint judge  did  not  err
         when giving weight to orders of the Family  Court;  indeed,  it  is
         likely that the judge would have fallen into error had he not  done
         so. I note that no challenge to  the  authenticity  of  the  Family
         Court  documents  was  made.  As  regards  to  the  fact  that  the
         appellant's partner did not give evidence, I do not accept, as  the
         grounds assert, that the judge considered this  to  be  the  matter
         supporting the appellant's  case.  At  [57],  the  judge  expressly
         states that he did not  to  intend  to  proceed  on  the  basis  of
         'suspicions' and assumptions. He recorded the partner's absence but
         found, as he was entitled to do, that the  appellant  is  the  main
         carer of the two children primarily on account of  the  unequivocal
         evidence of the CAFCASS officer who  had  reported  in  the  Family
         Court proceedings. The judge's methodology  and  findings  of  fact
         are, in my opinion, wholly free from legal error.

         5.   The second ground of appeal has more merit. This concerns  the
         proper basis upon which the judge should have considered the appeal
         on Article 8 ECHR grounds. Mr Noor, who has  appeared  before  both
         tribunals, accepts that paragraph  399D  of  HC  395  (as  amended)
         applies:

         399D. Where a foreign criminal has been  deported  and  enters  the
         United Kingdom in breach of a deportation order enforcement of  the
         deportation order is in the public interest and will be implemented
         unless there are very exceptional circumstances.

         6.   The Secretary of State argues that the appellant  had  applied
         for a revocation of the deportation  order.  The  judge  disagreed,
         stating at [75]:

         Similarly, I agree with Ms Young [for the Secretary of State]  that
         paragraphs 2 to 5 of Mr Noor's Skeleton Argument are in error -  to
         the extent that they refer to the criteria in paragraph 390 of  the
         rules.  That is because there is no suggestion that  the  appellant
         has made a relevant application to the respondent for revocation of
         the deportation order in question - see paragraphs 138  to  143  of
         the RFDL.  In other words, I am not deciding an  appeal  against  a
         refusal to revoke a deportation order.

         7.   The judge was, in my opinion, correct. The  decision  in  this
         appeal post-dates the new rights of appeal regime effected  by  the
         coming into force of the 2014 Act. The appellant's  appeal  to  the
         judge complied with section 82 because it was an appeal against the
         refusal of an asylum and human rights claim; since October 2014, it
         has not  been  possible  to  appeal  against  the  refusal  by  the
         Secretary of State to revoke a deportation order.  However,  it  is
         important  that  the  deportation  context  was  acknowledged.  The
         appellant had been removed and had returned to the  United  Kingdom
         in breach of the deportation order, returning prior to  the  expiry
         of 10 years following deportation. The judgement of  the  Court  of
         Appeal in  SU  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1069  makes  it  clear  that,  in
         circumstances where paragraph 399D applies, paragraph  391  is  not
         applicable. The question in the instant appeal is whether the judge
         has recognised the importance of paragraph 399D which provides that
         the enforcement of the deportation order (i.e. by the removal for a
         second time of the appellant from the United  Kingdom)  is  in  the
         public interest and will  be  implemented  unless  there  are  very
         exceptional circumstances [my emphasis]. That is  a  discrete  test
         imposed by paragraph 399D; whatever may be the other considerations
         relevant to an analysis of the appeal on Article  8  ECHR  grounds,
         the circumstances of the appellant must properly  be  described  as
         'very exceptional' if the appellant is to avoid the  implementation
         of the deportation order. If the tribunal  did  not  clearly  apply
         that test, then it is very likely to have fallen into error.

         8.   Mr Noor submitted that the judge had applied  paragraph  399D.
         At [74] the judge wrote:

         I have to consider the "article 8 rules" which are specific to that
         context -  viz  paragraphs  A398  to  399D  (as  suggested  through
         paragraph 90 of the RFDL) (and see sections 117B and 117C  of  Part
         5A of the 2002 Act). [my emphasis]

         The problem is that the judge makes no specific  reference  to  the
         existence of 'very exceptional circumstances' nor has he sought  to
         differentiate  the   paragraph   399D   test   from   the   various
         considerations set out at paragraph 398 et seq.  As  the  Court  of
         Appeal stressed in SU, the test of 'very exceptional circumstances'
         is more stringent than that of 'very compelling  circumstances'  in
         paragraph 398. I am not  satisfied  that  the  judge  as  expressly
         turned his mind to the application of the test of 'very exceptional
         circumstances'; one brief reference is, in my opinion, not  enough.
         I do not consider that it  is  appropriate  to  'read  between  the
         lines' of the judge's decision in the manner Mr Noor  proposes.  In
         consequence, I find that the judge has fallen into error.

         9.   I set aside the decision. I remake the decision in respect  of
         asylum and humanitarian protection, dismissing the appeal on  those
         grounds for the same reasons given by  the  judge,  preserving  his
         findings of fact in respect of  those  grounds.  I  find  that  the
         Secretary of State's challenge to the judge's credibility  findings
         generally fails. The judge's findings of  fact  in  the  appeal  on
         Article 8 ECHR shall stand, including his findings  in  respect  of
         the nature of  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
         children and the extent to which he acts as carer for  them  as  at
         the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing. There will be  resumed
         hearing before me in the Upper Tribunal at Bradford on a date to be
         fixed at or following which I shall remake the decision on  Article
         8 ECHR grounds. Both parties may adduce further  evidence  provided
         copies of any documentary evidence are sent to the other party  and
         filed at the Upper Tribunal no later than 10 days prior to the date
         fixed for the resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         10.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The
         Upper  Tribunal  (Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lane)  shall  remake  the
         decision at or following resumed hearing at Bradford on  the  first
         available date (2 hours allowed). Directions as to fresh  evidence,
         preservation of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal are set out
         at paragraph [8] above."

 2. The only issue remaining to  be  determined  is  that  in  relation  to
    Article 8 ECHR. The standard of proof is the balance of  probabilities.
    At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 2 May  2019,  I  heard  from  the
    appellant who gave his evidence in Vietnamese with the assistance of an
    interpreter. The appellant's two daughters, H1 who was born in 2015 and
    H2 who was born in 2016, continue to live with  the  appellant  who  is
    their sole carer. The children are the subject of a Child  Arrangements
    Order dated 3 March 2016 made in the Family Court at Chesterfield which
    provides, by consent, that they shall reside with  the  appellant.  The
    appellant told me that H1 continues to  have  speech  problems  and  is
    receiving therapy. He confirmed that children see  their  mother  on  a
    regular basis. She does not come to the appellant's home but  he  takes
    the children to where the  mother  works  so  that  they  may  see  her
    briefly. The appellant said that a friend also occasionally  helps  him
    with the children by collecting one from nursery at times when  he  has
    to provide a meal for the other child. The nurseries  attended  by  the
    children are about a mile apart.

 3. As identified in the error  of  law  decision,  this  case  turns  upon
    whether there exist 'very exceptional circumstances' as provided for in
    paragraph 399D of HC 395 (as amended):

         '399D. Where a foreign criminal has been deported  and  enters  the
         United Kingdom in breach of a deportation order enforcement of  the
         deportation order is in the public interest and will be implemented
         unless there are very exceptional circumstances.'

 4. There is no dispute that the appellant is in breach of the  deportation
    order. He submits that the likely effect of his  deportation  upon  his
    daughters H1 and H2 amounts  to  very  exceptional  circumstances.  Mrs
    Pettersen, who appeared for the Secretary of State, submitted that  the
    role, or lack of role, performed by the mother of the children in their
    lives was significant. She submitted  that  many  of  the  observations
    contained in Ms Redfern's report rested  on  the  assumption  that  the
    mother was 'unable' as opposed to unwilling to take on the care of  the
    children in the absence of the appellant. She argued that, in  reality,
    the mother would step in to assume day-to-day care for the children  if
    the appellant were deported,  thereby  mitigating  the  effect  of  the
    deportation upon them.

 5. Mr Levine,  who  appeared  for  the  appellant,  sought  rely  upon  Ms
    Redfern's report and in particular her conclusion  that  it  is  'clear
    that if the appellant is removed from the UK and thus removed from  the
    family unit, H1 and H2 would be at risk of significant emotional harm.'



 6. Judge Cruthers observed in the First-tier Tribunal [58], the  force  of
    that assessment may be  blunted  by  the  expert's  reliance  upon  the
    assertion made by the mother of the children that she is unable to look
    after them. However, there is a danger here in placing too much  weight
    on an assumption that the mother, by taking on responsibility  for  the
    children's material needs, will also  inevitably  provide  an  adequate
    substitute for the emotional bond which the children have enjoyed  with
    their father. The children would, after all, be moving from the care of
    a parent who has been able to devote all his time and energies to their
    welfare to parent who has made clear throughout  her  unwillingness  to
    care for the children. It is important to bear in mind that  these  two
    children have been living with the appellant in the case of H1 for  the
    majority of her life and in the case of H2 since she was born. Whilst I
    have little doubt that the mother would be  capable  of  providing  the
    material needs of these children, I consider it likely that the  expert
    was commenting primarily upon the emotional  and  psychological  impact
    which separation from the appellant would have  on  the  children.  The
    position is further complicated by the close relationship which the two
    sisters have with each other which they have always enjoyed  whilst  in
    the day-to-day care of the appellant. It is, of course, very  important
    that that relationship should  develop  and  thrive.  The  'significant
    emotional harm' predicted by the expert as a consequence of  separation
    from the father may impact upon that  relationship  although  I  accept
    that the sisters may, even at their very young age, be  able  to  offer
    each other emotional support.

 7. I have not found as an easy case to determine.  Given  the  unequivocal
    statement of the public interest in paragraph  399D  in  enforcing  the
    removal of those who are in breach of deportation orders, I have  borne
    in mind throughout the severity of the test which the  appellant  needs
    to surmount.  The children will be separated from their father if he is
    deported; the Secretary of State does not  suggest  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for the children to  travel  with  him  to  Vietnam.  It  is
    possible that, at their very young age, the children will adapt quickly
    to a new caring environment whether that be the home of their mother or
    elsewhere. I do not accept that the mother is actually unable  to  care
    for the children though I acknowledge that she has moved on  to  a  new
    relationship and may well be unwilling to do so. I also do  not  accept
    the argument that the expert has given too much weight to the  mother's
    categorical refusal to take on the care of the children. Her  reference
    to 'emotional harm' seeks to identify something which goes  beyond  the
    children's material needs. Moreover,  this  is  a  case  in  which  the
    assistance provided  by  the  expert  is  significant  given  that  the
    children are not old enough to  express  their  own  views  as  regards
    future separation from their father. Only the expert is able to provide
    an objective and independent assessment of the likely  future  harm  to
    the children. Ultimately, I  have  decided  that  the  balance  of  the
    assessment tips in  favour  of  the  appellant.  This  is  because  the
    appellant  has  been  the  sole  carer  of  these  two  young  children
    throughout their lives. I find that the bond  which  will  have  formed
    between the children and the appellant is likely to be  so  significant
    that the emotional harm and psychological disruption which  they  would
    suffer by being separated from him may properly be  described  as  very
    exceptional. In reaching that finding, my focus has been upon  breaking
    of the relationship between the father and the children  and  not  upon
    concerns regarding the children's material well-being in the future;  I
    find that, despite her protestations, the mother of the children would,
    should be necessary, look after the children. However, I conclude  that
    this is a rare case in  which  the  very  significant  public  interest
    concerned with the appellant's removal is outweighed.

 8. In the circumstances and for the reasons which I have  given  above,  I
    find that the appeal should be allowed on human rights grounds.



Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).


Signed                              Date 2 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

