
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06990/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 November 2018                   |On 30 November 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    I [T]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms I Davies, Senior Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms H. E. Adeyumo of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department and the
    respondent is a citizen of the Ukraine.  However,  for  convenience,  I
    refer below to Mr [T] as the appellant and to the Secretary of State as
    the respondent, which are the designations they had before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Coutts promulgated on
    26 July 2018, allowing the appellant's appeal  pursuant  to  Article  3
    human rights of the European Convention on human rights. The respondent
    had  refused  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum   and   humanitarian
    protection in the United Kingdom.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin in granting permission in a  decision
    dated 23 August 2018 stated that it is arguable that  the  Judge  erred
    when reaching a perverse or irrational conclusion that was contrary  to
    the evidence.

    The First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge gave the following reasons for  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 3 of the European Convention  on
    Human Rights. The Judge in the decision set out the background  of  the
    appeal which is that the appellant fled Ukraine in March 2015 and after
    travelling through several  safe  European  countries  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom illegally in  April  2015.  The  Judge  found  that  the
    appellant not credible in respect  of  this  claim  under  the  refugee
    Convention or for humanitarian  protection.  It  was  accepted  by  the
    respondent that the appellant had served as a junior  sergeant  in  the
    Ukrainian army. The Judge stated that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  a
    person's refusal to participate in military service would be an act  of
    political opposition.

 5. In respect of Article 3 the Judge stated that the  appellant  does  not
    dispute that he was  found  in  possession,  when  encountered  by  the
    respondent's officers, with a false Lithuanian identity card.  However,
    the Judge accepted the appellant's explanation that he was fleeing from
    potential ill-treatment in Ukraine and therefore it  is  plausible  the
    appellant would engage an agent and use this false document as a  means
    of entry.

 6. The Judge found that the respondent's assertion that the appellant  and
    his wife, agreed to voluntarily return to Ukraine on 11 April 2018 with
    the flight being arranged for them to leave from Gatwick airport  shows
    that there were not at risk. The Judge stated that he  attaches  little
    weight to the screenshot from the respondent system as being indicative
    of the appellant having no fear of the authorities upon their return to
    Ukraine but found the appellant's explanation plausible namely that  he
    had been encountered by the respondent's officers who had told him that
    he had no choice but he still did not want to return and  when  he  was
    able to pursue his legal options he told the respondent  that  she  was
    not returning.

 7. The Judge accepted that the appellant received  the  summons  from  the
    military at friend Victor's house because Victor managed to change  the
    appellant's  registration  to  his  home.  The  Judge  found  that  the
    appellant paid his friend Victor $50 and his identity  card  to  change
    the appellant's registration address by  unofficial  means.  The  Judge
    found It was possible to make a change of registration in this  way  at
    that time and it was commonly used by people. The Judge  accepted  this
    evidence.

 8. The Judge stated that respondent has rejected the documents provided by
    the appellant, but the respondent had the opportunity  to  verify  them
    with the Ukrainian authorities, particularly the court  Judgement,  and
    has chosen not to do so. It is plausible  that  the  appellant,  as  he
    claims, brought his documents with him when he fled from  Ukraine.  The
    Judge found that there was no reason to doubt their authenticity.

 9. The court Judgement dated 9 March 2015 states that  the  appellant  has
    been sentenced to 2 years imprisonment for his failure to mobilise  for
    the Ukrainian army when called upon to do  so.  In  VB  another  (draft
    evaders in prison conditions) Ukraine CG [2017] UKUT  00079  (IAC)  the
    Upper Tribunal held that there is a real risk of anyone being  returned
    to Ukraine as a convicted criminal having been sentenced to a  term  of
    imprisonment of being detained on arrival. Moreover, there  is  a  real
    risk that the conditions of detention and imprisonment in Ukraine would
    subject a person returned to be detained or imprisoned to be  a  breach
    of Article 3 of the human rights Convention.

10. The Judge found that article  3  of  the  human  rights  Convention  is
    engaged and allowed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

    Grounds of appeal

11. The respondent's grounds of appeal which I summarise are the following.
    The  Judge  did  not  find  the  appellant's  claim  for   asylum   and
    humanitarian protection credible. The Judge however accepted  that  the
    appellant will be detained upon his arrival in Ukraine because  he  has
    been summoned by the army. The Judge has made an  incorrect  assessment
    in his findings. The Judge  has  based  his  findings  of  the  Court's
    Judgement dated 9 March 2015. The appellant  provided  photocopies  are
    not originals and  the  onus  is  upon  the  appellant  to  corroborate
    evidence for his claim which he has not done.

12. The appellant and his wife discussed voluntary  return  to  Ukraine  in
    detail and agreed to return.  This  is  a  clear  indication  that  the
    appellant and his wife did not have any genuine fear  of  returning  to
    the Ukraine at this point. The appellant  left  Ukraine  and  travelled
    through Europe and then illegally entered the United Kingdom on 9 March
    2015. It took the appellant three years to  make  his  claim  but  only
    after he was  accosted  by  immigration  authorities.  His  account  is
    therefore hampered by this fact. The Judge has made a material error of
    law in allowing the appellant's appeal.

    The hearing

13. At the hearing both parties make submissions whether there is an  error
    of law.

    Findings as to whether there is an error of law

14. There was no dispute that the  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally in 2015 and did not makers protection claim until three years
    later and after he was apprehended by immigration authorities.

15. The Judge made material errors of law in his findings of fact and  law.
    The Judge reversed the burden of proof and said that  it  was  for  the
    respondent to verify the documents provided by the  appellant  to  show
    that he has been convicted and sentenced to 2  years  imprisonment  for
    his failure to mobilise for the Ukrainian army when called upon  to  do
    so.

16.  Given that the Judge primarily  relied  on  these  documents  for  his
    decision that the appellant cannot be returned to  Ukraine  because  he
    will be detained at the airport and which will  be  in  breach  of  his
    Article 3 rights.

17. The Judge found that the appellant was not credible in respect  of  his
    claim for asylum and humanitarian protection which he dismissed. It  is
    difficult  to  understand  therefore  why  the  Judge  would  find  the
    appellant's evidence credible in respect of the documents and his claim
    that he has been sentenced to 2 years imprisonment. The  documents  are
    not original documents but copies and therefore it was incumbent on the
    Judge to take that into account. Failure to do so meant that the  Judge
    fell into material error.

18. I find that there is a material error of law in the  decision  for  the
    reasons set out above. Consequential to my  finding  that  there  is  a
    material error of law, I set aside the decision  of  Judge  Coutts  and
    remit the appeal to the first-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  de  novo.  I
    direct that the appeal be placed before any First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    other than Judge Coutts.




    Decision




19. The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed and the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside.  I remit the decision to the
    first-tier Tribunal.


Signed by

       Dated this 26th day of November 2018
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Judge
Ms S Chana






