
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06881/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 16 April 2021                 |On 29 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                    O I D
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. C. Holmes, legal representative on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant, a citizen of Jordan, appeals with permission against
         the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who   dismissed   his
         protection and human rights appeal in a decision promulgated on the
         21 July 2019.


      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him and his  family  members.
         This direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.
          Failure to comply with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of
         court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 16 April 2021,  by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face-to-face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via
         video as did the appellant  who  was  able  to  see  and  hear  the
         proceedings conducted. There were no issues regarding sound, and no
         substantial technical problems were encountered during the  hearing
         and  I  am  satisfied  both  advocates  were  able  to  make  their
         respective cases by the chosen means.

      4. The immigration history of the appellant is set out in the decision
         of the FtTJ. The appellant is a citizen of Jordan  who  arrived  in
         the United Kingdom as a visitor in 2018, accompanied  by  his  wife
         and daughter and made a claim for asylum on 20 December 2019.

      5. The respondent refused his claim in a decision letter dated 5  July
         2019.

      6. The basis of his claim is that he became very  close  to  a  friend
         when  growing  up  in  Jordan  and  that  they  began  a   same-sex
         relationship which continued until they  reached  University.  They
         were in a relationship for a significant period of  time  and  this
         was a relationship that no one else knew of. However the  appellant
         married and ended that sexual relationship after his marriage.

      7. The appellant asserted that his bisexuality  became  known  to  his
         wife's family as a result of the  appellant  having  met  with  his
         former friend and that as a result he had been subjected to threats
         of harm. The appellant did  not  accept  that  the  authorities  in
         Jordan would protect him from his brother-in-law.

      8. An additional basis of his claim was that he believed his  daughter
         would be at risk of FGM.

      9. The appellant appealed that decision to the FtT on  the  28  August
         2019. The FtTJ heard oral evidence from the appellant.

     10. In a decision promulgated on 26 September 2019 the  FtTJ  dismissed
         his appeal. The FtTJ set out  her  analysis  of  the  evidence  and
         factual findings at paragraphs [40-56]. Whilst the  judge  accepted
         the appellant's nationality and also accepted  that  the  appellant
         had engaged in a same-sex relationship (see [45]),  the  judge  did
         not accept any further part of the appellant's account  as  to  how
         his meeting with  T came to the attention of his wife and therefore
         other family members  (at [41 ])  nor  did  the  judge  accept  his
         evidence as to he was encountered in the hotel room  with  the  man
         concerned (T). Further findings  were  made  that  the  appellant's
         brother-in-law did not have the rank or  influence  to  target  the
         appellant upon return or in a  place  of  internal  relocation  (at
         paragraph [48 - 49]).

     11. The judge found that he had reconciled with his wife  and  that  he
         would not have any future same-sex relationships (at [47)) and  did
         not accept that the appellant had given a truthful account of being
         at risk of an honour crime carried out  by  his  brother-in-law  or
         that he would have the influence throughout Jordan.  At  paragraphs
         [54 - 55] the judge rejected the appellant's claim concerning FGM.

     12. In conclusion the judge found that the appellant was not at risk of
         serious harm or persecution on return (at [55]). The FtTJ therefore
         dismissed his appeal.

     13. Permission to appeal was  sought  based  on  the  failure  to  take
         account of material evidence when reaching the credibility findings
         at [41] and allied to this, ground three that there was  procedural
         unfairness relating to the transcription of the interview. A  third
         ground (ground 2) related to the assessment of internal relocation.

     14. Permission was refused by  FtTJ Grant but on renewal was granted by
         UTJ Grubb  on 7 February 2020.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     15. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the 16 November 2020, inter alia, indicating that  it
         was provisionally of the view that the error of law issue could  be
         determined without a face-to-face hearing and that this could  take
         place via Skype. Both parties have indicated that they were content
         for the hearing to proceed by this method. Therefore, the  Tribunal
         listed the hearing to enable oral submissions to be given  by  each
         of the parties.

     16. Mr Holmes on behalf  of  the  appellant  relied  upon  the  written
         grounds of appeal. There were also further written submissions.

     17. There was  no  substantive  Rule  24  response  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent save for a short submission provided at an early part of
         these proceedings.

     18. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions. I intend  to
         consider their respective submissions when addressing  the  grounds
         of challenge advanced on behalf of the appellant.




    Decision on error of law:

     19. There are 3 grounds advanced on behalf of  the  appellant.  Dealing
         with grounds one and three taken together,  the  following  matters
         are relied upon.  Firstly  the  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to
         material evidence and "proceeding under an  inadvertent  procedural
         unfairness" (I refer to the skeleton argument).

     20. The material evidence that forms the focus of Mr Holmes' submission
         on ground  one  relates  to  the  judge's  assessment  of  how  the
         appellant's  wife  became  aware  that  he  was   engaged   in   an
         extramarital encounter thereby highlighting his bisexuality. It  is
         the appellant's case that he came to the attention of his wife when
         she realised  having  seen  a  receipt  from  the  shop  where  the
         appellant had purchase condoms.

     21. The FtTJ considered the evidence at [41] of her decision:-

         "41. A further inconsistency was stated to  be  the  issue  of  the
         receipt for a condom - again the  use  of  the  word  inconsistency
         appears to be misapplied as the respondent refers to the fact  that
         it is not believed that the appellant would be  so  careless  about
         the receipt. The appellant did state question 98 of his substantive
         interview that he put the receipt inside the bag.  He  changed  his
         evidence in a letter sent by his representative straight after  the
         interview in which it was stated that the receipt was placed inside
         the bag and he did not see there is a receipt or see the shopkeeper
         place it in the bag. The appellant views this  as  an  interpreting
         error. I note that the appellant did attempt to rectify  this  area
         at the earliest opportunity available  to  him  and  prior  to  the
         reasons for refusal being issued. It is however quite  a  different
         version of the information given at the interview."

     22. However whilst the FtTJ referred to question 98, the FtTJ  did  not
         refer to or take account of  the  later  answers  recorded  in  the
         interview questions 100 and 101. At question 100, the  reply  given
         by the appellant  was  referring  to  the  shopkeeper  putting  the
         receipt in the bag and at question 101,  the  appellant's  response
         was consistent with the account given by the judge.

     23. Thus it is submitted that before reaching the conclusion  that  the
         appellant's evidence was inconsistent, the judge should have  taken
         into account not only the  corrections  made  after  the  interview
         which she referred to at paragraph  [41]  but  the  contemporaneous
         questions and answers in the  subsequent  interview  questions.  Mr
         Holmes therefore submits that taken together; the  judge  erred  in
         not considering the entire responses before reaching a view of  the
         appellant's credibility.

     24. Therefore looking at paragraph 41, where the judge makes a  finding
         of discrepant evidence  and  thereby  undermining  the  appellant's
         credibility of his account was unfair to the appellant in the sense
         that the judge  held  evidence  against  the  appellant  which  was
         unfair.

     25. In my judgement ground 1 is made out. As set out above,  whilst  it
         is clear that the judge took into account that  the  appellant  had
         sought to challenge the interview record in a letter  sent  by  his
         representatives (see page 17 of the bundle) which  was  seven  days
         after the interview, it was also necessary to take into account the
         later answers to questions in the interview which  were  consistent
         with his account.

     26. Even if it could be said that question 98  and  the  version  given
         there was a different version from that given at answer 101, ground
         3 which deals with this issue  demonstrates  that  the  appellant's
         explanation  for  the  discrepancy  as  being  as   a   result   of
         "interpreter error"  is correct.

     27. In my view ground one has been superseded  by  ground  three  where
         post hearing evidence has now been provided to the  tribunal  which
         on its face demonstrates that  the  interview  record  was  wrongly
         transcribed. If that evidence is correct it is of no relevance that
         the judge failed to consider the question 98 in the context of  the
         later two questions because if the interview record  was  incorrect
         the finding made was not  a  valid  finding  or  one  that  was  in
         accordance with the evidence.

     28. I therefore turn my consideration to ground  three.  Following  the
         hearing of the original refusal of permission further evidence  was
         sought by way of an independent transcript of the asylum interview.
         The appellant's solicitors obtained the audio recording and it  was
         placed before Mr Hassan. In  his  statement  he  sets  out  how  he
         conducted the process of  producing  the  transcript  and  that  he
         listened to the Home  Office  questions,  the  translation  by  the
         interpreter and the answers from the client. He recorded each  part
         in the transcript to ensure consistency as to  what  was  said.  He
         stated that "he interpreted every word  from  the  audio  which  he
         stated, "formed  a  clear  and  true  picture  of  the  information
         provided by the interview." Annexed to the written statement  is  a
         translation of what Mr Hassan had heard from the audio tape.

     29. In terms of evidence I enquired as to whether this  was  an  agreed
         transcript. There then followed some discussion as to  whether  the
         documents had been seen by the respondent. Mr Diwnycz on behalf  of
         the respondent did not have any  of  the  documents  following  the
         grant of permission. Those had been provided to him by Mr Holmes at
         the outset of the case.  He  had  the  opportunity  to  read  those
         documents and prepare them. After some  further  investigations  Mr
         Holmes was  able  to  inform  the  tribunal  that  a  copy  of  the
         transcript of the documents were served on the Home  Office  on  18
         May 2020 and the email by which it was  served.  Mr  Diwnycz  later
         accepted that the email had been  sent  but  it  appeared  to  have
         remained in the inbox unread and un-actioned.

     30. Having heard the explanation I am satisfied that the documents  had
         been properly served on the  respondent.  No  explanation  is  been
         provided as to why the documents are not accessed and  the  hearing
         has been listed for hearing since 16 March 2021. No application was
         made for an adjournment in any event.

     31. As to its evidential value, no points have been taken by Mr Diwnycz
         as to the contents of the witness statement and the translation.  I
         further  take  into  account  that  the  document  sets   out   the
         qualifications of the interpreter, holding  a  level  II  community
         interpreter qualification and be qualified to interpret  in  Arabic
         and  Kurdish.  Whilst  his  primary  and  secondary  education  was
         undertaken in Iraq and in Arabic, he is  fluent  in  understanding,
         reading, and writing Arabic.

     32. Mr Diwnycz, in  his  submissions  accepted  the  contents  of  that
         statement. Furthermore, his submission to the tribunal was that the
         fairness point that had been raised in behalf of the appellant  was
         one with merit and that  he  would  be  "highly  surprised  if  the
         decision reached by this tribunal was not to remit the appeal as  a
         result of that unfairness".

     33. I therefore proceed on the basis that I have no reason  to  believe
         that the evidence provided is in error or  unworthy  of  weight.  I
         therefore treat the translation as an accurate translation  of  the
         questions and answers given which form the basis of the  procedural
         unfairness argument.

     34. The copy sent to the tribunal was unclear as to what  each  section
         referred to. However, Mr  Holmes  helpfully  took  me  through  the
         document.  The  translation  begins  with  question  98   and   the
         interviewer's question,  followed  by  the  Arabic  spoken  by  the
         appellant (as indicated by the written Arabic script). Then follows
         the  record  by  Mr  Hasan  interpreting  what  the   Home   Office
         interpreter had said and then  records  the  appellant's  response.
         Underneath this is the translation that Mr Hassan has translated it
         which is relied upon to demonstrate the interpretation error.

     35. The translation by Mr Hasan reads "my wife, when I bought the stuff
         in the suite, I bought condom, I put it in my pocket but  I  forgot
         the bill receipt inside the bag." In the statement made by Mr Hasan
         he makes reference to the  problems  and  interpretation  which  he
         describes as "one crucial point about  the  interpretation  of  the
         Home  Office   interpreter".   He   identifies   as   follows   "as
         interpreters,  we  are   strictly   expected   use   first   person
         interpreting, because it is  very  confusing  for  all  parties  if
         second person interpreting is used. For example, if I say "he  said
         I will write to you" you cannot tell if he is going to write or  he
         meant that I will write on behalf of him to you. Therefore, it is a
         must for interpreters to use first person only to  avoid  confusing
         people. This problem was evident in his case, as the interpreter in
         the interview said "he said he put the receipt in the bag" which is
         unclear whether it means (the male  client  says,  the  other  male
         person put the receipt in the bag) or (the male client says that he
         himself at the receipt in the back).

     36. Looking at the translation, I accept  the  submission  made  by  Mr
         Holmes that the record as  set out in the interview at question  98
         is inaccurate and that the account given by the  appellant  in  the
         interview at question 98 is set out in  those  terms  had  it  been
         properly interpreted.  Furthermore,  it  supports  the  appellant's
         account that  there  was  an  interpretation  error  which  was  an
         explanation which was discounted by the judge who went on  to  find
         that the appellant had not given a  consistent  account  concerning
         the factual basis of his claim.

     37. Consequently, I accept that it was a mistake of fact.  As  set  out
         earlier, Mr Diwnycz in behalf of the respondent also accepted  that
         this was a mistake of fact which undermines  the  fairness  of  the
         proceedings.

     38. The existence of such a mistake of fact give rise to  a  procedural
         irregularity which leads to unfairness for the  appellant.  As  set
         out in the decision of MM (unfairness: E &  R)  Sudan  [2014]  UKUT
         00105, a successful appeal is not dependent on the demonstration of
         some failing on the part of the FtT. Therefore, an error of law may
         be found to have occurred  in  circumstances  where  some  material
         evidence, through no fault of the  FtT,  is  not  considered,  with
         resulting unfairness (E&R V SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49).

     39. As Mr Holmes sets out, it was not the fault of the FtTJ who did not
         have the advantage of the evidence of Mr Hassan.  However,  as  the
         decision in MM (as cited) sets out, in appeals  where  mistakes  of
         fact have occurred in such a way, the criterion to  be  applied  is
         not of reasonableness but the criterion to be applied on review  or
         appeal is fairness (at [22]).

     40. Whilst it is not necessary for the appellant to show fault  on  the
         part of any party to the proceedings, I have had  to  consider  the
         materiality of the procedural unfairness. The decision  in  MM  (as
         cited) helpfully  refers  to  the  authorities  in  this  area.  In
         particular, I take into account that  the  reviewing  or  appellate
         court should exercise caution in concluding that the outcome  would
         have been the same if  the  diagnosed  procedural  irregularity  or
         impropriety had not occurred.

     41. In this context, I note that there were  other  credibility  issues
         properly raised by the FtTJ in her decision. However, in exercising
         caution as I must, when findings of facts are made on a basis which
         then turn out to be erroneous, I cannot  discount  the  possibility
         that the other credibility findings made have not been  tainted  by
         the erroneous finding. That will not always be the  case  in  every
         appeal and each appeal must be considered on its facts. However, in
         the light of  the  submissions  made  by  Mr  Diwnycz  who  was  in
         agreement with the submissions of Mr Holmes as to  the  materiality
         of the error, on the facts of  this  particular  case,  I  exercise
         caution and note that decisions  on  protection  claims  should  be
         considered with anxious scrutiny. I am therefore satisfied that the
         procedural  unfairness  resulting  from   the   mistake   of   fact
         demonstrates the decision should be set aside.

     42. On that basis it is not necessary for  me  to  consider  ground  to
         which relates to internal relocation, which will be  relevant  when
         the decision is remade.

     43. I have therefore considered whether it  should  be  remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for  a  further  hearing.  In
         reaching that decision I have given careful  consideration  to  the
         Joint Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
         Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

          "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied
         that:-
         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier
         Tribunal; or
         (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

     44. In the light of the error of law being that of procedural
         irregularity, it falls within subparagraph (a) above therefore in
         my judgement the best course and consistent with the overriding
         objective is for it to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a
         hearing. I do not preserve any factual findings. However, the
         appellant's evidence is recorded in the decision still remains as a
         record of what had been said by the parties.

     45. For those reasons, it has been demonstrated that  the  decision  of
         the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on a point of  law  and
         that the decision should be set aside and remitted to the FtT.


Notice of Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall be  set  aside
and remitted to the FtT.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him and his  family  members.   This  direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

Dated   21 April 2021
