
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06932/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 8th March 2019 On 7th May 2019



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   Ms C O
                                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                             Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Burrett, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    and Co, Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant has permission to appeal the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge PJS White who dismissed her appeal against the
      respondent's decision to refuse her protection.

   2. Permission was on the basis it was arguable the judges' comments on
      scaring  went beyond that open to the judge; the failed to have regard
      to the appellant's vulnerability and placed undue weight on
      plausibility factors.

The claim.

   3. The appellant is a national of Nigeria who claimed to be bisexual. She
      said her sister was aware of this. She was married in 2010 and has 2
      children. She claimed that her husband and 2 others beat her and cut
      her with knives and scissors after she was discovered with another
      woman. She was raped by the men. She was detained by the village
      community.

   4. Her sister arranged her release and she travelled to the United
      Kingdom in October 2014 on a visit Visa obtained by an agent. The
      agent then made her engage in prostitution and she remained under his
      control over 6 months before she managed to flee. She fell pregnant
      and gave birth to her son in December 2016.She made her claim for
      protection, two years after her arrival. The respondent raised section
      8 of the 2004 Act. A referral had been made to the Competent Authority
      who concluded she was not a victim of trafficking.

   5. The judge had been provided with photographs said to show her injuries
      after the attack as well as a medical report.

   6. The judge referred to evidence from a support worker with a charity
      suggesting the appellant was vulnerable. The judge was also provided
      with the psychiatric report in which post-traumatic stress disorder
      was diagnosed. The report also referred to scarring. At paragraph 34
      the judge commented:

          'it seems to me that this is a low number of scars to have
         resulted from a severe assault by several people and involving
         scissors and knives, as described'.

   7. The judge did not find the appellant to be credible and rejected her
      central claim. She had not established she was bisexual or the victim
      of domestic violence as claimed nor that she was attacked. The judge
      also rejected the claim that she had been trafficked and forced into
      prostitution.

The Upper Tribunal

   8. Permission to appeal was sought on 3 grounds. It was contended that
      the judge erred in commenting on the scarring as he had no expertise
      in this nor did he have a specialised report on the scarring. The 2nd
      ground was that the judge, in assessing credibility, failed to factor
      in her vulnerability. A psychiatric report submitted on her behalf she
      was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder and a mild
      depressive disorder. The psychiatrist referred to poor concentration
      and difficulty with recollection. Finally, it was suggested the judge
      erred in finding the account to be implausible. The judge had
      commented about the appellant's claim of trafficking and her
      subsequent escape as being implausible. That she was able to take
      photographs on her mobile phone of her injuries and send them to her
      sister, her sister not calling the police if the claim were true or
      that the village leaders did not assemble immediately were
      highlighted. Permission to appeal was granted on the grounds advanced.

   9. The respondent provided a rule 24 response dated 19 February 2019. It
      was submitted that the judge directed himself appropriately and was
      entitled to take into account the number of scars identified and their
      location . It was contended the judge in doing so did not go beyond
      his remit. Regarding the 2nd round, there had been no request by the
      appellant's representative for her to be treated as a vulnerable
      witness and the medical report had considered her to be a reliable
      historian. With regard to the final ground, the judge had considered
      all of the evidence in the round and the inconsistencies in the
      evidence and reached findings open to him.

  10. For the Upper Tribunal hearing the appellant's representative applied
      to introduce new evidence further to rule 15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal
      rules. The evidence was to support the claim of vulnerability. It
      consisted of a letter from a therapist with the Refugee Council,
      indicating the appellant had 12 sessions of therapy between February
      and August 2017. There was also a letter from the appellant's
      designated social worker assigned on 21 January 2019.This followed the
      appellant's child being made the subject to a Protection Order and
      taken into care. He had been left unattended whilst the appellant went
      to a nightclub. There is also a letter from a GP referring to the
      medication she is on and that her mood became significantly worse
      after she received the adverse decision.

  11. Ms Isherwood said the appellant's representatives had not provided an
      explanation why this evidence had not been produced to the First-tier
      Tribunal. She pointed out that the social worker was recently engaged:
      the same applied in respect of the GP letter.

  12. Mr Burrett, who appeared in the First-tier Tribunal, accepted no
      indication application had been made to have the appellant treated as
      a vulnerable witness. He adopted the grounds upon which permission had
      been granted. He suggested that the judge had picked aspects of the
      claim when assessing its truth and in the circumstance this was
      unreliable. He likened it to a scattergun approach with some aspects,
      such as the delay in making a claim being ceased at the expense of the
      claim in the round.

  13. Ms Isherwood went through the decision and referred me to aspects
      which she said indicated the judge had looked at multiple factors
      indicating the claim was not credible. On the scarring point she
      referred to what the appellant had claimed as well as her sister's
      comments. She referred to the details of the Visa applications which
      undermined the appellant's claim. She suggested that the appellant's
      representative was seeking to reargue the case rather than show an
      error of law.


Conclusions.

  14. The underlying truth of the appellant's claim was not accepted by the
      respondent. There were a number of significant credibility points
      raised in the refusal letter and arising from the evidence before the
      judge. The judge correctly stated the burden of proof and pointed out
      that it was for the appellant to establish her claim. A lengthy appeal
      bundle was presented on behalf of the appellant.

  15. The judge accurately set out the appellant's claim at paragraph 6
      onwards. The judge also sets out the points taken by the respondent in
      the refusal letter. At paragraph 7 the judge details how she said she
      was cut with knives and scissors.

  16. In her statement of 27 March 2017 she said she was raped by her
      husband and his 2 friends and she sustained a lot of scarring. She
      said they use knives and scissors to cut her. She also provided a
      supplementary witness statement dated 7 September 2018. She refers to
      how she received 'jungle justice.' She said she married on 15 March
      2008 and had 2 children 1st being born on 24 May 2008 and the 2nd on
      18 April 2010. It was an unhappy marriage with her husband being
      violent. Then in 2013 she met another female and they bonded. She then
      talks about being caught by her husband and being beaten severely and
      that knives and scissors were used to cut her.

  17. At hearing the appellant adopted her statements. The judge referred to
      the interviews in the appeal bundles. At paragraph 20 onwards the
      judge set out the reasons behind the decision.

  18. The judge at the start of the decision referred to the fact the
      appellant had visited the United Kingdom on 2 occasions on foot of
      visit visas. The 1st was issued for 6 months on 12 November 2013. The
      appellant accepted she completed the application in which she claimed
      to be single and with no children. Her oral evidence was that she in
      fact was married with 2 children.

  19.  The visit Visa applications are on file and state the appellant was
      supported by her parents who were in good positions, her father
      working with Lufthansa. She was interviewed on 15 July 2014 about her
      second visit Visa application. This was issued for a year on 15 July
      2014, with the application being made on 30 June 2014.It was pointed
      out in a previous application she had said she was coming for 7 days
      but stayed for 2 months. She said she was having a bad time with her
      husband who was beating her. She said her marriage breaking up and
      that she needed time to get away. She said that her father is one of
      the top 5 golfers in Nigeria and had of an aeronautical engineering
      firm. She said that her personal life had settled and her 2 children
      were with their father.

  20. In the First-tier Tribunal the appellant claimed that the 2nd visit
      Visa was made by an agent as she was in hiding. In that application it
      was indicated separated and did not live with her children. The judge
      pointed out this was not consistent with her claim that she had been
      living with her husband until he caught her with another woman. The
      application was supported by her mother's bank statements. Her 2
      brothers had also made application on the same day and were
      interviewed along with the appellant. At hearing the appellant said
      she was unaware her brothers had also made Visa applications or that
      they had been asked for an interview. The judge found this to be
      implausible. The appellant's representative had suggested her brothers
      might have been trying to help her without her knowing it. However,
      the judge pointed out this was not consistent with what she had said
      in interview or her account that her entire family had disowned her.

  21. The judge then pointed out that the appellant had given no real
      account about discovering her sexuality. The judge pointed out her
      inability to remember the full name of her claimed 1st same-sex
      partner.

  22. The judge considered to the incident where the appellant said she was
      caught by her husband. The appellant's account was that despite being
      severely beaten and raped she was able to take a photograph of her
      injuries and send these on her phone to her sister. The judge found
      this difficult to accept. The judge at paragraph 28 refers to the
      claim about her sister's reaction: not to approach the police but to
      arrive 2 days later. The judge then referred to the absence of
      complaint to the police by the appellant.

  23. At paragraph 30 the judge refers to a letter said to be from her
      sister. The letter refers to photograph of scarring. The photographs
      provided showed no evidence of any scar. The judge then referred to
      discrepancies between the timescale of events in the letter said to be
      from her sister and the appellant's account. The judge decided not to
      attach any weight to the letter.

  24. The judge referred to the psychiatric report submitted. The doctor had
      marked scarring on a drawing, referring to 5 scars on her scalp; a
      scar on her left shoulder; her right knee and shin and the back of her
      right hand. None of these corresponded with her account of being cut
      on her lap. I find it perfectly reasonable for the judge to comment
      that the evidence presented did not fit with the severe assault
      described.at paragraph 37 the judge referred to photographs being were
      very indistinct. The judge was not straying into areas of expertise
      such as the likely age of the scarring or its cause.

  25. The judge then referred to the details of the psychiatric report. This
      diagnosed post-traumatic stress disorder and said that she presented
      as a high suicide risk if returned. The doctor had referred to two
      overdoses. The judge commented that these were not referred to in the
      appellant's statements. The judge commented that the psychiatrist was
      reliant upon the information provided by the appellant and that the
      assessment of credibility was a matter for the tribunal. The judge
      made the point that the psychiatrist did not have all the information
      that was available to the tribunal.

  26. Section 8 had been raised by the respondent and the delay in claiming.
      She claimed she last entered the United Kingdom in October 2014.
      However, there was a two-year delay before she claimed asylum. A
      referral to the Competent Authority concluded she was not trafficked.
      Her son was born in the United Kingdom in December 2016.

  27. The judge concluded that having regard to all of the evidence the
      appellant was not a credible witness. The Judge did not accept that
      she was in a sexual relationship with another woman as claimed or that
      she was attacked by her husband or others as she said. The judge also
      rejected her account of being a victim of trafficking and concluded
      that the claim was a fabrication.

  28. Dealing specifically with the points for which permission was granted,
      it I find no error in the judge's comments about scarring. There is
      nothing the decision that suggests the judge was claiming any
      expertise. Rather, the judge was making common sense observations
      about the material presented. The 2nd ground related to the suggestion
      the appellant was vulnerable. There had been no application to the
      tribunal to treat her as such. The psychiatric report suggested she
      was clear in thought content. At page 10 of the report the doctor
      concluded she had mental capacity but has poor concentration.  The
      appellant's representative made no representations during the hearing
      that she was experiencing a difficulties. The final ground related to
      the judges' comments about the plausibility of aspects of the claim. I
      find nothing objectionable in relation to the judge's comments. Rather
      there were numerous credibility issues arising and the plausibility of
      the various accounts was open to question. The judge did not look at
      isolated aspects but clearly looked at the totality of the evidence
      and the numerous weak points.

  29. The decision has been carefully prepared and accurately sets out the
      claim made and the reasons for refusal. The evidence was properly
      appraised and the judge reached conclusion which were open to him. I
      do not find any of the grounds for which permission had been granted
      have resulted in any material error of law being demonstrated. In
      fairness to the appellant I have had regard to the evidence which was
      not before the First-tier Tribunal. I see nothing in that evidence
      which could affect the outcome.

Decision

No material error of law has been established. Consequently, the decision
of First-tier Tribunal Judge White dismissing the appeal shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly             Date: 07/05/2019
