
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/06758/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On Monday 11 November 2020                  |On Monday 16 November 2020     |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     M S
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Dalziel, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT Judge Farrelly dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 8 October 2019.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT on grounds  of  (1)
    failure to adjourn the hearing when his  representative  withdrew;  (2)
    finding credibility to be damaged by non-disclosure at  interview  that
    the appellant used a false nationality  in  Germany;  and  (3)  finding
    credibility to be damaged by  failure  to  claim  in  other  countries,
    without taking account of the appellant's explanation.

 3. On 6 June 2020, FtT Judge Parkes granted  permission,  not  restricting
    the grounds, but observing that while the decision not to  adjourn  was
    not itself an [arguable] error of law, the judge did not appear to have
    given the appellant the opportunity to make submissions, in  particular
    on the credibility issues which were live at the hearing.

 4. I conducted the hearing on 11 November from  George  House,  Edinburgh.
    Representatives attended remotely. No members of the  public  attended,
    either in person or remotely.   The  technology  enabled  an  effective
    hearing.

 5. Mr Dalziel said at the outset that the appellant had  recently  advised
    that when his representative withdrew the judge asked if he  wished  to
    continue; he did not know whether to do so,  but  was  assured  by  the
    judge that he could; and that he acted on that information.  The  judge
    also asked him at the end of the hearing if he  had  anything  to  add.
    (When making his submission, Mr Diwnycz said this was confirmed by  the
    record kept by his colleague in the FtT.)

 6. That honest disclosure is to the credit of the appellant.

 7. Mr Dalziel submitted that notwithstanding  that  disclosure,  ground  1
    showed unfairness of procedure.  The appellant had told  the  judge  he
    did not know whether to proceed, and so  was  obviously  confused,  and
    major credibility matters were  in  issue.    The  appellant  had  been
    prejudiced by being unable to present a better case, and to address the
    credibility points taken against him.   An  experienced  representative
    would have dealt in submissions with the  matters  which  emerged  from
    cross-examination.  The judge had taken the appellant's case  from  the
    skeleton argument before him, but that was not the same as  final  oral
    submissions, based on what  happened  at  the  hearing.   The  skeleton
    argument did not mention the compendious bundles of background evidence
    and of case law which had been before the FtT.  None of the  3  bundles
    included a key passages index.  The provision  of  specific  references
    would have been another aspect of final submissions.

 8. I find that ground 1 discloses no procedural unfairness.

 9. An appellant whose representative withdraws, either at the  hearing  or
    at any other stage, is not automatically entitled to an adjournment.

10.  An  appellant  should  sometimes  be  asked  if  he  would  prefer  an
    adjournment, but each case turns on its own circumstances.

11. It would be an error not to give a party the opportunity to make  final
    submissions.

12. The decision should have explicitly recorded  that  the  appellant  was
    given the chance to ask for an adjournment,  and  the  chance  to  make
    final submissions.  It was those  omissions  from  the  record  in  the
    decision which led to the grant of permission.  Now that  it  is  clear
    from the appellant's recollections and  from  the  respondent's  record
    that those opportunities were given, ground 1 has no force.

13. Mr Dalziel valiantly made the best of what was left of ground 1, but to
    no avail.  He sought to show that the appellant lost the chance to make
    a better case, but that was abstract.  He has had  new  representatives
    for some time, but has not specified anything  which  might  have  been
    argued to the FtT.  It does not appear that he had any better a case to
    make, if there had been an adjournment.

14. Ground 2 is only an assertion that the judge gave too  much  weight  to
    not telling the truth about his claim in Germany.  Ground 3 is only  an
    assertion that the judge gave too much weight to failure to  claim,  or
    to persist in claims, elsewhere.  Those were  matters  for  the  judge,
    within reason; and his weighing of them plainly was within reason.

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

16. The FtT made an anonymity direction.   Parties  did  not  address  that
    matter in the UT.  Anonymity is maintained.

      [pic]

      12 November 2020
      UT Judge Macleman


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




