
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/06718/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2 November 2018                    |On 15 November 2018              |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                  Mrs K M H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Clark (Counsel) instructed by Migrant Legal
                    Project (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. To preserve the anonymity direction made by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I
make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant.




2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Woolley promulgated on 26  June  2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 28 May 1965 and is a national of  Iran.  On  27
June 2017 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Woolley ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  27  July  2018  Judge  Haria
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      2. The grounds assert that the Judge  erred  in  taking  an  incorrect
      approach to:


           a. The evidence of two reverends from the  appellant's  covenant
           Church [46], and
           b. The account of the partner's evidence on the basis that he is
           a Muslim [47], and
           c. To the absence of evidence from the baptismal church a  point
           which was not taken in the respondent's  refusal  letter  and  a
           point on which the appellant was not asked to respond [44],
           d. The evidence of the appellant's conversion, and
           e. The risk faced by Christians [54]


      3. The weight to be given to evidence is a matter for the Judge. It is
      arguable that the Judge may have applied to high a standard  of  proof
      and may have conflated the position of those who were born and  raised
      Christians on the one hand with those who convert from  Islam  on  the
      other. Accordingly, I find that there is an arguable error of law.


      4. All grounds may be argued

The Hearing

5. Both Mr Clark and Mr Diwnycz told me that in light of the decision in  TF
(Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]  CSIH  58,  the
Judge's decision contains a material error of law and should be  set  aside.
They both joined in asking me to remit this case to the First-tier  Tribunal
so that fresh findings of fact can be made.

Analysis

6. The appellant claims to have a well-founded fear of  persecution  because
she says she has converted from Islam  to  Christianity.  Between  [14]  and
[17] the Judge records the evidence  that  he  heard  from  the  appellant's
witnesses. At [46] the Judge says

      I have great respect  for  both  the  Rev  Burnard  and  the  reverend
      Maynard, and have no doubt as to their sincerity as witnesses.

The Judge however goes on to  reject  their  evidence  and  finds  that  the
appellant has not genuinely converted to Christianity.

7. In TF (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] CSIH  58
there is
an extensive discussion of how to  approach  the  fact-finding  exercise  in
cases where the appellant claims to have converted to Christianity.  So  far
as Dorodian was concerned, it was said that  while  it  would  no  doubt  be
desirable that the individual concerned be  vouched  for  by  someone  in  a
position of leadership within the relevant  church,  it  is  more  important
that the evidence be given by someone who has knowledge  of  the  individual
whose  commitment  is  in  question.   What  mattered  was  that  they  have
sufficient knowledge of the practices of the church  of  which  they  are  a
member; sufficient  experience  of  observing  and  interacting  with  those
seeking  to  become  members  of  the  church;  sufficient   knowledge   and
experience of others who have gone through similar processes  of  engagement
in church activities with a view to becoming members of the church; and,  in
cases such as these, sufficient knowledge of the individuals  concerned  and
of the manner in which they have thrown themselves into church activities.

8. In TF (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] CSIH  58
the  court  found  that  church  witnesses  who   were   in   positions   of
responsibility within the church who had observed he appellant's  activities
at  church  and  expressed  their  views  on  the  genuine  nature  of   the
appellant's  conversion  based  on  their  experience  were  giving   expert
evidence.  There was also a detailed  discussion  of  the  effect  of  lies,
referring to MA (Somalia) and stating

      the appellant's case has to be considered in the round,  not  only  on
      the basis of the appellant's own evidence, which may  or  may  not  be
      accepted as credible, but also on the basis of other evidence that may
      be available. It does not follow from  the  fact  that  the  appellant
      himself is disbelieved, even on very large parts of  his  story,  that
      other evidence in support of his case cannot be relied upon. .....

And also

      Any court or tribunal must be very careful not to  dismiss  an  appeal
      just because an appellant has told lies. For reasons we  have  already
      set out, the judge should not jump too readily to the conclusion  that
      because the appellant has  told  lies  about  some  matters  then  his
      credibility on all matters is fatally undermined. [49] .... The  judge
      should not allow his adverse finding  about  the  credibility  of  the
      appellant to sway his assessment of the credibility and  relevance  of
      other independent evidence bearing upon the issue before him. So here,
      where the FTT judges have disbelieved the  appellants'  evidence  that
      they are genuine converts to  Christianity,  their  evidence  to  that
      effect will be put to one side, given no weight. But the rejection  of
      their evidence on this point  does  not  become  evidence  that  their
      conversion is not genuine,  to  be  set  against  other,  independent,
      evidence from  which  the  genuineness  of  their  conversion  can  be
      inferred. That other evidence requires to be assessed on  its  merits,
      without any a priori assumption  derived  from  the  complainer's  own
      false evidence that it is in some way suspect or of little value.

9. The Judge makes  findings  that  the  appellant  has  regularly  attended
Christian worship  and  appears  to  accept  that  the  appellant  has  been
baptised, but the Judge gives no consideration to the principles set out  in
HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
[2010] UKSC 31.

10. The decision places inadequate weight on the clear evidence of  Dorodian
witnesses. That is a material error of law. I set the decision aside.  There
is sufficient material before me to enable me to substitute my own decision

The Facts

11. The appellant is an Iranian national who entered the UK on 29 July  2012
and claimed asylum on the basis of imputed  political  opinion.  Her  asylum
claim was refused on 17 December 2014. She appealed that decision and on  20
May 2015 her appeal was dismissed. Her appeal rights  were  exhausted  on  3
September 2015. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in that case  found  that  the
appellant was not a credible witness.

12. On September 2015 the appellant started attending an  Iranian  Christian
Fellowship. In December 2015 she converted to Christianity.  On  4  February
2016 the appellant submitted a new claim for asylum  on  the  basis  of  her
conversion  to  Christianity.  The  respondent   refused   the   appellant's
protection claim on 27 June 2017. It  is  against  that  decision  that  the
appellant appeals.

13. On 12  June  2016  the  appellant  was  baptised  as  a  Christian.  The
appellant still regularly attends Christian  worship  and  plays  an  active
role in the Christian community of  faith.  Dr  Clive  Burnard  and  Revd  R
Maynard are both pastors in the church the  appellant  goes  to.  They  both
gave evidence in support of the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal  on
26 June 2018. They have both witnessed  the  appellant's  formation  in  the
Christian  faith.  They  have  both  observed  the  appellant  regularly  at
Christian  worship  and  at  Christian  instruction.  They  both  know   the
appellant and they are both  convinced  that  the  appellant  has  genuinely
converted to Christianity.

14. In Iran, converting from Islam is punishable by death for men, and  life
imprisonment for women, in Iran. While those considered  ethnic  Christians,
such as Armenians or Assyrians, are allowed to practise their faith  amongst
themselves, ethnic  Persians  are  defined  as  Muslim,  and  any  Christian
activity  in  the  Farsi  language  is  illegal.  Underground  churches  are
increasingly monitored, which makes some afraid to attend, and at least  108
Christians were arrested in the last year. Interrogation methods  in  prison
can be harsh and sexually abusive.

Asylum

15. Even if I ignore the appellant's evidence, I would  still  have  letters
from the appellant's church. The First-tier Tribunal has already taken  oral
evidence from the appellant's 2 pastors and found them to be impressive  and
sincere  witnesses.   I  have  supporting  evidence  from  the   appellant's
witnesses, who are Christian members of the same  church.   The  appellant's
pastors  speak  in  glowing  terms  of  the  appellant's   conversion,   her
participation  in  religious  education,  her  baptism  after   enquiry   by
ministers of the church.  The  Judge  found  that  one  of  the  appellant's
pastors is aware that cynical asylum seekers might try to exploit a  church,
but  he  is  convinced  that  the  appellant  has  genuinely  converted   to
Christianity, and that  the  appellant  now  lives  a  Christian  life.  The
unshakeable evidence of  both  Dr  Burnard  and  Rev  Maynard  is  that  the
appellant has converted to the Christian faith, and that she  now  sincerely
worships at a Christian church, and has been accepted into the community  of
faith there.

16. In FS and others (Iran- Christian Converts) Iran  CG  2004  UKIAT  00303
the Tribunal made the following findings.

      (i)  At paragraph 153 the  Tribunal  indicated  that  Christians,  who
      were not converts, were at risk of discrimination but not a real  risk
      persecution.  ("The evidence shows that those Christians who  are  not
      converts from Islam and who are members of  ethnic  minority  churches
      are not persecuted,  at  least  as  a  general  rule."   The  Tribunal
      accepted that they suffered societal discrimination but did not accept
      that this amounted to persecution.)

      (ii) At paragraph 186 the Tribunal  acknowledged  the  extent  of  the
      discrimination faced by Christians in Iran generally. ("All Christians
      suffer from significant legal, social and  economical  discrimination.
      All  known  converts  live  in  a  society  where   these   forms   of
      discrimination are reinforced.  The legal regime, in  theory,  can  be
      very harsh; they can be seen as enemies of the  theocratic  state  and
      their lives and well being can be threatened by the apparatus  of  the
      state and the violent  attentions  of  covertly  sanctioned  religious
      zealots.  There is no state protection.  There would  be  a  pervasive
      climate of fear, varying in degree, from time to time,  and  place  to
      place.")

      (iii)  At paragraph 187 the Tribunal found that the  ordinary  convert
      would not be at  a  real  risk  of  persecution.  ("For  the  ordinary
      convert, who is neither a leader, lay or ordained, nor a pastor, nor a
      proselytiser or evangelist, the actual degree of risk  of  persecution
      or treatment breaching Article 3 is  not  sufficient  to  warrant  the
      protection of either Convention.  The reality is  that  a  social  and
      economic life can be maintained; Christianity  can  be  practiced,  if
      necessary, cautiously at times, by church attendance, association with
      Christians and bible study.  There may well be monitoring of  services
      and identity checks.  They would be able to practice, however, as most
      Iranian converts do. It is realistic to expect that they may sometimes
      be questioning, disruption, orders not to  attend  church,  which  may
      require the convert to stay  away  for  a  while.   But  there  is  no
      evidence of a real risk of ill treatment during such questioning or of
      anything more than a short period of detention  at  worst.   There  is
      evidence of random or sporadic violence by the likes  of  the  Basiji,
      but at too infrequent a  level  to  constitute  a  real  risk  to  the
      ordinary convert.  The longer official questioning, detentions and the
      greater risk of charges trumped  up  or  menacingly  vague  or  simply
      threatened are not a real risk for the ordinary convert.")

       (iv)  At  paragraph  189  the  Tribunal  found  that   proselytisers,
      evangelists and church leaders would be at a real risk of  persecution
      with the risk increasing the higher the profile and role.  ("We  would
      regard the more active convert, pastor, church leader, proselytiser or
      evangelist as being at a real risk.  Their  higher  profile  and  role
      would be more likely  to  attract  the  malevolence  of  the  licensed
      zealots and the serious attention of  the  theocratic  state  when  it
      sought, as it will do on occasions, to repress conversions from  Islam
      which it sees as a menace and an affront to the state of God.")

      (v) At paragraph 190 the Tribunal found that an ordinary convert  with
      additional risk  factors  may  be  at  a  real  risk  of  persecution,
      particularly  women.  ("Where  an  ordinary  individual  convert   has
      additional risk factors, they too may be at  a  real  risk.   We  have
      already said that we accept that the conversions would become known to
      the authorities, but that  is  not  of  itself  an  additional  factor
      because it is the very assumption upon which we  are  assessing  risk.
      These risk factors may not relate to religious views at  all.   It  is
      the combination which may  provoke  persecutory  attention  where,  by
      itself, the individual conversion would  have  been  allowed  to  pass
      without  undue  hindrance.    A   woman   faces   additional   serious
      discrimination in Iran, although it falls short of  being  persecutory
      merely on the grounds of gender.  But for a single woman, lacking such
      economical social protection which a husband or other immediate family
      or friends might provide, the difficulties she faces as a convert  are
      significantly compounded.  Her legal status in any prosecution is much
      weaker; the risk of ill treatment in  any  questioning  is  increased.
      This factor tips the overall nature of the treatment and risk  into  a
      real risk of persecution.") By way of further  example,  at  paragraph
      191 the Tribunal noted that FS had a past adverse  political  profile.
      That profile was not one which, of itself, would cause any significant
      difficulties.  However, coupled  with  his  conversion,  the  Tribunal
      concluded that  it  would  lead  the  authorities  to  target  FS  for
      questioning and a higher level of harassment, more akin to that  which
      might be experienced by a proselytiser  or  evangelist,  generating  a
      real risk of persecution or treatment breaching Article 3.

      (vi) At paragraph 192 the Tribunal said that fact finders  would  have
      to decide how a convert was likely to behave if returned -  cautiously
      and in a quiet way  or  otherwise.  ("The  issue  which  primary  fact
      finders will need to consider carefully is the likely way in  which  a
      genuine convert would practice if returned.  It does not follow at all
      that the particular practices adopted in the United Kingdom  would  be
      those followed in Iran." The Tribunal took the view that primary  fact
      finders should decide whether, in practice,  a  convert  would  behave
      cautiously on return or not.  Those who  behave  cautiously  and  went
      about their Christianity in a quiet way  were  unlikely  to  draw  the
      adverse attention of the authorities")

      (vii) At paragraph 161 the Tribunal noted that there were  those  who,
      although not strictly proselytising, would be  impelled  to  share  or
      expound their beliefs with those who had not yet received the  Gospel.
      The  Tribunal  considered  arguments   on   the   difference   between
      proselytisation and "bearing witness in one's daily life" for want  of
      a better expression.  The latter  was  covered  by  the  Adjudicator's
      reference to evangelising.  The  Tribunal  said  "In  any  event,  the
      distinction between proselytising and bearing witness... is one  which
      is likely to be lost on ... any suspicious or  zealous  Muslim.   Both
      would be likely to be perceived by those in authority,  the  religious
      zealots, and those Muslims unaware of the distinction ...as people who
      are trying to persuade the hearer of the  theological  correctness  of
      Christianity and the joy of adhering to it. It is  but  a  short  step
      from proclaiming the advantages and joy it has brought and  suggesting
      that others should likewise benefit.  Neither proselytising or bearing
      witness or evangelising could be regarded as  cautious  approaches  in
      Iran."

17.  Since FS was decided, Apostasy has been criminalised in  Iran.  A  male
apostate can be punished by execution. A female  apostate  could  face  life
imprisonment.  TF (Iran) tells me to place weight on the  evidence  provided
by Dr Burnard and Rev Maynard.  On the facts as I find  them  to  be,  since
2015 the appellant has participated in Christian  worship  in  the  UK.  The
unchallenged evidence is  that  the  appellant  has  been  accepted  into  a
community of  Christian  faith  and  has  been  baptised.  The  unchallenged
evidence  is  that  the  appellant  continues  to  practice  her  faith  and
participates in Christian worship in a Christian church.

18. The Judge had no doubt that Dr Burnard and Rev Maynard told  the  truth.
They have been involved  in  the  appellant's  formation  in  the  Christian
faith, and  enjoy  weekly  contact  with  her  in  church  activities.   The
witnesses are committed Christians who are  in  the  best  position  to  say
whether or not the appellant is a Christian, because they have observed  the
appellant's instruction and growth in that faith,  they  have  observed  the
appellant at worship and can comment on the impact of the  appellant's  new-
found faith on her daily routines of life.  Their  unequivocal  evidence  is
that the appellant is a Christian. I therefore find that the  appellant  was
born a Muslim, and has converted to Christianity.

19.  Conversion from Islam to Christianity is the  basis  of  the  crime  of
apostasy known to the law of Iran.  The  Iranian  penalty  for  apostasy  is
death. Relying on the cases of FS  and  others  (Iran-  Christian  Converts)
Iran CG 2004 UKIAT 00303 & HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31, I find that  the
appellant cannot safely return to Iran.

20. SA (Iran), R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department [2012]  EWHC  2575  (Admin)  was  a  judicial  review  against  a
certification of an asylum claim  by  an  Iranian  Christian  convert  under
S.94(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  his  Honour
Judge Gilbert QC found that current evidence pointed to a greater  risk  for
Iranian Christian converts than is reflected in  the  country  guidance.  He
also  made  the  following  comments  on  the  judicial  assessment  of  the
genuineness of a Christian conversion (at 24):

    It is a dangerous thing for anyone, and perhaps especially a judge,  to
    peer into what some call a man or woman's  soul  to  assess  whether  a
    professed faith is genuinely held, and especially not when it  was  and
    is agreed that  she  was  and  is  a  frequent  participant  in  church
    services. It is a type of judicial exercise very popular some centuries
    ago in some fora, but rather rarely exercised today. I am  also  uneasy
    when a judge, even with the knowledge one gains judicially in a city as
    diverse as Manchester, is bold enough to seek to reach firm conclusions
    about a professed  conversion,  made  by  a  woman  raised  in  another
    culture, from the version of Islam practised therein, to an evangelical
    church in Bolton within one strand of Christianity. I am at a  loss  to
    understand how that is to be tested by anything other than  considering
    whether she is an active participant in the new church.

21. In SB (risk on return-illegal exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00053  the
Tribunal held that events in Iran following the 12  June  2009  presidential
elections have led to a government crackdown on persons seen to  be  opposed
to the present government and the Iranian judiciary  has  become  even  less
independent.  Being a person involved in court proceedings in Iran  who  has
engaged in conduct likely to be seen as insulting either  to  the  judiciary
or the justice system or the government  or  to  Islam  constitutes  another
risk factor indicating an increased level of  risk  of  persecution  or  ill
treatment on return. Being accused of  anti-Islamic  conduct  likewise  also
constitutes a significant risk factor.

22. The weight of reliable evidence persuades me that  the  appellant  is  a
practising Christian, who converted to Christianity from Islam.

23. Given these conclusions, I find that the Appellant  has  discharged  the
burden of proof  to  establish  that  she  is  a  refugee.  I  come  to  the
conclusion that the Appellant's removal would cause the  United  Kingdom  to
be in breach of its obligations under the 2006 Regulations.

24. Therefore, I find the appellant is a refugee.

Humanitarian protection

25. As I have found the appellant is a refugee  I  cannot  consider  whether
she qualifies for humanitarian protection.

26. Therefore, I  find  the  appellant  is  not  eligible  for  humanitarian
protection.

Human rights

27. As I have found the appellant has established  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution, by analogy I find her claim engages  article  3  of  the  Human
Rights Convention because she would face a real risk of torture, inhuman  or
degrading treatment if she were returned to her country of origin.

28. Article 9 of the European Convention on Human Rights  provides  a  right
to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. This  includes  the  freedom
to change a religion or belief, and to manifest  a  religion  or  belief  in
worship, teaching, practice and observance, subject to certain  restrictions
that are "in accordance with law" and "necessary in a  democratic  society".
As I have found that the appellant faces a real risk of persecution in  Iran
because she has converted to  Christianity,  by  analogy  I  find  that  her
appeal succeeds on article 9 ECHR grounds.

29. The appellant does not  claim  that  any  other  articles  of  the  1950
Convention are engaged. I find that no rights under any other  Articles  are
engaged in this appeal.

30.   In the light of the  above  conclusions,  I  find  that  the  Decision
appealed against would cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of  the  law
or its obligations under the 1950 Convention.

CONCLUSION

31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 26 June  2018  is
tainted by a material error of law.  I set it aside.

32. I substitute my own decision.

33. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds

34. The appeal is dismissed on Humanitarian Protection grounds.

35. The appeal is allowed on article 3 & 9 ECHR grounds.






Signed
         Date  8 November 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



