
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06976/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 01 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     MAR
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  the
    protection claim.



 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on  7  February  2020  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Moffatt which refused MAR's appeal brought on
    protection and human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.

 3. The appellant came to the UK as a student in 2010  and  remained  after
    his leave expired on 29 November 2011. On 13  March  2017  he  made  an
    asylum claim. This was refused on 7 September 2017 and his  appeal  was
    dismissed on 10 January 2018. He became appeal rights  exhausted  on  5
    April 2018.

 4. The appellant made further submissions on protection and  human  rights
    grounds on 27 February 2019. The respondent found that  the  protection
    and human rights claims  were  not  made  out  but  accepted  that  the
    submissions amounted to a fresh claim so  the  appellant  was  able  to
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. The appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moffatt on 6 December 2019 at Hatton Cross.

 5. As above, Judge Moffatt  refused  the  appeal  on  all  grounds  on  19
    December 2019. On 5 May 2020 the Upper Tribunal granted  permission  to
    appeal the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. On 8 July 2020 the Upper Tribunal directed  that  the  parties  provide
    written submissions on whether the Tribunal could make  a  decision  on
    the papers on whether there was an error of law.

 7. The respondent indicated in a response made on 13 July 2020 that:

         "The respondent does not oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal and accepts that the FTTJ did  not  adequately
         address  the  medical  evidence  which  may   have   infected   the
         credibility findings."

    The respondent appeared to consider that the Upper Tribunal  could  re-
    make the decision.

 8. In a response dated 21 July 2020 the appellant maintained that  as  the
    respondent had conceded that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law there
    was no requirement for an oral hearing of the error  of  law  challenge
    and maintained that the nature of the  error  of  law  meant  that  the
    correct disposal was a remittal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de
    novo hearing.

 9. Part of the challenge conceded by the respondent was  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal failed to take a lawful approach to the medical  evidence
    setting out the appellant's mental health problems and his status as  a
    vulnerable witness. The respondent  accepts  that  this  "infected  the
    credibility findings".  Failing  to  consider  the  potential  for  the
    appellant  to  be  treated  as  a  vulnerable  witness  is  a  material
    procedural error.

10. It is therefore my conclusion  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal discloses a material error of law such that  it  must  be  set
    aside to be re-made de novo in the First-tier Tribunal. The presumption
    in paragraph 7.2 the Senior President's  Practice  Statement  dated  11
    June 2018 for a re-making to  take  place  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    rebutted where there is a procedural error undermining all  aspects  of
    the findings and the re-making must be made again entirely.



Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside to be remade.

12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  re-made  de
    novo.


Signed:                                S                                Pitt
Date: 26 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

