
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06938/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th November 2019                 |On 20th November 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                 Ramazan [R]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Toora of Counsel, instructed by the Immigration
                    Advisory Service
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 5th  November  1990.   He
    sought to appeal against the respondent's  refusal  of  his  claim  for
    asylum and humanitarian protection, made on 31st  January  2016,  which
    was refused on 18th May 2018.

2.   The basis of his claim was that he was a gay man and  as  such  was  at
    risk in his home country were he to return.

3.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Davey for  hearing  on
    1st April 2019.  It was clear that the  appellant  had  certain  mental
    health problems and as  such  the  Judge  properly  treated  him  as  a
    vulnerable witness.  No complaint has been made as to the way in  which
    his evidence was obtained at the hearing.

4.   It was the  appellant's  claim  in  summary  that  he  formed  a  close
    friendship with a person named as Mario since he was aged 14.  Although
    there was no overt sexual activity, his bond with Mario was noted by an
    uncle in 2016 who attacked him with a screwdriver  and  thereafter  was
    unpleasant and sometimes violent towards him.  This  relationship  only
    came to the knowledge of his parents in 2011.   He  left  Albania  with
    Mario to work in Italy and then to come to the United Kingdom  in  July
    2013.  He was encountered by Immigration Officers during an enforcement
    visit in 2016.  When encountered he gave the explanation  that  he  had
    been in the United Kingdom since 2010.  It was his claim that following
    his detention he had lost all contact or means to communicate with  his
    friend Mario.

5.   The Judge heard medical evidence particularly  the  psychiatric  report
    from consultant psychiatrist Dr Furtado, who had spoken to a  Ms  Walsh
    and a Ms Jones.

6.   The doctor noted that the appellant had stated that he had never had  a
    sexual relationship with anyone, including Mario.  He claimed  that  he
    was unable to enter into a relationship because he had no money, he did
    not know anyone, he was not in any relationship currently  and  without
    having money to eat or things to do he could  not  enter  into  such  a
    relationship.

7.   Much of the consultant forensic psychiatrist's report  is  set  out  in
    the determination and no challenge has been made to the accuracy of the
    matters put forward.  It was noted that the appellant meets  a  mix  of
    anxiety and depressive disorder of  mild  to  moderate  severity.   The
    doctor, however, was resistant to make  a  formal  diagnosis  of  post-
    traumatic stress disorder based on the evidence presented.

8.   In terms of the credibility of the account the Judge did not find  that
    the appellant was credible.  A number of reasons were  given  for  that
    conclusion.  The Judge did not accept, for example, that had the  uncle
    been so angry and incensed with the appellant in 2006 that his  parents
    would not have known about it earlier  than  2011.   In  terms  of  the
    relationship with Mario there was a  degree  of  contradiction  in  the
    various accounts given by the appellant as  to  whether  he  left  with
    Mario or met Mario in the United Kingdom.  There was also the issue  as
    to whether in fact he left in 2013 or in 2010 as he  indicated  to  the
    immigration authorities.

9.   The Judge did not accept that it was a plausible  explanation  for  any
    lack of sexual activity with Mario that the appellant did not have  any
    money or security.  It would be reasonable to expect that if there were
    such feelings towards Mario they would  have  been  manifested  in  the
    usual course of a relationship.

10.  The Judge noted that the appellant had not entered into the  gay  scene
    or purchased magazines or had done any overt action  in  terms  of  his
    claimed sexual orientation.  In summary, therefore, it was the  finding
    of the Judge that the appellant was not gay and was not credible as  to
    his account.

11.  Challenge has been made to that finding  and  permission  to  bring  an
    appeal before the Upper Tribunal has been granted.

12.  A challenge to the credibility findings has been mounted on  the  basis
    that the evidence of Ms Jones was not considered by the Judge.   It  is
    said that the  Judge  was  in  error  in  stating  that  there  was  no
    supporting evidence regarding the appellant's sexuality from friends.

13.  At paragraph 10 of  the  determination  the  Judge  noted  evidence  as
    previously provided to the consultant  psychiatrist  from  a  Ms  Linda
    Walsh.  Ms Walsh had made her assessment that the appellant was gay  on
    the strength of experiences which she had had when she  was  living  in
    London with friends.  She did not press him to admit his  sexuality  to
    her but she believed as a result of his conduct that  that  was  indeed
    the case.  She did not know if  the  appellant  had  contact  with  his
    family and she did not think that he had same sex relations but  rather
    she described him as an isolated individual who did not go out and  was
    anxious about his safety.

14.  The Judge commented that he had taken into account Ms Walsh's  feelings
    and perception but did not find that sufficiently reliable in terms  of
    establishing,  even  to  the  lower  standard,  that  the   appellant's
    sexuality was as claimed.

15.  In terms of the evidence of Ms Jones, that was cited indirectly by  the
    Judge in paragraph 13.  This was when the doctor  was  considering  the
    medical evidence provided by the appellant and  noted  the  information
    provided by Ms Jones, with whom the appellant was currently resided and
    his examination of the appellant on 7th March 2019.  The doctor did not
    dwell upon that evidence.

16.  It is said that such evidence was  contained  in  a  witness  statement
    provided by Linda Jones in the bundle of  documents  presented  to  the
    Judge.  It is far from clear as to whether  that  bundle  was  in  fact
    before the Judge because, as Ms Aboni indicated, she had  a  bundle  of
    such documents in her file that was stamped as received by the Tribunal
    and with a covering letter addressed to the Tribunal,  rather  than  to
    the Home Office.  Be that as it may, I have now seen the  statement  of
    Linda Jones.  She and the appellant met in April  2016.   She  had  her
    difficulties and recognised his difficulties.  They kept in touch.  The
    central paragraph is as follows:- "Ramazan told me he was  gay  when  I
    was on the train down to London to visit him.  He text me that  he  had
    something to tell me and then confirmed he gay.  This was in  2016.   I
    was not surprised as I already knew.  My ex-partner was gay".

17.  The statement went on to indicate that the appellant moved in with  her
    and her family in October 2016.  She found it difficult to cope because
    of her own mental health issues, "I know that he  is  gay  but  also  I
    think he struggles to accept it.  He  feels  ashamed."   The  statement
    then goes on to describe his mental issues.

18.  Seemingly the appellant continued to live with her from  2016  and  was
    living with her at the date of the hearing on 1st April 2019.  She  did
    not attend to give evidence but rather her statement was presented.  Ms
    Jones gives no detail as to how she knows that he is gay.  In terms  of
    the text message, this of course is at a time when  the  appellant  has
    claimed asylum on the basis that  he  is  gay.   Without  more,  it  is
    difficult to understand how his statement to  her  can  amount  to  any
    independent assessment of his sexuality in the absence of any detail as
    to why she thinks that  he  is.   It  was  not  clear  indeed  why  the
    appellant should text Ms Jones  in  the  way  that  he  did  with  that
    information, particularly when she indicates in her statement  that  he
    struggles to accept that he is gay.

19.  He was interviewed in connection  with  that  matter  on  5th  February
    2016, but the text as stated by Linda Jones would  be  after  they  had
    first met in April 2016.  It is perhaps surprising that,  having  lived
    under her roof for close to three years, she cannot  be  more  specific
    about what it is that leads to her conclusion that he is gay.

20.  I do not find  that  that  evidence  is  so  material  to  the  overall
    assessment that it's absence renders  the  analysis  by  the  Judge  as
    unfair or unsafe.  Indeed, the Judge had considered Ms Walsh's feelings
    and perceptions but found little by way of probative value.  In  effect
    Ms Jones is making a similar comment, without any particularity  as  to
    why she came to the conclusion that the appellant is gay.

21.  I have no doubt that, even had the Judge been aware of that  statement,
    it would have made any  material  difference  to  the  outcome  of  his
    deliberations.

22.  Challenge is also made to the comments of the Judge that the  appellant
    has not purchase  magazines  or  gone  online  looking  for  homosexual
    material or contacts and has  not  gone  to  clubs  in  order  to  meet
    likeminded individuals.  Mr Toora invites  my  attention  to  the  Home
    Office Asylum Policy Instruction Sexual orientation in  asylum  claims,
    Version 6.2 of 3rd August 2016 which said:

         "Ignorance of commonly known meeting places and activities for  LGB
         groups  is  not  necessarily  indicative  of  claimant's  lack   of
         credibility.  Lack of engagement with  other  members  of  the  LGB
         community in the UK or failure to join LGB groups may be  explained
         by economic factors, geographic location, language and/or  cultural
         barriers, lack of such opportunities or fear of exposure.   It  may
         also be through personal choice.  Any  perceived  lack  of  contact
         with the LGB community, is a  relevant  area  of  investigation  to
         explore and should be considered on a case by case  basis,  in  the
         round with all other evidence."

23.  The appellant has never manifested  his  sexuality  overtly  to  anyone
    including his long-standing friend Mario.  He has not  engaged  in  any
    relationship  nor  exposed  himself  to  any  relationship,   club   or
    association.  The Judge found that the absence of money would not  have
    supported the reason advanced as  why  he  had  not  done  anything  to
    express his sexuality in the United Kingdom for some six or more years.



24.  The Judge took into account the vulnerability of the appellant but  did
    not accept the credibility of his claim overall nor that  the  evidence
    as presented established that he was gay.

25.  It seems to me that the Judge has applied the proper standard of  proof
    and has considered all matters in the round and was entitled to come to
    that conclusion.

26.  The Judge looked briefly at the alternative scenario  namely  that  the
    appellant was gay.  This was a case of an appellant who  chose  not  to
    overtly  express  himself  since  14,   notwithstanding   his   claimed
    relationship or friendship with Mario and was not somebody then who had
    given any indication that he was inclined to promote his sexuality upon
    return.   The  respondent's  decision  letter  went  into  considerable
    detail, specifying particularly the support which would be available to
    the appellant by NGOs and other groups to deal with  his  sexuality  if
    returned elsewhere to Albania. It also dealt  with  his  mental  health
    condition and the support.  Those matters were not  considered  in  any
    great detail because of the findings of the Judge  on  the  preliminary
    issues. No challenge has been made in the grounds  of  appeal  to  that
    aspect of the matter but rather to the findings  of  the  Judge  as  to
    whether or not the appellant was credible and/or was gay.

27.  Looking at the matter overall, I find  that  the  determination  was  a
    careful  one.   I  do  not  consider  that  the  absence  of   specific
    consideration of Linda Jones' evidence would  have  made  any  material
    difference to the outcome.  I do not find therefore any material  error
    of law in the decision.

28.  In the circumstances  therefore,  the  appellant's  appeal  before  the
    Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision shall stand, namely that the
    appellant's appeal in respect of asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights stands dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 15 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

