
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06908/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 28th July 2017                   |On 11th August 2017                   |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                  Miss G M
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, Counsel, instructed by Marsh &
Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on [ ] 1992 and  is  female.
    She had a child born on 4th January 2016 in the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant appealed the First-tier Tribunal decision of  Immigration
    Judge Mitchell dated  6th  January  2017  in  which  he  dismissed  her
    international protection claim, her claim  in  humanitarian  protection
    and under the ECHR and the Immigration Rules.

 3. The appellant asserted that  she  attended  university  in  Durres  and
    whilst there started having a relationship with a  neighbour  from  her
    home area, [F].  The  appellant's  family,  she  asserts,  suspected  a
    relationship with someone and they stopped her completing her education
    and  she  returned  home  on  26th  April  2014.   She  continued   her
    relationship and became  pregnant.   She  told  her  sister,  who  then
    without the appellant's permission told the mother.  The appellant  was
    advised by her mother that she should leave Albania for good because if
    the male members of the family came to know about  the  pregnancy  they
    would kill not only the appellant but the appellant's mother and [F] as
    well.  The mother would be killed because she had failed in her duty to
    educate the appellant.  The appellant and [F] would be  killed  because
    they had entered a relationship which was not approved of by the  males
    of the family.

 4. [F] made arrangements with the appellant for her to travel to Kosovo to
    his relatives and it  was  decided  that  the  appellant  should  leave
    Albania and travel to a country where  there  was  no  easy  access  to
    members of the appellant's family.  The United Kingdom was outside  the
    Schengen Area.

 5. The following day the appellant was outside her home talking to [F]  on
    the phone although this was not known to the younger brother  but  when
    she refused to hand over the phone she threw it so it fell within [F]'s
    house.  The younger brother then slapped the  appellant.   Later  there
    ensued an argument between the brother and [F] because  he  refused  to
    hand the phone over.  [F] has indefinite leave to remain in  Greece  as
    he has lived there for many years.

 6. The appellant left her home on 23rd June 2015 and travelled  to  Kosovo
    with [F] and he then returned to Greece.  She stayed  in  Kosovo  until
    5th December 2015 when an agent transported her to the  United  Kingdom
    where she arrived on 10th December 2015.  She gave birth on 4th January
    2016.

 7. An application for permission to appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell was initially refused by Designated First-
    tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy, finding  no  error  in  Judge  Mitchell's
    conclusion that the appellant was not a member of a  particular  social
    group, namely victims of domestic violence  in  Albania,  no  error  in
    finding it was reasonable to expect the appellant  to  relocate  within
    Albania despite the fact that she may risk  of  discrimination  and  no
    error in the application of the very significant obstacles test.

 8. That was not the end of the matter and the application  for  permission
    to appeal was renewed to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McWilliam, who stated: "In respect of paragraph 7 of the
    grounds it is arguable that the judge, having found that the  appellant
    was credible, did not make a clear finding as to whether she  would  be
    at risk on return (see [32], [34] and [72])."  The  matter  was  placed
    before Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul, who on  11th  May  2017  issued  a
    Memorandum and Directions stating that he was satisfied that First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mitchell did make  an  error  of  law  and  he  set  the
    decision aside.

 9. Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul stated:

    "In summary, that is because of a failure properly  to  assess  whether
         the appellant was at risk in her home  area,  and  consequently  to
         make proper findings as to the  sufficiency  of  protection  and/or
         whether it would be reasonable to expect  her  to  relocate  within
         Albania."

10. Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul also stated: "The findings in  respect  of
    the appellant's credibility are preserved, as are the findings of  what
    happened in Albania.  It will, however, be  necessary  to  address  the
    following issues", and he set out a list of questions.

         "(i)     Is the appellant at risk  of  ill-treatment  in  her  home
             area, that  is,  Tirana,  of  sufficient  severity  to  engage
             article 3 of the Human  Rights  Convention  and/or  amount  to
             persecution?

         (ii)     If so, is there  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  her,
             bearing in mind prior to action of police when contacted?

         (iii)    Would it be unreasonable or unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
             appellant to relocate within Albania given that she now has  a
             child born out of wedlock?  Would she be seen as 'kurva'?

         (iv)     Is there any evidence that the appellant's family would be
             able  to  trace  her,  given  what  is  recorded  in  'Country
             Information  and  Guidance  Albania:  Background  information,
             including actors of protection, and internal relocation'  CIG,
             SSHD at [2.2] and [12]?

         (v)      To what extent is the decision  in  LC  (Albania)  v  SSHD
             [2017] EWCA Civ 351 relevant?

         (vi)     If the appellant is at risk of serious harm, is that for a
             Convention reason, that is, on  account  of  membership  of  a
             particular social group?  If so, what is that group?"

11. It is notable that paragraphs 31  and  32  of  the  decision  of  Judge
    Mitchell set out the following:

         "31.     The Secretary of State has taken a number  of  credibility
             issues  concerning  the  appellant's  claim.   As  Mr  Collins
             highlighted  the  appellant's  account  has  been   remarkably
             unchallenged.  The issues raised by the Secretary of State are
             somewhat weak.  The appellant's account is entirely consistent
             with the background material and the patriarchal society  that
             exists in Albania.  The appellant has had the  opportunity  to
             travel throughout the Schengen area  of  the  European  Union.
             Her accounts that she wished to travel to an  area  where  her
             family would not have ready access seems perfectly reasonable.

         32.      The Secretary of State has highlighted the fact  that  the
             family appear to wish  the  appellant  to  make  something  of
             herself by allowing her to go to university but then considers
             is contrary as they then stopped her attending  university  as
             they suspected she was in a relationship with another man.  In
             the patriarchal dominated society of  Albania  this  may  well
             make perfect sense to an Albanian family and I do not consider
             that the  fact  that  it  is  somewhat  contrary  in  approach
             undermines  the  credibility   of   the   appellant.    Having
             considered the evidence as a whole including the oral evidence
             of the appellant and the documentary evidence  that  has  been
             adduced  I  do  conclude  that  the  appellant's  account   is
             credible."

12. I address the questions in turn.

13. First, is the appellant at risk of ill-treatment in her home area, that
    is, Tirana, of sufficient severity to engage Article  3  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention and/or amount to  persecution?   The  appellant  gave
    evidence that she was from a traditional northern family  and  attended
    university with their permission and once they even  suspected  her  of
    being in a relationship they stopped  her  attendance.   As  the  judge
    stated at paragraph 58 of his decision, "there has been no  history  of
    violence in the past" and "the appellant's situation is, however,  that
    there has been no domestic violence although it is  arguable  that  the
    violence used against the father of her child is indicative that  there
    may be violence in the future".  I find that it would be speculative on
    the evidence.   The judge also recorded, however, at paragraph 52  that
    "no crime against the appellant has been committed and she has not been
    threatened in any way".  He found at paragraph 55:

    "The attack on [F] was in the first week of June 2015 but the appellant
         was able to remain in the family home until 23rd  June  2015.   She
         was not threatened or beaten by any  male  members  of  the  family
         during the intervening weeks between the phone  incident  with  [F]
         and the younger brother and her departure.  That is indicative that
         the risk to her of violence within  the  family  is  low  and  that
         domestic violence although being widespread in Albanian society  is
         not the norm or likely in her household."

14. I note that Mr Collins accepted that there had not been  past  violence
    to the appellant.  Indeed it seems clear that she was able to remain in
    the house.

15. The fact that [F] was beaten but, as the  judge  found,  there  was  no
    history of violence to the appellant, only to the said boyfriend,  [F],
    and that was because he had failed to return the phone.  As  the  judge
    recorded at paragraph 36:

    "The appellant's family have not used violence against her in the  past
         - apart from a single slap by  a  younger  brother.   There  is  no
         history of  violence  against  family  members  that  I  have  been
         informed of.  The attack on [F] was not by the family but by  other
         people although it  is  assumed  that  it  was  instigated  by  the
         family."

16. It is also speculation to conclude that the alleged assault on [F]  was
    as a result of his relationship with the appellant.

17. I am therefore not persuaded that the appellant  is  at  risk  of  ill-
    treatment in her home area, that is, Tirana, of sufficient severity  to
    engage Article 3 of  the  Human  Rights  Convention  and/or  amount  to
    persecution.

18. It is stated that the family are from the North and relocated to Tirana
    and that the family therefore still retain  the  traditional  mores  of
    those who have lived in the North. Nonetheless, despite  that,  I  find
    past history  does  not  indicate  that  this  family  would  instigate
    violence on the  appellant,  albeit  that  she  was  removed  from  the
    university in 2014 because she was suspected of having a  relationship.
    That she was sent to university shows a more liberal approach.

19. It is argued that the appellant will have been perceived to bring shame
    on the family because she will return with a  child  that  has  clearly
    been born out of wedlock.  It was the appellant's speculation that  her
    mother thought she would herself be at risk as well  as  the  appellant
    and [F].  However, it was stated that her mother had assisted her and I
    note that the brother lives  in  the  United  Kingdom.   There  was  no
    suggestion that he had attempted to  locate  her  within  the  Albanian
    community.

20. There is nothing within the evidence which substantiates her fear  that
    she would be at risk from her family and the material does  not  assist
    on this point, given that she has not been threatened or ill-treated by
    them in the past despite having suspected a relationship.  There is  no
    indication that the family would actively seek her out to harm her  and
    the judge found that she had remained in the  family  home  after  even
    after suspecting the relationship.

21. As such I am not persuaded that she is at risk on return  to  her  home
    area.

22. Secondly, and even so, if  I  am  wrong  about  that,  would  there  be
    sufficiency of protection for her, bearing in mind the prior action  of
    the police when contacted?

23. The evidence taken at its highest is that when the boyfriend asked  the
    police what they should do there  was  nothing  which  warranted  being
    reported and therefore it was unsurprising they were not in a  position
    to assist.  It can be concluded that the boyfriend  and  the  appellant
    had approached the police but without any specific  crime  having  been
    committed, which is what the judge found at first instance.

24.  Indeed,  the  background  evidence  suggests  that  there   would   be
    assistance, Country  Information  Guidance  -  Albania:  Women  fearing
    domestic violence, April 2016 sets out the attitudes and  responses  to
    women facing domestic violence at section 6.  At  paragraph  6.2.4  the
    report indicates that it was clear  there  was  a  well-structured  and
    functional vertical organisation and reporting line regarding  domestic
    violence within the Albanian police and:

         "6.2.4   In total,  the  country  counts  43  police  commissariats
                covering 482 zones.   Each  zone  is  covered  by  one  zone
                inspector,  therefore,  in  total,  there   are   482   zone
                inspectors  who  are  the  frontline  staff  responding   to
                domestic violence among other areas of responsibilities they
                have.

         6.2.5    The same Data Centrum report noted that, according to  its
                own survey of 733 individuals of whom  23  were  victims  of
                domestic  violence,  based  on  respondents'  own   personal
                experience or  the  experience  of  friends  or  family,  74
                percent said that the police  were  effective  in  immediate
                reaction to domestic violence incidents, 64 percent said the
                police were effective in support/assistance given to victims
                of domestic  violence,  56  percent  said  the  police  were
                effective in prevention of domestic violence.

         6.2.6    Of the  23  respondents  who  had  personally  experienced
                domestic  violence,  most  were  satisfied  with  the  quick
                response of the police, but some were not satisfied with the
                behaviour  of  the  police,  claiming  that  they  were  not
                supportive and polite, or did not provide information  about
                services  or  rights.   Data  Centrum's  study  notes   that
                weaknesses of the police in addressing domestic violence, as
                reported by the police and other stakeholders,  include  the
                following: understaffing; high number  of  staff  transfers;
                low number of female officers;  lack  of  psychologists  and
                social workers at the commissariat level of the police; lack
                of private interviewing space at commissariat level; limited
                resources, such as computers, other technology and vehicles;
                lack of emergency funds for victims."

25. Based on the country guidance information  I  conclude  that  there  is
    sufficiency of protection for women in relation to  domestic  violence.
    AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania and TD and AD  (Trafficked  women)
    (CG) were cited and paragraph 182 of AM and BM.  Paragraph 182 in  fact
    related  to  sufficiency  of  protection  in  relation  to  victims  of
    trafficking.  There  was  no  indication  in  this  instance  that  the
    appellant had indeed been trafficked.  This places a  wholly  different
    emphasis on the sufficiency of protection.  What is clear in this  case
    is that when the police approached they were  approached  by  [F],  the
    man, and there did not appear to be  an  outright  suggestion  that  he
    would not be assisted.  It was not the  appellant  who  approached  the
    police.

26. It is accepted in the Country Information  and  Guidance  Albania  that
    there have been a number of legislative measures undertaken to  improve
    the situation of women in Albania which are  specifically  designed  to
    protect them against domestic violence  but  although  the  appropriate
    legislation is now in place  implementation  is  not  fully  effective.
    Although the law if identified  as  not  always  effective  there  have
    nonetheless been a significant number of prosecutions.

27. The third question is would it  be  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  to
    expect the appellant to relocate within Albania given that  she  has  a
    child born out of wedlock?  Would she be seen as kurva?

28. It was argued that internal relocation would not be viable as it  would
    be unduly harsh.   In  AM  and  BM  the  Upper  Tribunal  concluded  at
    paragraph 187 that:

    "To that should be  added  the  difficulties  for  a  single  woman  to
         reintegrate into a society where the family is the  principal  unit
         for welfare and mutual support as well as, it appears, the  channel
         through which employment is most often obtained.  We have therefore
         concluded that internal relocation is unlikely to be effective  for
         most victims  of  trafficking  who  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in their home area, although  once  again  we  consider
         that it is important to consider each case on an individual basis."

29. TD and AD stress the problems of single women but  added  at  paragraph
    107: "We do not accept that it is, in general, 'impossible' for a woman
    to live on her own in Tirana, as asserted by Professor Haxhiymeri."

30. The various factors in a non-exhaustive list were identified in TD  and
    AD and these included the social status and economic  standing  of  the
    family, the level of education of the  victim  of  trafficking  or  her
    family, the victim's state of health and mental health, the presence of
    an illegitimate child, the area of origin, age and what support network
    would be available.

31. It is clear that this appellant has a reasonable level of education  as
    she attended university  and  is  resourceful  and  she  has  not  been
    trafficked; as such I do not accept that she would be seen as  'kurva'.
    The social status and economic standing of her family is such that they
    were not considered to be  particularly  influential  or  powerful  (or
    indeed have the inclination to track her  down)  and  that  she  has  a
    reasonable level of health and she is of a young and fit age.  What  is
    clear is that she does  return  with  a  child  but  I  note  that  the
    appellant was assisted by [F]'s family whilst she was in Kosovo for six
    months and that the evidence given was that he was a wealthy man.   Her
    evidence is said to be credible and although no findings were  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge as to the support that he might offer her
    I did raise this issue at the hearing before me and I am not  satisfied
    that  the  boyfriend,  who  has  assisted  her  for  months   including
    transporting her out of Albania organising her accommodation  and  care
    after her relocation to Greece, and transporting her to the  UK,  would
    not be prepared to assist her on her return to Albania.   I  note  that
    she has never worked and has the 18 month old child but I conclude that
    with his support she would, with  her  resilience  and  resourcefulness
    shown by travelling to two different countries when pregnant,  be  able
    to withstand any discrimination that she might meet.

32. The fourth question was whether the appellant's family would be able to
    trace her, given what  is  recorded  in  the  Country  Information  and
    Guidance Albania at [2.2] and [12].  First it is not accepted that this
    is a family with power or influence and it is  apparent  that  although
    the appellant stated in her evidence that she wished to be taken  to  a
    place which was well away from her family, she knows she has a  brother
    in the United Kingdom.

33. Could she relocate albeit that her family have shown no  interest.   It
    is accepted that the appellant is from a very big family now  based  in
    Tirana and the Country of Origin Information  and  Guidance  at  12.1.1
    indicates that individuals moving within Albania  must  transfer  civil
    registration to access public services.

34. The CIG at 12.1.1 indicates that the Constitution and law  provide  for
    freedom  of  internal  movement,  foreign   travel,   emigration,   and
    repatriation, and the  government  generally  respected  these  rights.
    Although there was a report of 2014 from the OECD suggesting that women
    may have to seek  permission  from  their  husbands  or  family  before
    travelling within Albania, a report from Freedom House in  its  Freedom
    in the World 2015 report stated that "Albanians generally enjoy freedom
    of movement and choice  of  residence  or  employment".   There  is  no
    indication that the appellant  would  be  unable  to  provide  suitable
    documentation on her return to Albania and that she would not  be  able
    to access public services.  The fact that she  might  stand  out  as  a
    single woman with a child would not necessarily  inhibit  her  movement
    around Albania.

35. I was invited to  find  that  the  use  of  shelters  was  not  of  any
    assistance to the appellant and this was  in  part  in  line  with  the
    requirement to relocate to a different part of  Tirana.   It  is  quite
    clear that there are shelters available from  Section  7  of  the  CIG.
    There are shelters in Tirana and that is an indication that they  would
    not accept victims without  a  court  order.   As  there  has  been  no
    suggestion of violence to the appellant, no solicitation of the  police
    and no court order it would suggest that the  appellant  would  not  be
    able to access a government shelter.  The report at 7.3.1, the  CIG  on
    domestic violence, did identify shelters outside Tirana which were  run
    by NGOs which will accommodate those without a court order.

36. It was suggested that these were insufficient but I note at  the  close
    of the decision letter that the appellant can also  take  advantage  of
    the  Assisted  Voluntary  Return  Service,  which  assists   with   the
    reintegration into her country of return.

37. There were indeed various sources of information on  the  shelters  and
    the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  letter  identified  the  Canadian
    Immigration Service's report "Domestic violence, including legislation,
    state protection and support services available to victims, April 2014"
    identified a further number of shelters available.  Although  they  may
    be limited in number I find  that  the  appellant  has  the  resources,
    albeit with a small child, to relocate to a shelter if required.

38. She has not sought assistance from the police and she has failed, to my
    mind, to demonstrate that the authorities of Albania would be unable or
    unwilling to offer her protection if she sought it.  Even  if  that  is
    the case I  find  that  she  would  be  able  to  seek  assistance  and
    protection within a shelter.  There  are  shelters  throughout  Albania
    which can provide support services for women and children and  although
    she may face some practical difficulties in  starting  life  in  a  new
    place I do not accept that she would be totally bereft of support.

39. On the fifth question, it was agreed amongst the  representatives  that
    LC (Albania) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  351  was  not  relevant  in  this
    instance.

40. Lastly, I do not accept that the appellant forms part of  a  particular
    social group.  DM (Sufficiency  of  Protection,  PSG,  Women,  Domestic
    Violence) Albania CG [2004] UKIAT 00059 considered  the  situation  and
    concluded that women in Albania did not constitute a particular  social
    group unless there were other characteristics.  It  was  argued  by  Mr
    Collins that this decision was made before the landmark decision of the
    House of Lords in K and Fornah [2006]  UKHL  46  and  this  meant  that
    female victims of domestic violence in Albania formed part of a  social
    group.  The cases of AM and BM (Trafficked  women)  Albania  CG  [2010]
    refers to trafficked women.  This  appellant,  however,  has  not  been
    trafficked and has not experienced domestic violence.  I find her  fear
    speculative.

41. The Country Information and Guidance - Albania: Women fearing  domestic
    violence report was published in April 2016 by the Secretary  of  State
    and appears to conclude at paragraph 2.2 that women at risk of domestic
    violence in Albania are not considered  to  form  a  particular  social
    group within the meaning of the  1951  UN  Refugee  Convention  because
    although they share an  immutable  or  innate  characteristic  -  their
    gender - which cannot be changed  and  although  traditional  views  of
    their subordinate position in society are still prevalent in  parts  of
    the country, in general, in view of their equality under  the  law  and
    the general availability of state protection against domestic  violence
    they are not now perceived as different and  do  not  have  a  distinct
    identity in Albanian society.

42. The situation in DM with respect to paragraph 9  was  that  there  were
    very specific circumstances under which it was held there was a lack of
    sufficiency of protection for women  generally  in  Pakistan  and  that
    there were legal processes which could be set in  motion  against  them
    which  rendered  them  virtually  powerless.   That  was  an   entirely
    different situation from that propounded in relation to Albania.

43. Mr Collins cited AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG  and  referred
    to paragraphs 160 onwards.  Part of the  argument  of  Mr  Blundell  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State in that instance was  that  there  was
    nothing in the situation of the victims of trafficking  in  Albania  to
    indicate they would be identified by Albanian  society  at  large.   By
    contrast the appellant's representative,  Mr  Jones,  referred  to  the
    speech of Baroness Hale of Richmond in Hoxha [2005] UKHL 19:

         "163.    The arguments put forward by  Mr  Jones  referred  to  the
             speech of Baroness Hale of Richmond in Hoxha  [2005]  UKHL  19
             where she had said:-

             '37.      If  what  they  fear  is  capable  of  amounting  to
                  persecution,  is  it  for  a  Convention  reason?   It  is
                  certainly capable of being so.  In R v Immigration  Appeal
                  Tribunal and Another ex parte Shah [1999]  2AC  629,  this
                  house held that women in Pakistan constituted a particular
                  social group, because they  shared  the  common  immutable
                  characteristic of gender and were discriminated against as
                  a group in matters of fundamental human rights, for  which
                  the state gave them no adequate protection.  The  fact  of
                  current persecution alone is not enough  to  constitute  a
                  social group; a group which is defined  by  nothing  other
                  than that its members are currently being persecuted would
                  not qualify.  But women  who  have  been  the  victims  of
                  sexual violence in the past are  linked  by  an  immutable
                  characteristic which is independent of and  the  cause  of
                  their current ill-treatment.  They are  certainly  capable
                  of  constituting  a  particular  social  group  under  the
                  Convention.'"

44. The Tribunal in that case found that the central issue before them  was
    how the former victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation would  be
    identified in Albanian society.  It was accepted  that  they  would  be
    treated as kurva, that is women  considered  not  to  comply  with  the
    strict Albanian mores of how to conduct themselves.  In fact, the group
    was much narrower.  It would appear that the Tribunal found:

    "The fact that they had been trafficked would be an  obvious  inference
         that would be drawn by the wider  population  if  they  went  to  a
         shelter and were in that shelter for some time.  Not only  do  they
         share that characteristic but that is  a  characteristic  by  which
         they would become known in the wider society.   Certainly,  in  the
         eyes of those who  would  be  most  likely  to  be  the  actors  of
         persecution - those who had trafficked them in the first place they
         would clearly be considered to be members of  a  particular  social
         group - those who  had  been  trafficked  by  the  traffickers  and
         therefore those whom the traffickers might consider  to  be  either
         their chattel or to be a danger to them."  (Paragraph 165).

45. However, that is not the case here.  It was accepted that the appellant
    was not someone who was trafficked and  therefore  there  is  not  that
    automatic narrowing of the group but secondly there was  no  indication
    that the appellant had been a victim of sexual violence  in  the  past,
    which is independent of the  cause  of  her  current  ill-treatment  or
    perceived ill-treatment.   Thirdly  I  do  not  accept  that  there  is
    insufficient protection  from  the  state  because  she  would  not  be
    reporting that she was trafficked.

46. I find that her Article 2 and 3 claims fall with  her  asserted  asylum
    claim as does her humanitarian protection claim.

47. I turn to  the  Immigration  Rules.   Under  Appendix  FM  neither  the
    appellant nor her child are British citizens and therefore  she  cannot
    comply with the Immigration Rules.

48. I turn to paragraph 276ADE and find that she has not lived  in  the  UK
    for twenty years  but  moreover  there  are  no  significant  obstacles
    preventing her reintegration  into  Albania.   I  have  considered  the
    aspects of risk above.  I note she spent the majority of  her  life  in
    Albania including her formative years and speaks Albanian.

49. I consider the child's rights under Section 55 and note the  young  age
    of the child but it is in the best interests of  the  child  to  remain
    with the mother.  It is in the interests of the child to have stability
    and continuity and note that the child is an Albanian national and will
    be able to avail himself of  education  and  healthcare  facilities  in
    Albania.  The child has spent a very short time of its life in  the  UK
    and it would be in its best interests to reside  in  Albania  with  the
    mother.  The COIR Albania dated April  2012  confirms  that  there  are
    health facilities and education facilities in Albania and there was  no
    evidence to suggest the child would be denied access to public services
    as an Albanian citizen.

50. I find that there are  no  compelling  circumstances  and  I  therefore
    dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                             Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

