

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/06991/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 November 2019                      |On 13 November 2019              |
|                                        |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBIUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                ISABELLA [K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr U Aslam, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is from Namibia.  She sought asylum in the UK in  October
    2017.

 2. The respondent  refused  the  appellant's  claim  by  letter  dated  20
    February 2018, declining to accept the appellant's account of events in
    Namibia, or that she is lesbian (whether, if she is, that would entitle
    her to protection, remains unresolved).

 3. In a decision promulgated on 14 August 2018 FtT Judge Green  found  the
    evidence for the appellant unpersuasive, including the  evidence  of  a
    supporting witness, [A];  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  is  a
    lesbian; and dismissed her appeal.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  UT  on  grounds  of
    alleged error in  assessing  the  evidence  of  each  of  four  claimed
    relationships.  The fourth of these was with [A].  The ground says that
    the judge's reasons in this respect were  firstly  based  on  a  flawed
    assumption of what was meant by making a  relationship  "official",  so
    that there was no real discrepancy in  the  evidence  over  dates;  and
    secondly:

      ... based on an assumption that the  adverse  decision  in  [A]'s  own
      claim in the immigration appellate process is the "last  word"  as  to
      her claim.  If she is contemplating raising proceedings  for  judicial
      review it is plain that she  is  continuing  her  challenge.   In  any
      event, short of seeing the  decision  of  the  judge  (and  the  Upper
      Tribunal) in her claim it was an error of law  to  rely  on  it  as  a
      reason for making an adverse credibility finding in a separate case.

 5. The FtT and the UT refused permission, on the  view  that  the  grounds
    were only disagreement on the  facts.   The  appellant  petitioned  the
    Court for review of the UT's refusal of  permission.   Parties  entered
    into a joint minute:

      The FtT rejected the evidence of [the appellant] and [A]  [of]  ...  a
      homosexual relationship.  In doing  so,  the  FtT  took  into  account
      findings of fact by a different tribunal which had  found  that  [[A]]
      was not a lesbian.  No adequate explanation appears from the reasoning
      of the tribunal as to (i) why it decided to have  regard  to  evidence
      from a different tribunal or (ii) how much weight was put on it.

 6. Permission was granted to appeal to the UT  in  light  of  the  Court's
    interlocutor, following the joint minute.

 7. Mr Aslam submitted on both of the "flawed assumptions" above.   He  did
    not abandon the other grounds, but did not seek to expand upon them.

 8. The first "flawed assumption" is only a disagreement.   The  judge  was
    entitled to find an inconsistency over the date when  the  relationship
    was said to have formed.  In any event, this is a minor  point  in  the
    decision.

 9. On the second  "flawed  assumption",  neither  party  referred  to  any
    authority on whether and to what extent a tribunal,  in  assessing  the
    veracity of a witness, may have regard to factual  conclusions  reached
    in other legal proceedings.

10. Factual decisions do not set precedents in other cases.  However, it is
    established that where one member of a family has been  granted  asylum
    on the basis of similar considerations to those raised by an appellant,
    dismissal of the appeal must be very carefully reasoned; although it is
    important that tribunals do not treat earlier determinations  of  other
    family members' appeals as determinative: Chicaiza [2002] UKIAT 01200.

11. It is commonplace for appellants to advance the successful  outcome  of
    proceedings by supporting witnesses who are not relatives as  a  reason
    to accept their  evidence.   Such  outcomes  are  not  certificates  of
    reliability, but are not usually thought  to  be  entirely  irrelevant.
    The significance of decisions in other cases must depend partly on  the
    degree of inter-relation of the facts alleged.  I  see  no  reason  why
    such an approach would not apply equally for and against credibility.

12. The FtT did not take the outcome of proceedings by  [A]  as  "the  last
    word".  That passage in the grounds misrepresents the decision.

13. The allegation that [A] was "contemplating judicial review" was  vague,
    and took nothing away from the resolution of her case as it then stood.

14. The judge did give reasons at [22] for taking the status of proceedings
    by [A] into account.  He also made it clear how much  weight  that  was
    given.

15. I cannot see why the judge would be prohibited from taking  account  of
    the matter unless he saw the other tribunal's  decision.   It  was  for
    parties to choose what to put before him, and for  him  to  decide  the
    case on the material supplied.  That included  the  evidence  from  the
    witness that she had failed to establish her claim to be a lesbian, and
    the absence of that information from her witness statement.

16. The appellant has not shown that in resolving this issue the judge fell
    into any error on a point of law, as expressed either in the ground  or
    in the joint minute.

17. The grounds, other than as dealt with  above,  are  only  disagreements
    with the fact-finding exercise.

18. This was a detailed and through decision, reached for multiple reasons.
     The appellant has not shown that the decision, read fairly  and  as  a
    whole, is any less than a legally adequate explanation to the appellant
    of why her case was found to fall short of probation.

19. It emerged during submissions that [A] did not  petition  for  judicial
    review.  The tribunal's determination of her  status  stands.   She  is
    thought to be about to make  a  fresh  claim,  based  on  a  continuing
    relationship with the appellant.  I was advised that  they  are  to  be
    "married in the Metropolitan Church by  Pastor  Jane"  on  13  November
    2019.   While such a development might be advanced as part of  a  fresh
    claim, it cannot disclose error of law, which is to  be  determined  on
    the case as it stood before the FtT.

20. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

21. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      8 November 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




