
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06044/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30 November 2017                      |On 01 December 2017               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     GS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. N. Gobir, Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge Mathews, promulgated on 30 November 2016,  in  which  he
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
     refuse to grant asylum.




  2. As this is an asylum appeal, I make an anonymity direction.


  3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


     "It is arguable that in making findings about the transfer of money  to
     the appellant that the judge speculated in an impermissible  manner  as
     to how the money was transferred, and it is unclear if this  issue  was
     properly ventilated at the hearing.


     It is also arguable that the judge speculated as to how women would  be
     treated in a brothel, there being no evidence  of  that,  and  did  not
     properly take account of the appellant's evidence."

The hearing


  4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard oral submissions from both
     representatives following which I  announced  that  I  found  that  the
     decision involved the making of a material error of law,  and  that  my
     full reasons would follow.


Error of law decision


  5. I find, as set out in the grounds of appeal, that there were  two  main
     reasons why the Appellant's account was found not to be credible by the
     Judge.  These are with reference to the Appellant's finances and to her
     experiences in the brothel.


  6. Paragraphs [19] and [20] of the decision state:


     "That level of poverty is in contrast with the later assertion  of  the
     appellant in her asylum interview at question 69, that  having  had  no
     money before going to Macedonia, having earned  no  money  for  several
     months in Macedonia, she and her mother were nevertheless able within 2
     days to find an agent and  pay  6,500  euros  (question  75  in  asylum
     interview) for their trip to Italy.


     The appellant does state that her Aunt in Italy provided some financial
     support to her mother when she was in Albania, but gives no detail,  as
     one  might  reasonably  expect  of  the  circumstances   in   which   a
     considerable sum of money is sought and received at short notice.   The
     appellant states that the money came from her Aunt who  is  settled  in
     Italy and works as a receptionist, yet there is no evidence  before  me
     as to the transfer of such funds to her, a matter that must  have  been
     conducted very quickly, that would be expected to leave an audit  trail
     in the sending of funds from Italy to Albania, and that must have  been
     a  central  consideration  for  the  appellant  at  the  time  of   her
     departure."


  7. As set out in the grounds of appeal, the Appellant had stated that  the
     money used to pay the agent came from  her  aunt  in  Italy.   This  is
     contrary to the Judge's finding that the Appellant gave no detail as to
     what the money sent by her aunt was used for [20].   I  find  that  the
     Judge  has  failed  properly  to  take  into  account  the  Appellant's
     evidence.


  8. I further find that the Judge has rejected the Appellant's account  for
     her failure to provide an audit trail of this money.   He  states  that
     this "must have been a central consideration for the appellant  at  the
     time of her departure".  He gives no reasons why one of the Appellant's
     central considerations at the time would have  been  the  need  for  an
     audit trail.  He has failed to take into account  her  evidence  as  to
     where the money came from which was used to pay the agent, and then  he
     has held against her the fact that there is no audit trail.


  9. Further, in relation to the Appellant's finances, at [21] he states:


     "The suggestion of impoverished conditions explaining the temptation to
     work in Macedonia, is also in contrast to a reply to question 50 in the
     NRM interview in which the appellant  explained  that  her  mother  had
     funds that paid for the accommodation in Tirana."


 10. The full context of question 50 is set out in the  grounds  of  appeal.
     At question 52 the Appellant was asked "Did you work during  this  time
     in Tirana?"  She replied "At first it  was  just  my  mum  working  and
     earning just enough to pay the rent and keep the three of us.  But life
     was difficult financially so from November 2014 six  months  after  the
     birth of my daughter I began to work as a waitress."


 11. When reading the question in context, it is  clear  that  there  is  no
     inconsistency.  At question 52  the  Appellant  stated  that  life  was
     difficult financially such that she returned to work when her  daughter
     was only six months old.  I find that  in  taking  the  answer  out  of
     context the Judge has failed properly to consider the  evidence  before
     him.  He has then drawn an adverse inference  from  this  evidence.   I
     find that the Judge has erred in his consideration of the  evidence  of
     the Appellant's finances.  I find that these errors are material.


 12. In  relation  to  trafficking,  the  Judge  makes  adverse  credibility
     findings based on the Appellant's apparent lack of knowledge of how the
     brothel worked.  At [25] and [26] he states:


     "The appellant stated that she was never asked by a customer  how  much
     he would have to pay, was not aware of any  particular  limits  of  the
     time that a customer could spend, or indeed the extent of the  services
     she should provide for a particular customer.   Whilst  accepting  that
     others might have handled any financial transaction, it does not appear
     credible that customers would not have some  limit  of  time  on  their
     meetings with the appellant, or understanding as to precisely how  long
     they could spend with her for a given sum, or indeed the services  that
     they would receive for a particular sum.


     The rather sordid detailed considerations above, seen in  my  judgement
     to be  fundamental  elements  of  the  interaction  of  prostitute  and
     customer, yet they are entirely lacking in the appellant's account."


 13. I find that the Appellant gave evidence as  to  what  happened  at  the
     brothel.  In her NRM interview, question 108, she said "they would  not
     discuss with me how long they would stay but I  don't  know  what  they
     discussed before then".  At question 116 when asked "were you  expected
     to do anything that the client requested?" the appellant replied "yes".


 14. The Judge has not taken this into account, but has instead  found  that
     the Appellant's evidence is not credible based on his  own  speculation
     of how the brothel would have worked.   He  has  not  referred  to  any
     background evidence to support his finding that  it  was  not  credible
     that the Appellant did not know how long the clients  would  stay  with
     her, or the services that they would receive.  The Appellant's evidence
     was that she was not involved  in  discussions  about  time  limits  or
     services.  She was not party to these conversations.  The Judge had  no
     evidence before him on which to base a finding as  to  how  women  were
     treated in the brothels in Macedonia.  To base an  adverse  credibility
     finding on speculation is an error of law.


 15. I was referred to the case of HA v SSHD [2007] CSIH 65 which states  in
     the headnote:


     "An error of law might occur if the judge failed to take  into  account
     the relevant consideration that the probability of the asylum  seeker's
     narrative might be affected by its cultural context, or had  failed  to
     explain the part played  in  his  decision  by  consideration  of  that
     context, or had based his conclusion on speculation or conjecture."


 16. I find that the judge has speculated instead of taking into account the
     Appellant's evidence as to how she was expected to work  in  Macedonia.
     I find that his speculation was  an  insufficient  basis  on  which  to
     reject the Appellant's case.


 17. Given that these were the two main reasons that the Judge rejected  the
     Appellant's claim, I find that  they  are  material.   The  credibility
     findings of the judge are vitiated by material errors of law.


18. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given that I  have  found  that  the  credibility
    findings cannot stand, and therefore given the nature and extent of the
    fact-finding necessary to enable  this  appeal  to  be  remade,  having
    regard to the overriding objective, I find that it  is  appropriate  to
    remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision involves the making of material errors of law  and  I  set
    the decision aside.

20. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 30 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
