
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/06032/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly         |Decision Promulgated           |
|On 31 July 2017                        |On 8 August 2017               |
|                                       |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between

                                   I N O-N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mr Mohzam of Burton and Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent:       Mrs Obomi

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction. An anonymity order was  made  previously  and  shall
   continue
2. The Appellant was born on 18 May 1980 and is a national of Nigeria.
3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Tully promulgated on 29 December 2016 which dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent  dated  3  June
   2016 to refuse the Appellants protection claim which  was  based  on  her
   claim to be at risk on return of domestic violence and enforced  FGM  for
   her and her daughter from her husband and his family.
The Judge's Decision
5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Tully ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
   decision .
6. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that the Judge  was  in  error  in
   that :
   a) Her assessment that there was sufficiency of protection  available  in
      Nigeria was unjustified  by  the  material  before  her  which  showed
      unwillingness and ineffectiveness on the part of the authorities.
   b) With respect to internal relocation the  Judge  failed  to  take  into
      account K and others (FGM) The Gambia CG [2013] UKUT 62 (IAC) and give
      cogent reasons for finding that internal relocation would be available
      or unduly harsh
   c) The Judge failed to take  into  account  the  best  interests  of  the
      children.
   d) The Judge failed to take into account the risk to the Appellant if her
      husband was returned to Nigeria.
7.  On 10 April  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  refused
   permission to appeal. The application was renewed. In a decision dated 10
   May 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Smith granted  permission  'principally  on
   the sufficiency of protection point' while noting that the error may  not
   be material if the findings on internal relocation were  sustainable.  He
   noted that the grounds in relation to human rights were weaker but he did
   not limit the grant of permission.

8. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Mohzam  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a) The Judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  in  respect  of  sufficiency  of
      protection given the background material in the Appellants bundle.

   b) The Judges consideration of internal protection  and  whether  it  was
      unduly harsh was not adequately reasoned.

   c) The husband could cause further problems if he were returned.

   d) There was no adequate assessment of the children  being  at  risk  and
      their best interests were inadequately considered.

9. On behalf of the Respondent Mrs Obomi submitted that :

   a) She relied on the Rule 24 notice.

   b) The Judge had directed herself  appropriately  and  made  no  material
      error.

   c) The Judge accepted that the Appellant was at risk in her home area and
      considered  all  of  the  evidence  in  relation  to  sufficiency   of
      protection and was entitled to reach the conclusions she did.

   d) Even if she was wrong she  considered  internal  relocation  and  gave
      sustainable reasons for finding that relocation was not unduly harsh.

   e) She set out clear findings in relation to the children.

The Law

10.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. It is a trite observation that a judge need not address in detail  every
   single argument advanced before her,  nor  consider  in  isolation  every
   single piece of evidence. She must weigh all of the evidence before  her,
   and give clear reasons for her conclusions such that the parties, and  in
   particular the losing party, can understand the reasons for her decision.
   I am satisfied that this was what the Judge did in this case.

14. Having accepted that the Appellant and her daughter would  face  threats
   on return to her home area, Benin, from her husband's family only as  she
   considered that in the absence of any evidence to  the  contrary  it  was
   speculative to consider the risk of her  husband  returning  to  Nigeria.
   That was a finding I am satisfied she was entitled to make.

15. The Judge then went on to consider her  circumstances  if  she  returned
   and found that she could return to live with her family  (paragraphs  26-
   28) as  she  found  her  claim  to  be  estranged  from  her  family  was
   inconsistent with what she had told Social Services. She was entitled  to
   find that with their support and living an hour away from  her  husband's
   family it was unlikely they would abduct her for the purpose of FGM  now.
   This was a finding that was reasoned and open to her.

16. Neverthless in what she found to be an unlikely event she then  went  on
   to consider the adequacy of state protection in this context  noting  the
   background material in the refusal letter at paragraphs  15-21  that  FGM
   had been criminalised and  there  was  a  police  force  in  Nigeria  but
   nevertheless recognising the Appellants case that corruption affected the
   effectiveness of state protection but found that there  was  no  evidence
   before her to suggest her husbands family  had  the  power  or  influence
   required to subvert the police.

17. While not specifically setting out the principles in  Horvath  [2001]  1
   AC 489 she would have been entitled to note that in that case Lord  Craig
   endorsed the formulation of Stuart Smith LJ in the  court  below  on  the
   level of protection required and said "In my judgment there  must  be  in
   force in the country in question  a  criminal  law  which  makes  violent
   attacks by the persecutors punishable by sentences commensurate with  the
   gravity of the crimes.  There must be a reasonable willingness by the law
   enforcement agencies, that is the police and courts, to detect  prosecute
   and punish offenders".  However, in relation to unwillingness, he pointed
   out that inefficiency and incompetence by the police and law  enforcement
   officials are not the same as unwillingness; there may be  various  sound
   reasons why criminals are not brought to  justice;  and  the  corruption,
   sympathy and weakness of some individuals in the system of  justice  does
   not mean that the state is unwilling to afford protection.  The Judge was
   entitled to conclude at paragraphs 28-29 that the Appellant had failed to
   demonstrate that in her case the police would be unwilling to act on  the
   laws criminalising FGM.

18.  I am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  took  into  account  the  Appellants
   personal circumstances in assessing whether she could  avail  herself  of
   the protection available: she was a well-educated woman , she had herself
   avoided FGM and was clearly protective of her daughters interests,  would
   be living an hour from her husbands family and have the  support  of  her
   own family  (paragraphs 28-29)  and  concluded  that  the  Appellant  had
   failed to demonstrate that in her case the police would be  unwilling  to
   act on the laws criminalising FGM.  I  am  satisfied  she  gave  adequate
   reasons for this conclusion

19. However while I find her  reasoning  to  be  adequate  she  went  on  to
   consider in  the  alternative  whether  the  Appellant  could  internally
   relocate  to  Lagos  or  Abuja  at  paragraphs  30-36  directing  herself
   appropriately as to the relevant legal test in Januzi v SSHD [2006]  UKHL
   5 . I am satisfied that  the  Judge  took  into  account  the  Appellants
   personal circumstances: she spoke the  language,  was  well  educated  to
   degree level and had a  good  employment  record,  would  have  financial
   support with a relocation package, was in generally good health  and  her
   children would return with her and  there  was  a  functioning  education
   system in Nigeria. I am satisfied that the Judge  gave  adequate  reasons
   for her finding.

20. In relation to the children's best interests the  Judge  carried  out  a
   very detailed analysis under  Article  8at  paragraphs  41-60specifically
   identifying the best  interests  of  the  children  at  paragraphs  54-58
   directing herself correctly that these were not a trump card.

21. I remind myself of what was said in   Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
   set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

22. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

23. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

24. The appeal is dismissed.

25. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008  9as
   amended)  the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout   these
   proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise.  An
   order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.
Signed                                                              Date
7.8.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
