
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06246/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 March 2019                               |On 26 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   mr P S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna of Counsel, instructed by Gurney Harden
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  In a  decision  sent  on  22
    November 2018 Judge Devittie of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissed  his
    appeal against a decision made by the respondent on 23 April 2018.  The
    appellant first claimed asylum in October 2010.   His  application  was
    refused in November 2010.  His appeal was dismissed by the Tribunal  on
    21 March 2011 and by June 2011 he had become appeal  rights  exhausted.
    On 28 April 2014 he made  further  representations  and,  following  a
    judicial review, these were treated as a fresh claim.  On 23 April 2018
    the respondent made a decision refusing to grant him asylum  and  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant's first ground contends that the judge erred  in  law  in
    treatment of  the  appellant's  sur  place  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It is salient to set out the judge's considerations of  these
    activities in paragraphs 13 and 14:

         "13. The appellant stated that his sur plus activities  in  the  UK
             would place him at risk of persecution upon his return.


             (1)  He said that since his  release  from  detention  he  has
                  begun actively  engaging  in  Tamil  activities  and  LTTE
                  associated  organisations  in  the  United   Kingdom.   He
                  attended a Diaspora Remembrance Day  on  18  May  2014  at
                  Trafalgar Square to commemorate those who died in the war.
                  He is a human rights activist.  He  is  a  member  of  the
                  Tamil Solidarity Organisation.  This  organisation  brings
                  all people in the  diaspora  community  together  who  are
                  Tamils.  He is also a member  of  the  Voice  of  Freedom,
                  which is a group initiated by Tamil youths in London.   He
                  plays a musical instrument used in times long gone to make
                  announcements about the fight of the Tamil  people.   They
                  also have a Facebook page and YouTube channel  to  promote
                  the vision of this group.  He has now dedicated  his  life
                  to justice for the Tamil people.  In 2018  he  attended  a
                  mass rally organised by all Tamil organisations in the UK.
                   He took the lead in chanting anti Sri  Lankan  government
                  slogans.   At  both  of  these  protests  the  Sri  Lankan
                  government  officials  took  photographs  of  them.    His
                  parents attended the events and  were  threatened  by  the
                  authorities.  As a result his parents have had to move out
                  of their home. He first became involved  in  UK  political
                  activity in May 2014.   At  one  of  their  demonstrations
                  outside the Sri Lankan  embassy  in  the  UK,  an  embassy
                  official was heard to say:


                      "We will cut their throats" "our photos published  in
                      the media and the South India Tamil Channel".


             (2)  The appellant called a witness to give  evidence  on  his
                  sur  plus  activities.  He  said  that  he  was  a   Tamil
                  Solidarity activist. He saw officers take photos and utter
                  threats at an event he attended  with  the  appellant  and
                  others. He recruited the appellant to the Tamil Solidarity
                  Movement.


         14.  In relation to the appellant's  sur  plus  activities  I  have
             accepted  his  account  of  the  extent  of  his  involvement.
             However, given the  fact  that  the  appellant's  profile  and
             history of  past  detentions  does  not  place  him  into  the
             category of someone whom the authorities would perceive  as  a
             threat to the unitary state of Sri Lanka, I find that his  sur
             plus  activities,  standing  alone,  would   not   cause   the
             authorities to perceive him as posing a threat to Sri  Lanka's
             unitary state."


3.   It is contended that in this treatment of  the  appellant's  sur  place
    claim the judge erred in treating as  fatal  to  that  claim  that  his
    profile and history of  past  detentions  did  not  place  him  in  the
    category of someone who the Sri Lankan authorities would perceive as  a
    threat to the unitary state of Sri Lanka.  It was said that thereby the
    judge wrongly made the risk arising out  of  the  appellant's  diaspora
    activism conditional upon the appellant's earlier history in Sri Lanka.
     In that way it was said he conflated both aspects of  the  appellant's
    claim in circumstances where each on its own could give rise to a  risk
    on return.

4.   I am persuaded that this ground is made out and Mr Tufan did  not  seek
    to challenge it with any vigour.  It was plainly an error on  the  part
    of the judge to consider that sur place activities could not  on  their
    own place the appellant in a risk category.  The guidance given by  the
    Tribunal in GJ [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) very clearly sets out  that  one
    of the distinct risk categories concerns those identified at  paragraph
    7 of the headnote in the following terms:

         "7.  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are: ...


               a) individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora  and/or  a  renewal  of  hostilities  within  Sri
                  Lanka."


    This risk category is stated in general terms that do not  exclude  sur
    place claims. Such error on the part of the judge was plainly  material
    since the appellant's own account of  the  extent  of  his  involvement
    clearly evidenced a significant role within  diaspora  activities.   In
    light of the above, I find that the judge materially erred in  law  and
    that the judge's decision must be set aside.

5.   I discussed with the parties what I should do by  way  of  disposal  of
    this appeal if I decided (as I have) to set aside the  decision.   Both
    were in agreement that it would be open to me to dispose of it  on  the
    basis of the evidence that is now before me.  An alternative  would  be
    to consider the matter for  potential  country  guidance  treatment  in
    particular in relation to whether or not diaspora  involvement  in  the
    TGTN suffices to place a person within the GJ risk categories.

6.   Having considered the matter I am satisfied that I am in a position  to
    remake the decision in this appeal without further ado.  On  the  basis
    of the judge's findings on the  appellant's  sur  place  activities,  I
    conclude that the appeal should be allowed.  There are several  reasons
    for my conclusion.

7.    First,  one  relevant  consideration  when  assessing  the  sur  place
    activities of an applicant concerns whether or not such activities  are
    a continuation of activities that took place in the country of  origin:
    see Article 5 of the Qualification Directive.   That  is  important  in
    this case because it was  accepted  by  the  judge  that  he  had  been
    detained in 2006.  Indeed this was something accepted by the respondent
    in the refusal letter in respect of the original asylum  claim.   Judge
    Dawson at paragraph 5 of the decision in  March  2011  noted  that  the
    appellant had been afforded the benefit of the doubt in respect of  the
    incident of detention which occurred in  June  2006.   As  recorded  in
    paragraph 2 of the same decision the appellant had been arrested by the
    Sri Lankan authorities in connection with a bombing in close  proximity
    to where he lived.  He claimed that he was arrested as he was suspected
    of being an LTTE member.  It had also been  accepted  by  Judge  Dawson
    that in this detention the appellant had suffered ill-treatment.   That
    meant that it was necessary for there to be good reasons why it  should
    be considered that there  would  not  be  a  repetition  of  such  ill-
    treatment.

8.   Secondly there were  several  strands  to  the  appellant's  sur  place
    activities.  He had been involved in a  group  called  PARAI  Voice  of
    Freedom, a group of Tamil youths who provide musical accompaniment  for
    diaspora events.  His involvement in diaspora events had been confirmed
    by a  letter  from  T  U  Senan,  international  coordinator  of  Tamil
    solidarity which described his commitment as a political activist  with
    both Tamil solidarity and the TGTE.  His account was also supported  by
    a statement of Mr Pushparagavan, a human rights activist  with  refugee
    status in the United Kingdom who recruited  the  appellant  into  Tamil
    solidarity.  He confirmed that the appellant's role in the organisation
    extended beyond attendance at demonstrations  and  included  a  project
    seeking for disclosure of all detention camps and secret torture prison
    in Sri Lanka, as well as seeking  for  the  release  of  all  political
    prisoners.  There were also photographs,  including  of  the  appellant
    having appeared in the media.  He had been interviewed by ETHIR  media,
    an online based political forum.  There was a video of  him  expressing
    his views which appeared  on  YouTube.   The  video  of  the  appellant
    playing his instrument during a widely  reported  protest  in  February
    2018 appeared in online media.  He was also part of the organising team
    of the Martyrs'  Day  celebration  in  2017.   The  statement  from  Mr
    Pushparagavan also  confirmed  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  had
    attended and photographed protests in  which  the  appellant  had  been
    involved.  Before proceeding further, I note that the TGTE continues to
    be a proscribed  organisation  in  Sri  Lanka,  as  recognised  by  the
    respondent in the CPIN at 6.3 and  that  this  is  clearly  a  relevant
    matter to the assessment of risk of questioning and detention:  see  UB
    (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 85.

9.   Mr Tufan has sought to rely on the fact  that  the  CPIN  at  paragraph
    3.1.4 states that "participating in diaspora activity such as attending
    demonstrations is not in itself evidence that  a  person  will  attract
    adverse attention  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   Each  case  should  be
    considered on its own facts".  However, that is followed by  a  further
    paragraph stating at 3.15:

         "A person perceived to be a threat to the state through  having  or
         being perceived to have a significant role  in  relation  to  post-
         conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora  and/or  renewal  of
         activities within Sri Lanka as held by the Upper Tribunal in GJ and
         Others are likely to be at risk of  persecution  on  the  basis  of
         political opinion and a grant of asylum may be appropriate".


    Whilst further the final sentence of this paragraph  states  that  each
    case must be considered on its own facts, I am satisfied that the facts
    accepted by the judge in this case were weighty.  The evidence  showing
    that the appellant has a significant profile is considerable.  As noted
    earlier, it is not disputed by the respondent that the  judge  accepted
    the appellant's account of his sur place activities in full.  In  light
    of that acceptance I consider that the appellant has established to the
    lower standard of proof  that  he  falls  within  the  risk  categories
    outlined in JG at 7(a).  This not being a case which  turns  solely  on
    the issue of his  involvement  in  a  proscribed  organisation  (TGTN);
    therefore, I do not consider that there is  any  need  to  adjourn  for
    further guidance that may be given in the future  by  the  Tribunal  in
    relation to such category of person.  As emphasised  earlier,  the  sur
    place activities of the appellant were multifaceted and fall within the
    scope of existing country guidance.

10.  Mr Tufan has submitted that the appellant would not be at risk  because
    it has not been suggested that he is on a watch or stop list.  However,
    I note that that is a separate category of  risk  as  set  out  by  the
    Tribunal in GJ and the appellant falls  within  7(a)  of  that  country
    guidance, (accepted at 3.15  of  the  CIPIN  as  applying  to  diaspora
    activities) irrespective of whether or not he is a person on a watch or
    stop list.

11.  For the above reasons I conclude:

    The decision of the judge is set out for material error of law;

    The decision I remake is to allow the appeal of the appellant on asylum
    grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 20 March 2019

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
