
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06964/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 May 2019                        |On 21 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     RK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Pickering
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1970 and is a female citizen of South Africa.
    She appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  dated  22  May  2018  to  refuse  her  claim  for
    international protection. The  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  the  decision
    promulgated on 10 July 2018, dismissed her appeal.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal seriously lack focus. The Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge granted permission principally on the basis that  the  judge  had
    failed to follow guidance provided in ES (s82 NIA 2002;  negative  NRM)
    Albania [2018] UKUT 335 (IAC). The headnote of ES provides:

         "1.   Following  the  amendment  to  s  82  of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act'), effective from 20
         October 2014, a previous decision made by the  Competent  Authority
         within the National Referral Mechanism  (made  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities) is not of primary relevance to the determination  of
         an asylum appeal, despite the decisions of the Court of  Appeal  in
         AS (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1469  and  SSHD  v  MS
         (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594.

         2.   The correct approach to determining whether a person  claiming
         to be a victim of trafficking is entitled to asylum is to  consider
         all the evidence in the round as at the date of  hearing,  applying
         the lower standard of proof.

         3.   Since 20 October 2014, there is also no right of appeal on the
         basis that a decision is not in accordance with  the  law  and  the
         grounds of appeal are limited to those set out in the amended s  82
         of the 2002 Act."

 3. The appellant claims that she is a victim of  trafficking.  It  appears
    that the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge found that  it  was  arguable  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge had applied the incorrect standard  of  proof
    to the appellant's claim that she had been trafficked. This is puzzling
    given that at [29] the  judge  writes,  'I  am  required  to  look  the
    evidence in the round and in doing so, I have had regard to  the  lower
    standard of proof. At  the  core  of  this  claim  for  asylum  is  the
    appellant's assertion that she  is  the  victim  of  trafficking.'  The
    wording used by the judge very closely follows that at headnote [2]  of
    ES. I find of the judge applied the correct standard of proof.

 4. At the initial hearing in the Upper Tribunal,  the  appellant  had  the
    advantage of professional representation from Ms Pickering of  counsel.
    She sought to advance a number of  arguments  which  do  not  obviously
    arise from the grounds of appeal. She submitted that the appellant  had
    been unrepresented at the First-tier Tribunal hearing under  the  judge
    had been wrong to criticise the  appellant  for  having  failed  to  to
    provide evidence in support of her appeal especially in  light  of  the
    appellant's health difficulties. I disagree. There is  nothing  in  the
    judge's decision which indicates that  he  adopted  a  procedure  which
    prevented the appellant from stating her case or that he failed to take
    into account  the  appellant's  medical  condition  which,  indeed,  he
    examines at considerable length. Ms Pickering also submitted the  judge
    had failed properly to take into account the fact  that  the  appellant
    had required counselling for PTSD. The judge refers to that counselling
    at [36]. At [38], however, he noted that whilst there was evidence that
    the appellant was suffering from PTSD depression and anxiety there  was
    'little detail as to the severity of these conditions.' He  noted  that
    he did not have copies of  the  appellant's  GP's  records  or  medical
    evidence of her claimed diagnosis of HIV. Notwithstanding the fact that
    the appellant was not represented, it was open to  the  judge  to  have
    regard to these deficiencies in her evidence. The judge was not obliged
    to take a different view of the appeal and the evidence simply  because
    the appellant attended without a  representative.  He  was  obliged  to
    ensure that the appellant  fully  understood  the  proceedings  at  the
    hearing but he had to determine the appeal on the basis of the evidence
    before him.

 5. The judge found that the appellant was not a victim of trafficking.  He
    carried out a detailed analysis of risk on return to South Africa.  All
    of the findings which he made were available to him on the evidence and
    background material  relating  to  South  Africa.  He  found  that  the
    appellant would have to  access  counselling  and  appropriate  medical
    treatment in South Africa. He noted that the appellant had delayed  for
    10 years without any clear justification before applying in the  United
    Kingdom for asylum. That was a fact which the  judge  was  entitled  to
    consider in relation to the appellant's credibility. Although the judge
    found that the appellant was not a victim of trafficking, he considered
    in the alternative whether she would be at risk  from  those  whom  she
    claimed had trafficked her. These findings, made in the alternative,  I
    find were legally sound. It was open to the judge to conclude that,  if
    the appellant had been trafficked, then trafficking would not be likely
    to occur again, there being very  little  chance  that  those  who  had
    trafficked the appellant would be aware of her return to South  Africa.
    In conclusion, I find that  the  judge  has  produced  a  thorough  and
    detailed analysis which is not flawed by legal error  for  the  reasons
    asserted in the grounds or, indeed, for  the  reasons  advanced  by  Ms
    Pickering  at  the  initial  hearing.  Consequently,  the   appeal   is
    dismissed.



Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 2 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

