
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06033/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th September 2018                        |On 16th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                    [K J]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajja
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith dismissing his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 26 April 2018 to refuse him asylum  in
    the UK.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 9 July 1991.   He  is  a
    single man with no dependants.  He came to the UK in July 2010  with  a
    visit visa (child) valid from 4 June 2007 until 4  December  2007.   He
    was refused further leave to remain as a Tier 2 child in December 2009.
     After being refused leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  he
    was subsequently granted  leave  valid  from  23  July  2010  until  31
    December 2012.  This was extended until 15 September 2015.

3.   His application  for  leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules  based  on
    compassionate grounds was refused on 28 April  2016,  with  an  out  of
    country right of appeal.  Permission to proceed with a judicial  review
    was refused on 20 October 2016.

4.   On 23 November 2016, he applied for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of
    family and private life.  This was refused with no right of  appeal  on
    31 August 2017.  He claimed asylum on 9 November 2017.

5.   He claimed asylum on the basis that owing to his Muhajir ethnicity  and
    his political activity within MQM London, he would be at risk on return
    to Pakistan.

6.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and his father.

7.   The appellant adopted his witness  statement,  which  he  said  he  had
    written himself.  He said his father is part of the MQM.  The appellant
    said he joined APMSO, the student wing of MQM, for his personal safety.
     He was an ordinary worker in APMSO and when  he  came  to  the  UK  he
    became a member of the MQM in  the  London  branch.   He  has  attended
    protests and other activities, usually outside 10 Downing  Street.   He
    said the events were broadcast in Pakistan.  He has never been involved
    in organising an entire protest but has been involved in doing so  with
    other party members.

8.   He said that his parents left Pakistan in 2010 and neighbours had  told
    them that  their  property  had  been  ransacked  and  had  taken  some
    photographs.  They raised an FIR, a  copy  of  which  he  said  he  had
    provided with the asylum claim.   He  believed  that  the  Taliban  and
    perhaps members of other political  parties  were  responsible  because
    evidence of clothing and weapons were found.

9.   When asked why he had not claimed  asylum  until  2017,  the  appellant
    said he had been issued with a visa for more than three years  and  did
    not wish to claim in case it jeopardised his stay.  His  intention  was
    to return if the situation improved but the situation  got  worse.   He
    had heard from a friend that he would be forced to leave if his  asylum
    claim was unsuccessful and because his family was British, he  believed
    he had a right to family life.   He  said  that  discrepancies  in  his
    earlier evidence were owing to his depressed state of mind and that  he
    had told the truth as far as he could understand.

10.  He was asked about an apparent contradiction in the evidence about  the
    state of his mother's health.  The doctor had reported that she was  in
    quite good health.  He said her condition has deteriorated and that was
    why she was unable to attend the hearing.  When he  was  in  detention,
    some friends had been looking after her and she had been to  visit  him
    every day.

11.  He said his father supported him when he was a student.  His father  is
    now retired from his previous job but was  still  working  at  Heathrow
    Airport.  His father is a member of MQM and when he was at work he  had
    close connections with senior members of MQM in Pakistan.   His  father
    attends protests and is  a  long-standing  member  of  the  party.   He
    started accompanying his father to MQM events when he came to  the  UK.
    MQM does not issue membership cards.

12.  He said that until 2013 there was a single  MQM  party.   In  2013  the
    party split and in Pakistan there is a separate party  with  their  own
    leader and that is why  he  believes  he  would  have  no  security  in
    Pakistan because the leader of his faction has been banned.

13.  The judge then asked the appellant some questions.  He said he did  not
    report the attack on  him  when  he  was  at  college  because  he  was
    frightened there might be  repercussions  for  his  family.   When  the
    family left in 2010, the property remained empty and there was  no  one
    to care for it.  He fears the  Taliban  and  other  political  parties,
    state actors including the police and the  rangers.   He  said  he  had
    suffered no personal physical harm because at the time he had security.

14.  The appellant's father  adopted  his  witness  statement  in  which  he
    stated that the appellant is politically  active  with  MQM,  which  he
    joined in Pakistan and with which he still maintains ties in the UK.

15.  The appellant's father referred to the incident when he  and  his  wife
    were captured by the Taliban and robbed and  the  house  was  illegally
    occupied.  They  no  longer  feel  safe  there  and  claimed  that  the
    appellant's life would be in danger.  As  they  are  from  the  Muhajir
    ethnic group, they would be targeted by state actors.  He  referred  to
    his wife's medical conditions and to the dependency on the appellant.

16.  The judge then heard submissions  from  Mr  Pareek  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent,  who  relied  on  the  refusal  letter.   She  also   heard
    submissions on behalf of the appellant from Mr M Alam.

17.  The judge considered the appellant's reliance on his ethnicity as  part
    of his claim for asylum.  The judge said the issue of his ethnicity was
    not pursued in interview and his written evidence did not  address  it,
    neither did his father's evidence.  Even if she accepted that he is  of
    Muhajir ethnicity, there was no objective evidence that that in  itself
    would give rise to a risk of persecution.  The objective  evidence  set
    out in the refusal letter shows the Muhajir is a main ethnic  group  in
    Pakistan, not affiliated to one  particular  political  party  although
    many support MQM.  She did not find, even applying the  lower  standard
    of proof, that the appellant has established a protection  claim  based
    on race, as there was  no  evidence  that  Muhajir  are  persecuted  on
    account of their ethnicity.

18.  As to the appellant's political affiliations, the judge  accepted  that
    the appellant was a student member of MQM by virtue of his  association
    with the APMSO.  The judge found that the one incident in  Pakistan  in
    2008 when he was attacked by individuals he believed were supporters of
    another political party, to have been an isolated incident,  which  was
    not reported to the police.  Therefore between 2007  when  he  went  to
    college and 2010 when he left for the UK, there was no evidence that he
    suffered any adverse attention from the authorities or any other source
    and his oral evidence was that he did not suffer any physical harm.

19.  The judge found that the only purpose for the appellant coming  to  the
    UK in 2010 was to pursue his studies.  She rejected as  untruthful  his
    father's evidence that the appellant was tortured in Pakistan and  that
    when he came here it was because he feared torture.  She  rejected  the
    appellant's claims that he did not claim asylum because he did not wish
    to jeopardize his  stay.   She  found  the  delay  in  claiming  asylum
    damaging to his credibility and that it was made as a  last  resort  to
    seek to remain in the UK with his family when all  other  attempts  had
    failed.  She found that when he  left  Pakistan  in  2010  he  had  not
    suffered treatment amounting to persecution  nor  was  he  at  risk  on
    account of his student politics and  his  affiliation  with  MQM.   His
    father had no high political  profile  and  it  was  not  his  father's
    evidence that he suffered  discrimination  or  ill-treatment  from  any
    source on account of his political activities in Pakistan.

20.  The judge said there was  no  corroborative  evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's claims that his parents were robbed either in 2002 or  2008
    and held for ransom, and that their house was occupied by the  Taliban.
    The property was left abandoned in 2010 and the photographs, which  the
    appellant claims were taken by a neighbour were of no evidential value.
     Even if the Taliban  did  occupy  the  property,  given  that  it  was
    abandoned, there was nothing to link the action taken  by  the  Taliban
    with the political affiliation of the former owners or occupants.

21.  As to the appellant's political activities to the  UK,  the  judge  was
    prepared to accept that he is connected with the MQM  in  London.   The
    letter from Nadeem Ehsan states that he has been a  member  since  2008
    but apart from a general statement that the  appellant  "has  continued
    his active association with the party from the United Kingdom" provides
    no further information about the appellant's activities or profile  nor
    does he mention the split in the party or claim the party is banned  in
    Pakistan.

22.  The judge considered  the  objective  evidence  cited  in  the  refusal
    letter about the MQM which appeared to indicate that the London faction
    is not banned but  only  that  it  is  not  recognised  as  having  any
    authority to represent MQM in Pakistan.

23.  The judge found that taking the evidence at its highest, the  appellant
    has a low profile within the MQM in the UK and there was no evidence to
    show that merely taking part in  demonstrations  -  the  only  evidence
    being a few photographs which are undated  and  with  the  location  as
    specified - gives him a profile sufficient to  make  him  a  person  of
    interest to the authorities or to the other political parties such that
    he would be at risk on return.  She held that  the  objective  material
    suggests that members of MQM are not at risk of treatment amounting  to
    persecution and that relocating to Karachi would be an  option  as  the
    general security situation has improved there.

24.  The judge  considered  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  suffering  from
    depression and at one stage was suicidal.  She said he has  offered  no
    medical evidence in support.  The judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant has demonstrated the  high  threshold  required  to  meet  an
    Article 3 claim.

25.  The judge considered the appellant's claim under Article 8 of the  CHR.
     She said the appellant has no partner or children and therefore cannot
    bring himself within Appendix FM.  As to his private life, he has  been
    in the UK for eight years and cannot meet the residence requirements of
    paragraph 276ADE.  He is an educated young man and there is no  medical
    evidence that he is in poor health.  She was therefore unable  to  find
    in the light of her findings in the asylum claim, that there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to his integration into Pakistan.

26.  The judge considered the appellant's  relationship  with  his  parents,
    particularly his mother.  She took into  account  the  medical  report.
    His mother is a British  citizen  and  is  entitled  to  treatment  and
    support from the NHS.   The  judge  said  when  the  appellant  was  in
    detention, alternative arrangements were  made  for  her  care  and  no
    reasons were advanced why, in the event  of  the  appellant's  removal,
    alternative arrangements could not be made.  She appreciated  that  the
    appellant's mother would prefer to have her son at home to  look  after
    her but, if he were allowed to  work,  alternative  arrangements  would
    need to be made in that event.  The judge said  that  if  there  was  a
    dependency, it was one of choice rather than of necessity and that  the
    appellant has exaggerated the extent of his mother's disability and her
    dependence on him.

27.  The judge  held  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  amount  to  an
    interference in his current domestic arrangements and in the  enjoyment
    of his private life.  She went on to consider  the  proportionality  of
    his removal which involved balancing the public  interest  against  the
    appellant's particular circumstances and has had regard to  the  public
    interest considerations in Section 117B.  She said the appellant speaks
    English, is not financially independent as he is not allowed  to  work.
    His immigration status has throughout been precarious, as leave that he
    was granted as a student was temporary and for a specific purpose.

28.  The judge found that there is a strong public interest  in  maintaining
    immigration control and has been  unable  to  identify  any  particular
    circumstance that outweighs the public interest in his removal.

29.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Birrell granted the appellant  permission  to
    appeal.  He said that the grounds asserted that the judge erred in that
    it was procedurally unfair to proceed without  a  copy  of  either  the
    screening interview and asylum interview;  the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for finding that his credibility was undermined by his
    late claim when he had valid leave to remain; her findings  in  respect
    of paragraph 276ADE(vi) were inadequate.

30.  Judge Birrell held that given that the respondent in submission  relied
    on a refusal letter which itself relied on issues arising out  of  what
    was said in the interviews and discrepancies therein, it  was  arguably
    procedurally unfair to proceed  without  those  interviews  given  that
    there was no reason given for why they could not  be  produced.   Judge
    Birrell said there was little merit  in  the  other  grounds  but  gave
    permission for those grounds to be argued.

31.  Mr Gajja submitted that paragraph 8 of  the  grounds  which  criticised
    paragraph 16 of the judge's decision was  not  sustainable  because  in
    that paragraph  the  judge  was  only  setting  out  what  was  in  the
    respondent's refusal letter.

32.  Mr Gajjar said that the basis of the appellant's appeal was in  respect
    of what the judge said at paragraph 10 of the decision.  The judge said
    there was no respondent's bundle.  Therefore, she had not had sight  of
    the appellant's screening interview or  substantive  asylum  interview.
    Mr Gajja said the absence of these documents was fatal to  the  judge's
    decision.  He accepted that there was no specific indication that could
    be seen from the determination that either party  raised  this  at  the
    hearing.  He accepted that it  was  something  that  should  have  been
    raised but was not.  He said that from paragraphs 54 onwards the  judge
    adopted what was said in the respondent's Reasons for Refusal Letter.

33.  Mr Gajja  submitted  that  within  the  asylum  interviews  there  were
    references to the appellant's suicidal tendencies.  However  the  judge
    failed to consider this matter.  It was also explored in the  screening
    interview.  He said the appellant had attempted to take  his  life  and
    was given treatment.  The judge mentioned  at  paragraph  65  that  the
    appellant claimed to be suffering from depression and was at one  stage
    suicidal.  He said the judge failed to properly  consider  this  issue.
    He said the judge failed to have proper regard to the relationship  the
    appellant has with his mother which in  his  opinion  goes  beyond  the
    normal emotional ties, and the role he plays within her life.  He  said
    the judge gave insufficient reasoning for dismissing this issue.

34.  Ms Everett submitted that the difficulty with the  argument  about  the
    absence of the screening and substantive interview records was that  it
    was not raised at the hearing before the judge.  She found in her  file
    a letter dated 13 June 2018 (a copy is also on the  court  file)  which
    was sent by the Home Office to the  appellant's  solicitors,  Law  Lane
    Solicitors, enclosing the respondent bundle.  The  appellant's  hearing
    was heard on 8 June 2018.  This meant that the respondent's bundle  was
    sent five days after the hearing.

35.  In any event when I asked the appellant some questions about  this,  he
    told me that at the end of the screening  and  substantive  interviews,
    the Home Office interviewing  officer  made  copies  of  the  interview
    records and gave them to him.  He scanned a copy of each  interview  to
    his solicitor in preparation for consultation with them.  I  find  that
    this would be the explanation as to why the absence  of  the  interview
    records were not raised by the appellant's solicitor  at  the  hearing.
    They were not probably aware that the judge did not have copies of  the
    interview records.

36.  In any event, the judge had a copy of the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    dated 30 April 2018 from which she was able to set out the respondent's
    reasons for refusing the appellant's asylum claim.  (Paragraphs  15  to
    26 of the judge's decision).

37.  I find that the absence of  the  screening  interview  and  substantive
    interview records was not fatal to the  judge's  decision.   The  judge
    heard evidence from the appellant and his father.  They  adopted  their
    witness statements.  They were cross-examined by the  HOPO  below.  The
    judge's  findings  did  not  rely  on  the  interview  records  or  the
    discrepancies highlighted  by  the  HOPO  below  that  arose  from  the
    interviews.

38.  The judge identified the evidence that she accepted  and  the  evidence
    that she rejected.  She had regard to the objective  evidence  and  the
    documentary evidence submitted by the appellant.  She reached  findings
    that were perfectly sustainable and open to her on the evidence.

39.  I reject Mr Gajja's submission that the judge  was  dismissive  of  the
    appellant's Article 8  claim.   The  judge  had  misgivings  about  the
    appellant's mother's health.  She said so at paragraph 67.   She  found
    that if there was a dependency it was one of choice rather than one  of
    necessity and that the appellant had  exaggerated  the  extent  of  his
    mother's disability and her dependence on him.

40.  Mr Gajja sought to raise an issue which  was  not  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  He claimed that the judge failed to give proper regard to  the
    appellant's mental health and his attempt to commit  suicide.   I  find
    that the judge gave sufficient consideration to it at paragraph 65.

41.  I find that the judge's decision does not disclose  an  error  of  law.
    The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  10 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun






