
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06327/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 13 May 2021                     |On : 24 May 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     TV
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, instructed by Bindmans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business.  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  of  Tamil  ethnicity,  born  on  14
March 1996. He arrived in the UK on 27 October 2008, aged 12 years old,  and
claimed asylum on 31 October 2008. His claim  was  refused  on  15  December
2008 but, owing to his age, he was  granted  discretionary  leave  until  15
December 2011 under the Home Office policy for unaccompanied asylum  seeking
children ("UASC"). Prior to the expiry of his leave he applied  for  further
leave to remain, but his application was refused on 3 July 2014.  An  appeal
against that decision was dismissed on 25 March 2015 by First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Coll and the judge's decision was upheld by the Upper  Tribunal  in  a
decision of 21 September 2015. The appellant became appeal rights  exhausted
on 5 October 2015.

On 4 March 2016 the appellant made further submissions  which  were  refused
on 17 January 2018. Following a  successful  judicial  review  claim,  those
submissions were re-considered by the respondent  together  with  additional
submissions received on 14 March 2019. In a decision dated 20 June 2019  the
respondent treated the submissions as a fresh protection  and  human  rights
claim but refused the claim, with a right of appeal.

The basis of the appellant's claim, as set out  before  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Coll in February 2015, was that the appellant  feared  persecution  if
returned to Sri Lanka on account of  his  Tamil  ethnicity  and  his  mental
health. The appellant claimed to have resided in Sri Lanka with his  mother,
his step-father and his step-brother. He claimed that his father was  killed
by the Sri Lankan army in around 1999 when he was pushed into  a  well.  He,
the appellant, was three years of age at the time. The army  also  killed  a
relative of his and he was unable to live  a  normal  life  because  of  the
artillery fire, curfews and round-ups, general  violence  and  the  constant
presence of soldiers near his home. His step-father used to beat him up  and
eventually his mother decided to send him to the UK due  to  his  heightened
anxiety. He was taken to Colombo and  then  handed  over  to  a  family  who
brought him to the UK on 27 October 2008. He was handed to a woman  whom  he
now referred to as "aunt" and he lived with her for some time.

At the hearing before Judge Coll reliance was placed  upon  the  appellant's
mental  health  condition  as  he  was  suffering  from  PTSD  due  to   his
experiences in Sri Lanka and was receiving therapy. The appellant  had  been
placed with a foster family in 2012 following  an  incident  when  his  aunt
attacked him and he had then moved into semi-independent accommodation  with
support from the local  authority's  Looked  After  Children  team.  It  was
submitted that his mental health  would  significantly  deteriorate  if  his
support was withdrawn and if he was returned to Sri Lanka. The  judge  found
the appellant's fears to be genuinely held but did not accept that he  would
be of any adverse interest to the Sri Lankan authorities as he  had  had  no
personal involvement with the LTTE when in Sri Lanka and had not engaged  in
sur place activity in the UK. The  judge  considered  that  the  appellant's
mental health was not a risk factor for persecution. It  was  accepted  that
he was no longer in contact with his mother but the  judge  considered  that
the Red Cross may be able to help him trace her and his brother and did  not
consider there to be  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  in  Sri
Lanka. The judge noted that the appellant had made a good recovery in  terms
of his mental health and considered that he could not succeed on  Article  3
grounds.

The appellant's further submissions were based upon his  mental  health  and
the risk on return arising from his sur place activities in the UK.  It  was
stated that the appellant had been attending various demonstrations and  had
become a member of the British  Tamil  Forum  and  Tamil  Solidarity,  which
would put him within the risk factors in  GJ  and  others  (post-civil  war:
returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319. The submissions made following  the
judicial review proceedings, received on 14 March 2019,  were  based  mostly
on Article 3 and 8 and provided a more detailed account of  the  appellant's
history giving rise to his mental  health  problems.  The  submissions  were
accompanied by a significant number of medical and  psychiatric  reports  as
well as a country expert report and background materials.  It  was  asserted
that the appellant had attempted suicide since  receiving  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal and was being treated by mental health  specialists.
He had been diagnosed as  having  complex  PTSD  and  depression  caused  by
multiple traumatic experiences and that he was functioning  at  an  age  far
younger than his years. There were concerns about him breaking  down  if  he
was separated from his significant level  of  support  in  the  UK.  It  was
considered that there was a high risk of suicide if he was  removed  to  Sri
Lanka.

The submissions were  accompanied  by  the  appellant's  statement  dated  6
February 2019, in which he gave details of  his  experiences  in  Sri  Lanka
including the abuse suffered  at  the  hands  of  his  step-father  and  the
traumatic experiences of the conflict, his journey to  the  UK  at  a  young
age, the abuse he suffered from his aunt with whom he  was  living  when  he
came to the UK,  the  harsh  treatment  he  received  in  foster  care,  the
difficulties he faced living in semi-independent accommodation, his  studies
in adult nursing, his mental  health  problems  and  four  suicide  attempts
between the age of 18 and 19 including cutting himself, drinking  weedkiller
and attempting to hang himself, and his introduction to Tamil groups and  to
Christianity. He referred to being baptised in  2017  and  to  his  fear  of
being discriminated against in Sri Lanka as a  Tamil  and  a  Christian  and
being at risk because of his father's past involvement  with  the  LTTE  and
his own involvement with Tamil groups in the UK.

In the decision  of  20  June  2019  refusing  the  appellant's  claim,  the
respondent considered that the evidence provided by the  appellant  did  not
demonstrate that his political activities  in  the  UK  were  likely  to  be
perceived as a significant role such as to make him of ongoing  interest  to
the Sri Lankan authorities. It was considered that  even  if  the  appellant
had genuinely  converted  to  Christianity  he  would  not  be  at  risk  of
persecution on that basis and would be  able  to  continue  practising  that
religion in Sri Lanka. The respondent, therefore, did not consider that  the
appellant was at risk on  return  to  Sri  Lanka.  Further,  the  respondent
considered that there were no very significant obstacles to the  appellant's
integration in Sri Lanka and that he could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
paragraph 276ADE(1) of the immigration rules. It  was  considered  that  his
medical condition was not such that his removal would breach Article 3 or  8
and that he would be able to access medical  treatment  in  Sri  Lanka.  The
respondent accepted that the appellant's PTSD  and  depression  were  fairly
severe and that he gained significant support from the Boabab  Centre  where
he was  receiving  psychotherapy,  but  his  condition  was  not  considered
sufficient to meet the Article 3 threshold.

The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision and his appeal  was
heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 13 February 2020 by  Judge  Khawar.  The
appellant was represented by Counsel, Ms C Meredith, and the respondent  was
represented by Mr G Mavrantonis, also Counsel. There was some discussion  at
the commencement of the hearing about the appellant's appearance as  he  was
wearing a hat  which  he  did  not  wish  to  remove  for  the  proceedings.
Ultimately the judge permitted the appellant to keep his hat on, but in  any
event the appellant did  not  give  oral  evidence.  The  judge  heard  oral
evidence  from  Sheila   Melzak,   a   Consultant   Child   and   Adolescent
Psychotherapist from the Baobab Centre and two other witnesses. He also  had
before him an appeal bundle and supplementary  appeal  bundle  amounting  to
around 1000 pages.

The judge  considered  that  there  was  no  adequate  explanation  for  the
appellant's decision not to give  oral  testimony  and  that  there  was  no
evidence to suggest that he was  not  fit  to  give  evidence,  although  he
accepted that he was a vulnerable witness and that he would  be  treated  as
such. The judge agreed with Mr Mavrantonis  that  there  were  a  number  of
credibility issues arising in relation to  the  appellant's  claim  to  have
been politically active in  the  diaspora  and  that  the  limited  evidence
produced did not warrant a departure from the conclusions of Judge  Coll  in
relation to risk on return on that basis. The judge  concluded  likewise  in
relation to the appellant's claim as to his conversion to  Christianity  and
considered that there was no objective evidence to show that he would be  at
risk on that basis even if his conversion was genuine. With  regard  to  the
appellant's medical condition in relation to  Article  3,  the  judge  noted
that the medical experts had based their reports upon the  appellant  having
no support network available to him in Sri Lanka whereas he did  not  accept
that there  was  such  a  lack  of  a  support  network  on  return.  Having
considered the appellant's ability to undertake university studies in  adult
nursing in the UK, the judge concluded that he was a long way  removed  from
his earlier troubled years and from being suicidal. He  therefore  concluded
that the appeal failed on Article 3 grounds and he dismissed the  appeal  on
protection and Article 3 human rights grounds.

The judge, however, allowed the appellant's appeal on Article 8  grounds  on
the basis of his private life, as a  result  of  a  cumulation  of  factors.
Those included the fact that the appellant would be bound to  succeed  under
paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) in a short period of time as he  would  have  reached
the criteria of having been spent more than half of his life in the UK,  the
delays in the consideration of his claim, the fact that  he  had  reached  a
critical stage in his education in the second  year  of  his  adult  nursing
degree and would be unable to continue studying in Sri Lanka, the fact  that
he had come to the UK as a 12 year old child and that he had  suffered  from
PTSD and depression for a number of years.

The Secretary of State  did  not  seek  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
appellant was granted 30  months'  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  until  15
September 2023, under Article 8.

The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  the  judge's  decision  on  his
protection and Article 3 claim  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  20  May  2020.
Following the refusal of permission in the First-tier Tribunal,  he  renewed
his grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal on 1 July 2020.  Permission  was
sought on the following grounds: that there was a failure by  the  judge  to
take proper account of the expert medical evidence and  the  seriousness  of
the appellant's vulnerability which led him to a legally erroneous  approach
to credibility; that the judge failed to  take  account  of  expert  country
evidence in the assessment of credibility and risk; that  the  judge  failed
to make an objective evidence-based  assessment  of  credibility  and  risk;
that the judge misdirected himself in law in relation to the  assessment  of
risk and failed to apply country  guidance;  that  the  judge  made  legally
unsustainable findings on Article 3 medical grounds and failed to take  into
account    material    matters;    and    that    there    was    procedural
unfairness/irregularity and apparent bias by the judge.

Permission was granted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  7  October  2020.  The
responded provided a Rule 24 response dated 12 November  2020  opposing  the
appeal.

The appellant's solicitors, in a letter dated  6  April  2021,  gave  notice
under section 104(4B) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
that the appellant intended to proceed with his  Article  3  and  protection
appeal. They subsequently accepted that  the  Article  3  claim  had  to  be
treated as abandoned owing to the grant of leave to remain to the  appellant
and the appeal therefore proceedings on asylum grounds only.

It is relevant to mention that, at the same time,  written  statements  from
Ms Meredith, Mr Palfi, a paralegal at Bindmans Solicitors and Ms Melzak  who
had given evidence before Judge Khawar, all of which  had  been  annexed  to
the grounds seeking permission, were also  included  as  part  of  a  formal
complaint made by Ms Meredith to the President of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
in a letter dated 21 May 2020. The complaint was made against Judge  Khawar,
alleging that he had failed to treat the appellant  appropriately  in  light
of his mental health  and  vulnerabilities,  that  he  had  taken  a  closed
approach to the evidence, that he had been rude, aggressive and critical  to
herself and to Ms Melzak, that his approach had been unfair and hostile  and
that he had displayed irritation and crossed  the  line  into  bullying.  Mr
Mavrantonis was invited to make comments in relation to  the  complaint  and
he responded in a letter dated 14 September 2020, annexing  his  minutes  of
the hearing.

Judge Khawar was invited to respond to the complaint and did  so  at  length
in a letter dated 11 November 2020, refuting the suggestions of bullying  or
being  hostile  and  dismissive  and  providing  his  own  account  of   the
proceedings.

Hearing and submissions

The matter then came before us and both parties made submissions.

Mr Mackenzie, in his submissions, referred to the evidence relating  to  the
appellant's diaspora activities. He submitted that the  respondent  had  not
disputed the appellant's activities based on the evidence  at  the  time  of
the refusal decision, but had  only  challenged  the  question  of  risk  on
return as a result of those activities. There was  further  evidence  before
the judge including evidence of the appellant's attendance at a  protest  in
February 2020 including  supporting  photographs.  Likewise,  there  was  no
express  challenge  by  the  respondent  in  the  refusal  decision  to  the
appellant's conversion to Christianity. Mr Mackenzie also  referred  to  the
expert evidence which referred to  the  appellant's  PTSD  and  his  limited
capacity to cope with giving evidence and  to  his  fragile  and  vulnerable
state, none of which actually stated that he was unfit to give evidence  but
which made it clear that he would be overwhelmed by  having  to  do  so.  He
submitted that the judge's conduct at the hearing and his  adverse  comments
on the appellant's decision not to give  oral  evidence  ran  "a  coach  and
horses" through the Senior President's  Practice  Direction  and  the  Joint
Presidential Guidance Note No.2 for  vulnerable  witnesses.  The  judge  had
failed to read the papers  before  the  hearing  which  meant  that  he  was
unaware of the appellant's level of vulnerability  and  therefore  erred  by
finding there to  be  no  adequate  explanation  for  him  not  giving  oral
evidence. Mr Mackenzie submitted that the judge gave limited,  unsustainable
and  contradictory  reasons  for  making  adverse  credibility  findings  in
relation to the appellant's sur place activities, in  particular  when  that
had  not  been  challenged  in  the  refusal  letter.  With  regard  to  the
appellant's claim based on his conversion to Christianity, the  judge  erred
by rejecting the appellant's account on the basis of him  not  having  given
oral evidence, again when that  had  not  been  challenged  in  the  refusal
decision but also when there was expert evidence to which he had  failed  to
refer. In relation to the complaint of unfairness,  and  having  read  Judge
Khawar's response, Mr Mackenzie submitted that there was little  dispute  as
to what had happened at the proceedings and he accepted that the  judge  had
not intended to come across as  he  had.  He  submitted  that  the  relevant
matter was how his manner was perceived by the parties.

Mr Melvin submitted  that  whilst  the  refusal  letter  accepted  that  the
appellant was involved in  some  diaspora  activities,  the  author  of  the
refusal letter did not have the benefit of the later witness statements.  It
was therefore for  the  appellant  to  give  evidence  on  those  subsequent
matters and the burden was on him to make out his case before the  Tribunal.
Mr Mavrantonis had been right to comment on the fact that  the  more  recent
evidence could not be tested if the appellant was not  giving  evidence  and
the judge was entitled to reach the conclusions that he did on  the  limited
evidence before him. The judge had considered the medical evidence  and  was
entitled to question why the appellant was not giving oral evidence.

Mr Mackenzie provided a brief response.

Discussion and conclusions

The main focus of the appellant's  challenge  is  the  judge's  approach  to
credibility. It is asserted that  the  judge's  credibility  assessment  was
unlawful as it unfairly took against  the  appellant  for  not  giving  oral
evidence and went behind matters  unchallenged  by  the  respondent  in  the
refusal letter.

The appellant's challenge in that regard is problematic because it takes  as
its starting point the fact that the appellant's evidence before Judge  Coll
in February 2015 was accepted and that his credibility  was  not  challenged
by the respondent in the refusal decision  of  20  June  2019,  whereas  the
appellant was relying upon matters post-dating Judge Coll's  decision  which
had not been the subject of any concession in the refusal  decision.  Whilst
there was no specific challenge in the refusal decision to  the  appellant's
claim  in  regard  to  his  sur  place  activities  and  his  conversion  to
Christianity, there was  by  no  means  a  concession  that  the  claim  was
unchallenged in either respect.  Accordingly,  in  so  far  as  Ms  Meredith
approached the proceedings on that basis, she  was  clearly  wrong  to  have
expected the appellant's evidence to be accepted at face-value.  Although  a
further  reason  for  the  appellant  not  giving  oral  testimony  was  his
vulnerability and mental health concerns, we agree with Mr Melvin  that  the
Tribunal would have treated  him  as  a  vulnerable  witness  and  exercised
appropriate caution and sensitivity when he  was  giving  his  evidence.  In
deciding  to  take  the  step  of  not  making  him  available  for   cross-
examination, Ms Meredith ought  not  to  have  been  taken  by  surprise  by
adverse findings made in that regard, particularly where  the  evidence  did
not specifically state that  the  appellant  was  unfit  to  give  evidence.
Accordingly, we conclude that the judge was perfectly entitled to  make  the
observations that he did at [31] and [37].

However, having said that, and whilst we consider Ms Meredith's approach  to
have been somewhat misguided as stated above,  there  clearly  were  reasons
why the appellant was  reluctant  to  give  live  evidence  and  we  do  not
consider  that  the  judge  was  sufficiently  appraised  of   his   medical
background at the start of the hearing  to  appreciate  that  that  was  the
case. The judge openly admitted that he had not had  sufficient  opportunity
to read all the papers fully  before  the  hearing.  Whilst  it  is  not  in
general a criticism that a judge has not been able to  read  the  papers  in
advance, it is unfortunate in this case that he was unable to do  so  as  it
led to some of the problems with his decision. Had the  judge  had  such  an
opportunity he would no doubt have understood why the appellant was  wearing
his hat, so avoiding the lengthy discussion on the matter,  and  would  have
appreciated the extent of his vulnerability beyond  the  mere  diagnosis  of
PTSD and depression. He would also have been in a position  to  address  the
appellant's reluctance to give evidence and to direct the  evidence  to  the
matters which were in dispute. We  consider,  therefore,  that  the  judge's
approach to the proceedings was erroneous owing to his lack of  appreciation
of the extent of the appellant's vulnerability and we do not  consider  that
his indication, as recorded at [37] of his decision,  that  he  would  treat
the appellant as a vulnerable witness, was sufficient to show that that  was
what he did in practice.

That the judge erred in that respect is particularly evident from  the  fact
that his adverse credibility findings appear to be based  upon  little  more
than the appellant's failure to give oral evidence. That  is  apparent  from
his comments at [36] and [41]. At [36] the judge said  that  Mr  Mavrantonis
"properly submitted that a great many questions arise  in  relation  to  the
appellant's alleged diaspora activities (or lack of them), about  which  the
appellant could have given oral evidence. He failed to do so"  and  at  [38]
he said, "I entirely agree with Mr Mavrantonis that  a  considerable  number
of credibility issues arise in relation to the appellant's  claims  to  have
been active in the Diaspora in demonstrating against  the  Sri  Lanka  state
and his motives for any such activity." The judge did not elaborate on  what
those credibility issues were and neither did he explain, at [38],  why  the
absence of further evidence to warrant departure from Judge Coll's  decision
on risk  on  return  reflected  upon  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
account, when Judge Coll's decision was not based  on  credibility  grounds.
Indeed, the appellant's evidence at that time was that he was  not  involved
in diaspora activities, whereas his current claim is based  upon  activities
carried out subsequent  to  that  decision.  At  [35]  the  judge  found  it
reasonably likely that the appellant  had  only  become  involved  with  the
Tamil groups as a consequence of the refusal of his appeal  by  Judge  Coll,
but he gave no reasons for reaching that conclusion and did not engage  with
the appellant's explanation for the timing of his involvement  in  political
activities in the context of his mental health. At [41] and [42]  there  was
no proper assessment by the judge of the appellant's claim in regard to  his
conversion to Christianity other than a simple dismissal  of  the  claim  on
the basis of a lack of oral evidence.

Clearly  those  were  entirely  inadequate   reasons   for   rejecting   the
credibility of the appellant's account. The appellant's claim was  supported
by a significant amount of letters and  witness  statements,  together  with
oral evidence from witnesses  other  than  the  appellant  and  medical  and
country expert reports, none of which were considered, or considered in  any
detail, by the judge. On the contrary much of the  evidence,  in  particular
that of the medical experts, was  simply  dismissed  by  the  judge  without
proper  reasons  given  -  notably,  at  [45]  and  [50],  where  the  judge
criticised the experts for taking at face value  the  appellant's  claim  to
have no support from  family  in  Sri  Lanka,  yet  giving  no  reasons  for
rejecting his claim in that regard.

For all of these reasons we agree with the assertion  in  the  grounds  that
Judge Khawar erred in his approach to credibility  and  failed  properly  to
engage with the evidence. The decision has to be set aside in  its  entirety
as a result. With regard to  the  ground  making  assertions  of  procedural
impropriety, Mr Mackenzie properly accepted that it  was  not  a  matter  of
apportioning blame and that there were no adverse intentions on the part  of
the judge. To the extent that the judge did not  appear  to  have  a  proper
appreciation of the appellant's vulnerability,  having  not  considered  the
papers fully prior to the hearing, we agree  that  there  was  a  degree  of
procedural unfairness in the proceedings, but we  otherwise  consider  there
to be no need to engage with that ground of appeal any further.

Accordingly, we set aside Judge Khawar's decision and remit the case to  the
First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  again  before  a  different  judge.  The
decision on Article 8  is,  of  course,  preserved,  the  respondent  having
accepted that and granted the appellant  leave  to  remain.  The  Article  3
ground has been abandoned pursuant to section 104(4A)  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The  protection  ground  is  therefore  the
only remaining ground on which the decision is to be re-made.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law and the decision is set aside  to  the  extent
stated above. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant  to
section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(b), to be heard before any  judge  aside  from  Judge
Khawar.

      Anonymity

   The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed:   S Kebede                                 Dated:      17 May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
