
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/06884/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4th August 2017                        |On 21st September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              ahmed rostam aziz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R A O'Hagan, promulgated on 2nd March 2017, following  a  hearing
    at  Birmingham,  Sheldon  Court  on  23rd   January   2017.    In   the
    determination, the judge allowed the appeal of the Appellant  on  human
    rights grounds under Article 8.  The  Respondent  subsequently  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a national of Iraq, is a male, and  was  born  on  1st
    July 1976.  He appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 26th
    May 2016, refusing his claim for asylum and humanitarian protection.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he and his family have been threatened by
    ISIS on  the  basis  of  their  imputed  political  opinion;  that  the
    situation in Iraq is such that he and his family would  be  exposed  to
    the risk of indiscriminate violence contrary to Article 15(c); and that
    he and his family, if returned  to  Iraq,  would  have  to  suffer  the
    consequences of medical treatment being denied to their  daughter,  who
    suffers from Wolcott-Rallison syndrome, which is  a  genetic  disorder,
    causing serious health issues, including diabetes and renal  and  liver
    failure.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the Appellant's asylum and humanitarian  protection
    claim would fail, but there had  been  a  previous  decision  by  Judge
    Hubball on 17th August 2015, where the claim had been rejected, and the
    judge held that it could not succeed now (see  paragraphs  19  to  21).
    He, therefore, went on to say that the only basis upon which the  claim
    might potentially succeed was  under  Article  3  in  relation  to  the
    medical claim arising from the Appellant's daughter's  health  problems
    (paragraph 22).  Consideration was then given by the judge to a  letter
    from Dr Melanie Kershaw, a consultant paediatric endocrinologist, dated
    6th January 2017, and the judge set out extracts from  this  report  at
    length (paragraph 22).

 5. The judge then looked at how "the landscape has changed  following  the
    decision of the European Court of Human Rights in Paposhvili v  Belgium
    (App No. 41738/10, dated 13th December 2016)", in  that  this  decision
    departs from earlier established case  law  (see  paragraph  24).   The
    judge noted how, in the case of N v UK the  previous  long  established
    position had been a requirement that there be "other  very  exceptional
    cases" within the meaning of the judgment in N, so as to raise an issue
    under Article 8 ECHR.

 6. However, the position now was that

         "Situations involving the move of a seriously ill person  in  which
         substantial grounds have been shown for believing that he  or  she,
         although not at imminent risk of dying, would face a real risk,  on
         account of an absence of appropriate  treatment  in  the  receiving
         country or the lack of access to such treatment, or  being  exposed
         to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or her state of
         health resulting in intense suffering or to  significant  reduction
         in the life expectancy" (paragraph 83)

would also suffice.  The judge held this to be the  case  here  because,  "I
have good evidence from Dr Kershaw" (paragraph 26).  The Razgar  steps  were
then followed (see paragraphs 28 to  30).   The  case  law  in  relation  to
Article 8 was considered (paragraph 31 to  34).   The  judge  finally  dealt
with the issue of public interest (paragraph 35).  The  appeal  was  allowed
on human rights grounds.  It was not allowed under the Immigration Rules.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  had  misapplied  the
    exceptionality test in Paposhvili and had failed to consider the  House
    of Lords judgment in N v UK.  Indeed, the judge had  lowered  the  very
    significant obstacle in this case.

 8. On 26th June 2017, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal  on
    the basis that it was  arguable  that  the  judge  had  misapplied  the
    exceptionality test in Paposhvili v Belgium.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me the Appellant was not legally represented  but
    had the assistance of a McKenzie friend in the person of Mr  D  Forbes.
    The Respondent, represented by Ms Aboni, a Senior HOPO, relied upon the
    Grounds  of  Appeal  and  stated  that  the  judge  had   misunderstood
    Paposhvili and had failed to apply the House of Lords judgment in  N  v
    UK.  Mr Forbes, assisting the Appellant, stated that the importance  of
    the judgment in Paposhvili lay in the fact that  the  court  there  had
    addressed "exceptionality" in the way that N v UK simply had not.   The
    judge's recital at paragraph 25 of what was said by the European  Court
    in paragraph 83 of Paposhvili was accurate and he was entitled to apply
    that principle to the facts that were before him in  the  way  that  he
    did.  There was no error of law.

No Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

11. First, the determination of Judge R A O'Hagan is  clear,  comprehensive
    and well reasoned.  It is not the  case  that  N  v  UK  is  overlooked
    because the judge had regard to the case of GS (India) [2015] EWCA  Civ
    40 and expressly  states  that  there  was  "a  long  line  of  earlier
    authorities" and that "until December 2016 it was the  settled  law  to
    which I would have been bound to give effect" (paragraph 24).  What the
    judge then does is to apply the latest judgment in Paposhvili v Belgium
    and in doing so, it is not the case that what he recites  at  paragraph
    25 as being said at paragraph 83 of the judgment is incorrect.  That is
    the principle.  Thereafter he applies the principle to the facts before
    him (from paragraphs 26 to 29).

12. Second, the European Court of Human Rights had in N v UK [2008] 47 EHRR
    885 considered the position of an AIDS sufferer who, under treatment of
    antiretroviral drugs, was no longer in a critical condition  (paragraph
    47).  Given that her  condition  was  less  critical,  the  benefit  of
    Article 3 could not be given to her.

13. What Paposhvili now does is to give detailed guidance as to  the  "very
    exceptional" cases that were actually referred to in N (see  paragraphs
    181 to 182) and here the Grand Chamber was clear in its statement that,



         "The 'other very exceptional cases' were  in  the  meaning  of  the
         judgment in N v United Kingdom (paragraph 43) which  may  raise  an
         issue under Article 3 should be understood to refer  to  situations
         involving  the  removal  of  a  seriously  ill  person   in   which
         substantial grounds have been shown for believing that he  or  she,
         although not at imminent risk of dying, would face a real risk,  on
         account of the absence of appropriate treatment ....".

14. The question then is whether the judge was justified in  concluding  in
    the manner that he did.  In this regard, the judge  (at  paragraph  22)
    set out the relevant parts of Dr Melanie Kershaw's expert report.   She
    points out that Wolcott-Rallison syndrome

         "Is a multisystem disorder (not simple  diabetes)  which  was  not
         well understood by doctors in  Iraq  due  to  its  rarity  ...  her
         diabetes control was extremely poor on arrival in the UK due to the
         way the family had been advised to use the  insulin  prescribed  by
         her doctors in Iraq ...".

15.  The medical expert goes on to say that

         "The significant risks in her condition are  of  liver  and  kidney
         failure.   These  occur  unpredictably,  and   are   triggered   by
         intercurrent viral illnesses ...  Intense  support  with  intensive
         care and input of  paediatric  liver  and  kidney  specialists  are
         required ...".

16. The report ends with the observation that "Wolcott-Rallison  is  not  a
    gradually or steadily progressive disease".   The  judge,  accordingly,
    was entitled to conclude in the manner that he  did  on  the  basis  of
    medical evidence before him.

Notice of Decision

17. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th September 2017




