
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06206/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th July 2019                     |On 18th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  mr S N K
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzam (Solicitor), Burton & Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Asjad, promulgated on 31st July  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham  on  13th  June  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter came before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen  of  Iraq,  and  was  born  on  20th
    October 1991.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    1st May  2018,  against  refusal  of  his  claim  for  asylum  and  for
    humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he originates from  Mosul,
    in Iraq, and  this  was  accepted  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   The
    Appellant also maintained that he was of Kurdish  ethnicity,  and  this
    too was accepted by the Secretary of State.  The Appellant claimed that
    he was wanted by ISIS who wanted to recruit him.  This was not accepted
    by the Respondent.  He further claimed that he would  not  be  able  to
    obtain a CSID card upon return to Iraq, as his family in Iraq would not
    be able to vouch for him or to  support  him,  and  this  too  was  not
    accepted by the Secretary of State.  It was said that the area of Mosul
    was no longer under control of ISIS.  The Appellant claimed he had left
    his documents in Mosul.  He could return there  and  obtain  them  (see
    paragraph 8).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge concluded that the Appellant lacked in credibility  in  terms
    of the entirety of his claim which "was inconsistent on core facts  and
    when challenged about inconsistencies, was vague and dismissive in  his
    responses" (paragraph 18).  The Appellant  had  not  given  a  credible
    account of his contact with ISIS or that they tried to recruit  him  or
    that he fled from the area (paragraph 19).

 5. Second, in relation to the Appellant's ability to acquire a CSID  card,
    the Appellant claims that he did not have any contact with  his  mother
    or sisters since leaving Iraq.  The judge, however, held that she would
    "reject  his  evidence  on  grounds  of  credibility.   It  is  in  the
    Appellant's interest to deny familial  contact  and  the  existence  of
    documents", and given that the judge had already found that "he has not
    been credible about his claim and that he did not leave Iraq because he
    feared ISIS", the judge's firm view was that  the  Appellant  had  left
    Iraq for economic betterment and his family "have  themselves  invested
    in his departure from Iraq" (paragraph 20).

 6. After giving due  consideration  to  the  applicable  country  guidance
    cases, the judge dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the fact that the Appellant  came
    from Mosul had been accepted by the  Secretary  of  State  and  by  the
    judge.  Mosul had been under control of ISIS.  The fact that  ISIS  had
    now been dispelled did not mean that Mosul was  a  "uncontested"  area.
    It was still very much contested.  The judge had taken  the  view  that
    the Appellant could contact his mother and sister in  Mosul.   However,
    the judge provided no reasons for this.  There were no reasons given as
    to why it was believed that the  Appellant  was  in  contact  with  his
    family.  Furthermore, the judge did not follow AA (Iraq) that the  CSID
    card had to be properly enquired into.  The determination was flawed on
    the basis of what had been set out by the judge at paragraphs 21 to 22.



 8. On 28 August 2018, permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that
    the judge had failed to properly  follow  the  guidance  in  AA  (Iraq)
    [2017] and AAH (Iraq) [2018] UKUT 212.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 4th July 2019, Mr Mohzam  relied  upon  the
    grounds of application.  He  has  submitted  that  Mosul  was  still  a
    "contested" area and the fact that ISIS  had  been  dispelled  did  not
    suggestion otherwise.  The refusal letter (at paragraphs  102  to  104)
    did not provide any objective evidence  to  suggest  that  the  current
    position was not still precarious  in  the  manner  maintained  by  the
    Appellant.

10. Second, the Appellant's case was that he was not in  contact  with  his
    family or with his mother.  The judge provided no reasons to  show  why
    it was believed that this was not the case. Simply to say that  it  was
    in the Appellant's interest "to deny familial contact and the existence
    of documents" (paragraph 20) was not enough.

11. Third, it had to be borne in  mind  that  since  ISIS  made  Mosul  its
    stronghold, some  900,000  people  had  left  the  city  and  had  been
    displaced, and in these circumstances, it could not simply  be  assumed
    that the Appellant's mother and family still remained there.   Finally,
    with regard to the CSID card, the country guidance cases make it  clear
    that the Appellant needed a male relative to assist  him  in  procuring
    one upon return.

12. For her part, Mrs Aboni submitted that the judge had  directed  herself
    appropriately.  And good reasons had been given throughout.   The  fact
    was that the Appellant had been found not to  be  credible.   That  had
    coloured the rest of the evidence that the Appellant had given.   There
    was no reason why the judge could not  conclude  that  the  Appellant's
    account that he was not in contact with his family was not  equally  to
    be disbelieved, if the core account that he had been a demonstrator and
    had been subject to detention, was also  disbelieved.   The  judge  was
    clear that the family had invested  monies  in  making  sure  that  the
    Appellant left Iraq for  economic  betterment  overseas.   That  was  a
    finding that the judge had made and it was in the light  of  this  that
    the judge had come to other conclusions of fact.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

14. First, this is a case  where  the  judge  has  fully  recognised,  that
    despite the fact that ISIS has now been ejected from Mosul,  that  this
    is "a contested area and that guidance remains unchanged by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AAH" (paragraph 21, on page 7).

15. Second, the judge had  given  additional  reasons  for  coming  to  the
    conclusion as to why the Appellant would not be able to procure a  CSID
    card.  She makes it clear that in AA (Iraq), "it was noted that offices
    had been set up in Baghdad to enable CSIDs  to  be  obtained  by  those
    living in Mosul".  The fact that this has been done, is  indicative  of
    the Iraqi government's  prioritisation  of  the  claims  of  those  who
    originated from Mosul, that city having been since retaken by the Iraqi
    government, when they returned back to their country.

16. Third, the judge was  entitled  to  conclude,  having  found  that  the
    Appellant had not  been  truthful  about  his  being  involved  in  the
    demonstration, that led to his subsequent detention, and his fleeing in
    contravention of the terms of the release, from Iraq, that he was  also
    not telling the truth about not being in touch with his family  members
    in Mosul.  If they have indeed, left Mosul, there is no reason why they
    would not still have been in contact with the Appellant.

17. Finally, indeed, the judge goes further still, and observes that  "even
    if he cannot return to Mosul as an Iraqi Kurd,  he  would  be  able  to
    relocate to the IKR once the documents were  obtained",  (at  paragraph
    22) having concluded that offices have been set up in Baghdad to enable
    CSIDs to be obtained for those who have  been  living  in  Mosul.   The
    judge was entitled to conclude that the Appellant being required to  do
    so would not be subject to unduly harsh  conditions  because  he  spoke
    Kurdish Sorani, had experience of working in Iraq, and would  have  the
    assistance of his family members.

Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

19. An anonymity order is made.

20. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date12th July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss
