
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06747/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House UT                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st November 2018                          |On 16th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                  mr F.F.M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation or appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant F.F.M. was born on 24th May 1994 and is a male citizen of
    Iraq.  By a decision dated 19th May 2018 the Secretary of State refused
    the  Appellant's  application  for   international   protection.    The
    Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Blundell) which in
    a decision promulgated on 9th August 2018 dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    Appellant now appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The core of his claim hinged on an assertion  that  he  is  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity and came from Kirkuk.  He claimed that he feared  persecution
    from ISIS and Daesh on account  of  volunteering  for  an  organisation
    opposed to ISIS and because he had worked as a security  guard  at  the
    United University in Sulaymaniyah.

 3. The central part of the Appellant's case revolved around a  dispute  as
    to where he originated from.  The Appellant claimed that he  came  from
    Kirkuk which is outside  the  three  federally  recognised  Independent
    Kurdish Region (IKR) governorates of Dohuk, Erbil and Sulaymaniyah.  It
    was  the  Respondent's  case  that  the  Appellant's  home  village  of
    Darveshan is situated  in  Sulaymaniyah.  The  Respondent  was  equally
    satisfied that following answers given by the Appellant in his  various
    interviews he was untruthful in a claim that he had lost  contact  with
    his family. The Respondent was satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  wife,
    children, parents and a brother remained in Sulaymaniyah.

 4. After taking evidence and hearing submissions, the judge  had  reserved
    his decision.  He then became aware that the country guidance  case  of
    AAH (Iraq) [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC) had been handed down (it was published
    on the same day as the FtT hearing).  Quite properly the judge  decided
    that this decision seemed to be relevant to the appeal before  him  and
    he therefore issued directions for  further  written  submissions  from
    both parties [16].  For the  purposes  of  this  hearing,  the  written
    submissions from the Appellant briefly continued to assert that he  was
    from Kirkuk, had no identity documents with him,  and  therefore  could
    not safely relocate to Kirkuk due to the ongoing conflict.

 5. The judge did not believe the Appellant's account  of  past  events  in
    Iraq.  Having seen and heard from the Appellant and after referring  to
    the various interviews which the Appellant  underwent,  Judge  Blundell
    made several findings of fact:



       . The Appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity


       . The Appellant's family home is in Darveshan village in the
         Sulaymaniyah area


       . His family, including his parents, wife and children remain in that
         area


       . The Appellant has not lost contact with his family as claimed.  The
         judge drew on evidence from the Appellant's response in his
         interview (Q.29) and disbelieved the Appellant's claim that his
         home village had been demolished. There was evidence that the
         Appellant keeps in contact with his family by Viber


       . The Appellant has a CSID card, which is at his home in Sulaymaniyah




       . The Appellant's passport was retained by the German authorities
         when the Appellant claimed asylum in Germany, en route to the UK.

 6. In a careful and thorough analysis of the evidence before him the judge
    concluded that the Appellant was demonstrably not from Kirkuk as he had
    claimed and was not at risk from ISIS. Central to the judge's reasoning
    were his findings that the Appellant was from Darveshan in Sulaymaniyah
    [25] and that his claim to  have  lost  contact  with  his  family  was
    discredited [28].

 7. The judge then turned his mind to  the  ability  of  the  Appellant  to
    return safely to the IKR.  Following receipt of the further submissions
    from the parties, the judge  analysed  the  Appellant's  position  and,
    referring to the guidance set out in AAH, concluded  the  following  at
    [32-34]:

         "In light of the findings I have reached about the appellant's home
         area; the location of his family; and the contact that he has  with
         his family, I consider the application of the country  guidance  to
         be essentially straightforward.  His CSID  remains  at  the  family
         home in Darveshan.  Were he to be returned to Baghdad (which is the
         only place to which he could conceivably be returned  at  present),
         he would need that CSID in order to leave the airport. [......]  If
         the appellant were removed from the UK, he would alert  his  family
         to his impending arrival and a member of the family could travel to
         Baghdad to provide him with his CSID. [......]" [32]

         "In the  event  that  the  appellant's  family  has  misplaced  the
         appellant's CSID (or it is damaged or expired), however, I consider
         it more likely than not that they would be able  to  obtain  a  new
         CSID for him before his arrival in Iraq." [33]

         "I conclude, therefore, that the appellant would be  in  possession
         of a CSID shortly after arriving  in  Baghdad  because  his  family
         members would bring his existing CSID to  him  or  would  obtain  a
         replacement before his  arrival.   The  appellant  would  use  that
         document to travel to the IKR without difficulty.  On  arrival,  he
         would be subjected to security screening but there is no reason  to
         believe that he would be of concern  to  the  Kurdish  authorities.
         [......] He would return to his family in Sulaymaniyah and he would
         not be required to resort to a critical shelter arrangement of  the
         kind described in the  country  guidance.  [......]   There  is  no
         rational basis upon which I could conclude that the appellant would
         be destitute or at risk on return to Sulaymaniyah." [34]

    He then dismissed the appeal.

 8. The Appellant appealed that decision and permission was granted in  the
    following terms:

         "The grounds requesting permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
         argue that the judge erred in the conclusions reached in respect of
         the CSID  card  and  its  replacement.  Those  ground  an  arguable
         material error of law and leave is granted on all grounds."

 9. It is correct to say that issue was taken with the  FtT's  findings  on
    the basis that they were 'speculative'  and  unjustifiable.   Thus  the
    matter comes before me for  an  error  of  law  hearing  at  the  Upper
    Tribunal.



Error of law hearing

10. Before me, Ms Isherwood appeared  for  the  Respondent.  There  was  no
    attendance either by the Appellant or anyone on his behalf.  No  reason
    was put forward to explain this non-attendance. I  was  satisfied  that
    both the Appellant and his  named  representatives  had  been  properly
    served with notice of the hearing.  I caused enquiries to be made  with
    the  Tribunal  administration  staff  to   ensure   that   no   further
    correspondence had been received from either  of  them.   That  drew  a
    negative response.  In the circumstances I saw no reason not to proceed
    with the hearing and I heard submissions from Ms Isherwood.

11. Suffice to say that Ms Isherwood relied in the main on the  submissions
    dated 30th July 2018, forwarded by the Respondent in  response  to  the
    directions issued by the FtTJ.  She submitted that the decision of  the
    FtTJ was a careful and well-constructed one.  The judge  had  addressed
    the CG cases of both AA  and  AAH.   He  had  made  clear  findings  on
    credibility concerning the Appellant's claim that he came  from  Kirkuk
    and that he had lost contact with his family. She drew my attention  to
    the fact that the Appellant by his own account had said that he  worked
    in Sulaymaniyah and that he  had  exited  the  country  using  his  own
    passport from Sulaymaniyah airport.  It was open to the judge  to  find
    that the Appellant came from that part of the IKR rather  than  Kirkuk.
    It stood to reason that his family remained there and that he  had  not
    lost contact with them.

12. She further drew my attention to the judge's findings at [28] where the
    judge commented that the Appellant was a man who changed and  contrived
    his account in order to bring himself within the terms of the prevalent
    case law.

13. She outlined that the Appellant himself had said that his CSID card was
    at home and that the judge's finding that the Appellant would  be  able
    to be in possession of a CSID, within a reasonable space of  time,  was
    properly reasoned.  Furthermore referring to the  further  submissions,
    she pointed out  that  in  evidence  given  to  the  FtT  hearing,  the
    Appellant agreed that he would be willing to attend the  Iraqi  embassy
    to try and obtain an ID.

14. Given these circumstances the  decision  was  fully  sustainable.   The
    judge had carefully considered step by step the process outlined in AAH
    and the appeal should therefore be dismissed.  The Appellant's  grounds
    amounted to no more that a disagreement with the judge's findings.  The
    Appellant has not attended to put a contrary argument before me.



Consideration

15. I find merit in Miss Isherwood's submissions.  I find that the evidence
    before the judge was such that he was unarguably entitled  to  conclude
    that the Appellant was neither a credible nor consistent witness.  That
    being the case, I am satisfied that the  judge  properly  analysed  the
    evidence before him and made findings which were properly open  to  him
    as regards the Appellant's claim to be from Kirkuk.

16. Following on from that I find that there was ample evidence before  the
    judge which led him to the conclusion  that  the  Appellant  came  from
    Sulaymaniyah and that his family remained there. I find he was entitled
    to conclude that the Appellant was in contact with his family.

17. In view of the non-attendance of the Appellant, I heard no argument  to
    the contrary. However, I pay particular heed to the contention made  in
    the  grounds  that  many  of  the  FtTJ's  conclusions   were   plainly
    speculative and involved matters that  had  not  been  put  before  the
    Appellant.  This  refers  in  particular  to  the  finding   that   the
    Appellant's  family  members  would  bring  his  existing  CSID  or   a
    replacement to him upon his arrival in Baghdad.  However, I  find  that
    this argument is unfounded for  the  following  reason.  The  Appellant
    maintained that he is from Kirkuk and had lost contact with his family.
     If that were the case, his family would indeed be unable to assist him
    in this  way.   Therefore  the  Appellant  could  not  be  expected  to
    acknowledge that they could do so.  However, the FtTJ  disbelieved  the
    Appellant and concluded that he is from Sulaymaniyah  and  remained  in
    contact with his family.  Therefore the FtTJ was entitled  to  conclude
    that the family could assist, and, in these given  circumstances,  were
    likely to do so.

18. I am satisfied that using  those  clear  findings  the  judge  properly
    analysed the procedure and processes for  return  to  Sulaymaniyah  via
    Baghdad, as set out in AAH.  He reached a sustainable  conclusion  that
    there was good reason to expect that it was reasonably likely that  the
    Appellant would have access to, and be in possession of a CSID, shortly
    after arriving in Baghdad.   This  would  enable  him  to  transit  the
    airport and thereafter travel to the IKR.

19. It follows therefore the  decision  of  the  FtTJ  is  sustainable  and
    stands.


Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     09 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     09 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

