
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/06070/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 2nd May 2017                       |On 11th May 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     S J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Patel, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge James made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 10th November 2016.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on [ ] 1975.  He applied
    for asylum in the UK on 7th December  2015  having  arrived  here  from
    Pakistan in 2010, claiming that he  could  not  return  to  Afghanistan
    because he feared the Taliban.

 3. The judge did not believe  him.   He  said  that  the  evidence  lacked
    credibility and he did not accept  that  the  appellant  either  had  a
    genuine subjective fear of the Taliban  or  that  they  had  sought  to
    recruit him in Peshawar which is where he had lived before he  came  to
    the UK.  He said that there was no significant medical  evidence  which
    established that the appellant, who  suffers  from  problems  with  his
    mobility, would not be able to access healthcare either in Kabul or  in
    Peshawar.

 4. While the appellant may not have lived in Afghanistan since  he  was  a
    boy he had been living in  Pakistan  which  had  a  significant  Afghan
    refugee population.  He then wrote as follows:

         "Finally I have considered  whether  the  appellant  is  an  Afghan
         national or a Pakistan national.  On balance I am satisfied that he
         is a displaced Afghan national.  However for the  reasons  provided
         above I would dismiss his appeal in either case."

The Grounds of Application

 5. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  on  a  number  of  grounds
    challenging the  judge's  assessment  of  credibility  in  relation  to
    Section 8 of the 2004 Act and arguing that the judge had failed to have
    regard to relevant evidence  when  considering  whether  the  appellant
    could be returned to Kabul.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Grant on 23rd February  2017.



 7. On 10th  March  2017  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Consideration of Whether there is an Error of Law

 8. I am satisfied that the judge did not properly engage with the evidence
    before him in considering whether the  appellant  could  reasonably  be
    returned to Kabul.  No findings of fact were made in  relation  to  his
    claim that he has not lived there since the age of 5 and has no  family
    there.  This is particularly important in the appellant's case since it
    is clear that he suffers from significant medical  issues  which  limit
    his ability to find work.

 9. There is no merit in the Section 8 challenge.  The  judge  was  plainly
    entitled to take as his starting point the appellant's failure to claim
    asylum for five years after his arrival  in  the  UK  as  damaging  his
    credibility.  The  judge's  findings  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    claimed fear of the Taliban will stand.

10. The sole issue at the resumed hearing will  be  whether  the  appellant
    faces conditions in Kabul such  as  to  engage  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive.

11. The appellant must serve a fresh bundle of all  of  the  evidence  upon
    which he intends to rely, including  updated  medical  evidence,  seven
    days before the hearing which is fixed for 10th July 2017.  An  Afghani
    Pushtu interpreter is required.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




[pic]
Signed                              Date 11 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
