
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/06759/2017
                                                               HU/06043/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool Civil and Family     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Court                                   |                                    |
|On 29th January 2019                    |On 18th February 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     MKI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik of Counsel instructed by Knightbridge
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born 22nd November  1990.   He
    appealed against a decision of Judge Herwald (the judge) of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated following a hearing on 15th  August
    2017.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the UK in September 2009 as a Tier 4  Student.
    His student leave was curtailed  to  expire  on  23rd  July  2012.   He
    remained in the UK without leave.  On 30th July  2015  he  applied  for
    leave to remain in the UK based upon his same-sex relationship with his
    partner.  That application was refused on 16th February 2016.

 3. On 28th December 2016 the  Appellant  claimed  asylum  based  upon  his
    sexuality.  He claimed that he is gay and would be at risk if  returned
    to Bangladesh.  His application was refused on 23rd June 2017.

 4. The Appellant appealed against both refusal decisions.  Directions were
    made by the FtT that the two appeals should be  linked  together.   The
    appeals were heard by the FtT on 15th August 2017.

 5. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and his partner, to whom  I
    shall refer as C.  The judge found that the Appellant is  gay  but  did
    not accept that he was in a relationship akin to marriage with C.   The
    judge described the Appellant as using C  "as  a  useful  assistant  in
    gaining asylum and/or proving he has some sort  of  family  or  private
    life in this country".  The judge considered background  and  objective
    evidence in relation to LGBT persons in Bangladesh,  noting  that  male
    same-sex sexual acts are criminalised in Bangladesh and  punishable  by
    life imprisonment.  The judge however noted that there  had  only  ever
    been two arrests and no convictions.  The judge found that although  in
    theory gay relationships in Bangladesh are against the law, they  exist
    online and there are physical meeting places.  The judge found  it  was
    appropriate to follow the Respondent's policy guidance contained in the
    Country Policy and Information Note (the CPIN)  on  sexual  orientation
    and gender identity in Bangladesh published December  2016,  and  found
    that "there is not a risk on return in  this  case".   The  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    It was contended that the judge had erred in assessing credibility, had
    failed to take into account relevant country background  material,  and
    had failed to apply the principles in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.

 7. Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds  granted  permission,  finding  no  arguable
    error of law in relation to the credibility findings,  but  finding  it
    arguable that the judge had failed to take  into  account  the  country
    evidence relating to the nature of risk on return for LGBT persons  "in
    Bangladesh and in the light of  the  necessary  enquiry  and  questions
    identified in the decision of HJ (Iran) and  reach  findings  on  those
    issues."

Error of Law

 8. On 10th December 2018 I heard submissions from both parties in relation
    to error of law, and concluded that the judge's decision  must  be  set
    aside.  Full details of the application for permission, the submissions
    made by the parties, and my conclusions and reasons are contained in my
    error of law decision dated 11th December  2018,  promulgated  on  18th
    December 2018.

 9. In summary, I found no error of law  in  relation  to  the  credibility
    findings made by the judge and  those  findings  were  preserved.   The
    judge had made a finding that the Appellant is gay,  and  that  finding
    had not been challenged and was preserved.  The error of law  was  that
    the judge had not demonstrated that having found the  Appellant  to  be
    gay, he thereafter followed the approach set out in paragraph 82 of  HJ
    (Iran).

Re-making the Decision

10. At the resumed hearing the Appellant and C attended.  They were  called
    to give oral evidence.  There was no cross-examination.  In very  brief
    summary, the Appellant confirmed that  he  had  had  a  number  of  gay
    relationships while in the  UK  with  men  he  met  in  Manchester  Gay
    Village.

11. In giving oral evidence C confirmed that if the Appellant had to return
    to Bangladesh he would not accompany  him,  pointing  out  that  it  is
    illegal to be gay in Bangladesh and he would fear for his  safety.   In
    addition his health is not good, and he did not think he would  receive
    the same medical care in Bangladesh as he receives in the UK.

12. I then  heard  oral  submissions  from  the  representatives.   I  have
    recorded the submissions in my  Record  of  Proceedings  and  will  not
    reiterate them here.

13. In very brief summary, Mr Tan referred  to  the  most  recent  CPIN  on
    sexual orientation and  gender  identity  in  Bangladesh  published  in
    November 2017.  I was asked to conclude that  the  background  evidence
    contained therein demonstrated that the Appellant would not be at  risk
    as a gay man in Bangladesh.

14. Mr Karnik also relied upon the CPIN of November 2017,  submitting  that
    the evidence contained therein demonstrated that the Appellant would be
    at risk if he lived openly in Bangladesh.  I was asked to find that the
    background evidence indicated that there would  be  no  sufficiency  of
    protection and no reasonable internal  relocation  option.   Mr  Karnik
    submitted that background evidence contained  in  the  UK  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office Report dated 16th July 2018  on  human  rights  and
    democracy in Bangladesh supported his  submission  that  the  Appellant
    would be at risk because of his sexuality if he returned to Bangladesh.



15. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. I have taken into account all the evidence, both oral  and  documentary
    that has been supplied, and considered that evidence in the round.   In
    relation to risk on return the burden of proof is on the Appellant,  to
    the lower standard, that being a reasonable degree of likelihood.

17. The finding made by the FtT that the Appellant is gay is preserved.   I
    have to decide whether the Appellant would be at risk on account of his
    sexuality if  returned  to  Bangladesh.   The  CPIN  of  November  2017
    provides up-to-date background evidence.   It  is  accepted  that  LGBT
    persons in Bangladesh form a particular social group within the meaning
    of the Refugee Convention.  The policy summary at 3.1.1  confirms  that
    male same-sex sexual acts are criminalised in Bangladesh under  section
    377 of the Penal Code and punishable by life imprisonment.  There  have
    however only  ever  been  two  arrests  under  this  provision  and  no
    convictions.  There are reports that section 377, together  with  other
    legal instruments, have sometimes been used by the police in Bangladesh
    to arbitrarily arrest, harass and intimidate LGBT persons.  There  have
    also been reports that police use physical and sexual violence  against
    LGBT persons.

18. The guidance indicates at 2.3.9 that in general the available  evidence
    does not establish that LGBT persons are  systematically  targeted  and
    subject to treatment amounting to persecution or serious  harm  by  the
    state.  However, each case must be considered on its  merits  with  the
    onus on the person to demonstrate that they would be at risk.

19. Further guidance is contained at 2.3.10-2.3.17 which I summarise below.
     LGBT persons face  societal  discrimination  as  well  as  family  and
    societal pressure to conform to cultural and religious norms, including
    marriage.  Strong  social  stigma  about  sexual  orientation  prevents
    discussion of LGBT rights

20. There have been some reports of violent behaviour towards LGBT  persons
    who are open about their sexual orientation.   Among  the  perpetrators
    are "mastans" (local thugs), family members and Islamist groups.

21. Various sources maintain that LGBT persons are in general reluctant  to
    be open about their sexuality.  Reasons for this may include conforming
    to societal norms and fear of discrimination and/or violence.

22. There is an indication that the rise in social  media  has  led  to  an
    increase in hate speech against LGBT people.  Whilst there are  support
    groups for LGBT persons, some have reduced their  activities  following
    the murder of two gay rights activists in 2016.

23. There is evidence that  the  LGBT  community  is  closed  and  private.
    Informal networking takes place at private parties and other venues and
    on the internet.  A Gay Pride rally took place in Dhaka in  April  2014
    and another in April 2015.  The  event  planned  for  2016  had  to  be
    cancelled due to threats and opposition from Islamist groups.

24. In general LGBT persons are not open due to  social  stigma,  pressures
    and norms, and to avoid a level of discrimination and violence  arising
    from this.  LGBT persons who openly express  their  sexual  orientation
    are likely to be socially excluded, receive threats of violence, and in
    some cases (particularly gay men) may be attacked by non-state  actors.
    The nature and degree of treatment may vary according to geography  and
    socioeconomic status.  Widespread stigma and discrimination  is  likely
    to restrict their participation in the community and the workforce  and
    access to healthcare.

25.  In  general,  an  LGBT  person  who  does  not  conceal  their  sexual
    orientation may be at  risk  of  treatment  which  by  its  nature  and
    repetition  amounts  to  persecution  or  serious  harm.   LGBT  rights
    activists and bloggers may be at greater risk  due  to  their  profile.
    However, each case must be considered on its facts with the onus on the
    person to demonstrate why their particular circumstances would put them
    at real risk from non-state actors.

26. Protection from the state is dealt with in the guidance at 2.4.1-2.4.7.
     Where a person's fear is of persecution and/or  serious  harm  by  the
    state they will not be able to obtain protection.   LGBT  persons  from
    influential  families  may  be  able  to  access   protection.    State
    authorities have been responsible for  arbitrary  arrests,  detentions,
    harassment and discrimination towards LGBT persons with reports of  the
    police physically and sexually assaulting them.  There is some evidence
    of the authorities taking appropriate action.  For example, the  police
    are reported  to  have  investigated  the  murder  of  two  gay  rights
    activists in 2016 and one arrest was made.

27. In general, the state appears able but  unwilling  to  offer  effective
    protection and the person will not be able to avail themselves  of  the
    protection  of  the  authorities.   However,  each  case  needs  to  be
    considered on its facts.

28. There is reference in the background evidence to activists.  I  do  not
    find the Appellant to be an LGBT activist.  There is also  a  reference
    to individuals coming from influential families.  I do  not  find  that
    the Appellant comes from an influential family.

29. Having summarised the background evidence above, I now turn to consider
    the approach that should be followed when  considering  an  application
    for asylum from an  individual  who  is  gay.   This  is  contained  in
    paragraph 82 of HJ (Iran).

30. The first question to be answered is whether it  has  been  established
    that the Appellant is gay.  In this case that has been established.

31. I must then consider whether I am satisfied on the  available  evidence
    that gay people who  live  openly  in  Bangladesh  will  be  liable  to
    persecution.  Having considered the Respondent's own guidance  set  out
    above, I am satisfied to a reasonable degree of  likelihood,  that  the
    background evidence indicates that  a  gay  man  who  lived  openly  in
    Bangladesh would be liable to  persecution.   There  is  no  reasonable
    internal relocation option in Bangladesh.  I find the  situation  would
    be very much the same throughout the country.  The background  evidence
    indicates that there is not a sufficiency of protection  as  stated  at
    2.4.5 of the Respondent's guidance.

32. I must then  consider  whether  the  Appellant  would  live  openly  or
    discreetly if he returned to Bangladesh.  I find  that  he  would  live
    discreetly and I therefore I must consider why he would do this.

33. I do not find that  the  Appellant  would  choose  to  live  discreetly
    because of social pressures such as not wanting to distress his parents
    or embarrass his friends, but would live discreetly because  he  has  a
    fear of persecution if he lived openly.

34. The guidance in HJ (Iran) states that if:

         "the Tribunal concludes that a material reason  for  the  applicant
         living discreetly on his return would be a fear of the  persecution
         which would follow if he were to live openly as a  gay  man,  then,
         other things being equal, his application should be accepted.  Such
         a person has a well-founded fear of persecution".

35. I therefore conclude that the Appellant  is  entitled  to  a  grant  of
    asylum based upon his sexuality.  I also find, that if he  returned  to
    Bangladesh, there would be a real risk that he would  be  subjected  to
    inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment which would breach Article
    3 of the 1950 European Convention.

36. I move on to consider Article 8.  I do not find that the Appellant  has
    established family life in the UK but  he  has  established  a  private
    life.  Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) involves  the  Appellant  proving  on  a
    balance of probabilities that there would be very significant obstacles
    to his integration in Bangladesh.  I find that would be the  case.   My
    reasons for reaching this conclusion are that the Appellant would be at
    risk because of his sexuality if he returned to Bangladesh,  and  there
    is a risk that he would be subjected to  treatment  that  would  breach
    Article  3.   I  find  that  this  is  sufficient  to  amount  to  very
    significant obstacles to integration.

37. In considering Article 8 I have had regard  to  the  considerations  in
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This
    provides that the maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
    the public interest.  In this regard I find it  relevant  that  I  have
    found the Appellant  is  entitled  to  asylum,  and  he  satisfies  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

38. Section 117B also provides that it is in the  public  interest  that  a
    person seeking leave to remain can speak  English  and  is  financially
    independent.  The Appellant can speak English,  and  is  not  dependent
    upon the state.  These are neutral factors in the balancing exercise.

39. It is further provided that little  weight  should  be  attached  to  a
    private life established by a person while in the UK with a  precarious
    immigration status, or in the UK without leave.  This  applies  to  the
    Appellant.  Initially he had a precarious immigration status as he  had
    limited leave to remain, and thereafter he has remained without  leave.
    Therefore little weight must be attached to his private life.

40. However, notwithstanding that conclusion, I find that  the  Appellant's
    removal would breach Article 8, because he satisfies the provisions  of
    the Immigration Rules, and he would be at risk if returned.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and is set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

I allow the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.  Therefore, the  Appellant
is not entitled to humanitarian protection.



I allow the Appellant's appeal on human rights  grounds  with  reference  to
Articles 3 and 8.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date         11th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The  appeal  has  been  allowed  because  of  evidence
considered by the Tribunal that was not before the initial  decision  maker.



Signed                              Date         11th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall







