

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06874/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided on the papers                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|                                     |On 13 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     CH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq born in 1990. She  appeals  against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Clapham) to dismiss  her
    protection and human rights appeal.

 2. This decision has, with the consent of the parties, been  made  on  the
    papers under Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.   It follows the parties' responses to Directions made  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan on the 7th April 2020.

 3. The Appellant's grounds contend that Judge Clapham's decision is flawed
    for four material  mistakes  of  fact,  which  render  the  credibility
    findings unsafe. In particular:

          i) The First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant had failed to
             mention in her screening interview that she had separated from
             her husband. This is incorrect - it is mentioned at  Q1.19  of
             the amended record.

         ii) The First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant had belatedly
             embellished her claim by  stating  in  her  witness  statement
             matters that she failed to mention at  her  asylum  interview,
             namely that her former in-laws had  threatened  her.  This  is
             incorrect  -  the  statement  in  fact  predated  the   asylum
             interview.

        iii) The First-tier Tribunal found that there was  no  evidence  to
             support the Appellant's claim that her  former  in-laws  would
             wish to  forcibly  remove  the  children  from  her.  This  is
             incorrect - there was country background evidence  before  the
             Tribunal indicating that this practice does occur in Iraq, viz
             the Finnish Immigration Service Overview.

         iv) The First-tier Tribunal draws negative inference from its  own
             finding that the Appellant claimed asylum  in  Switzerland  on
             the basis that she was involved in a  land  dispute.  This  is
             incorrect - that claim was made by her husband.

 4. By his written submissions dated the 4th  May  2020  the  Secretary  of
    State accepts that all four alleged errors are made out. It is accepted
    that the  First-tier  Tribunal  overlooked  or  misunderstood  evidence
    before it, and that it failed to  have  regard  to  country  background
    material capable of demonstrating that the claim was plausible  in  the
    context of Iraqi society.

 5. The parties therefore agree that the decision of Judge Clapham must  be
    set aside. I am invited to remit the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for hearing de novo. In light of the  fundamental  misunderstanding  of
    the Appellant's case in the first decision I agree  that  this  is  the
    most appropriate disposal.

    Anonymity

 6. The Appellant seeks international protection. As such I  am  satisfied,
    having had regard to the guidance in the Presidential Guidance Note  No
    1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would be appropriate  to  make  an
    order in accordance with Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

    Decisions

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  errors  of  law  such
    that it must be set aside in its entirety.

 8. The decision in the appeal is to be remade de novo  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 9. There is an order for anonymity.

                                                                       [pic]

                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              30th June 2020

