
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
PA/06423/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Glasgow  Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 21st June 2019                                                      On
08th August 2019




                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                    M S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                 Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:       Ms S McKeeve of McGlashan McKay Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Govan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1. The appellant made repeated attempts to enter the United Kingdom. He
      made a claim for protection in September 2014 on the basis that he
      would be at risk if returned to his home country. This was on the
      basis he had changed his religious beliefs from following Islam to
      Christianity in early 2013 after arriving in the United Kingdom. He
      said this occurred after he was introduced to a local Baptist Church
      and subsequently was baptised. He said he felt obliged to bust the
      ties

   2. He said that he grew up in Iran and his father was from Afghanistan.
      The respondent concluded that irrespective of his country of birth he
      was to be considered an Afghan national. The respondent accepted that
      if true he would be at risk if returned to either Afghanistan or Iran.
      The respondent stance however is that he is an Afghan National

   3. An earlier claim for protection made in September 2012 was rejected.
      His appeal was dismissed in November 2012. This was heard before First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Doyle. On that occasion the claim related to a
      risk on return on the basis he was Gay. The judge rejected his claim
      of having been brought up in Iran and of being Gay. The judge
      concluded the appellant had fabricated the claim.

   4. Regarding the most recent claim, the respondent did not accept the
      claimed conversion was genuine.

   5. His appeal was heard at Glasgow on 15 September 2017 by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Mill. In a decision promulgated on 26 September 2017 it
      was dismissed. The judge referred to the earlier decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Doyle and the Devaseelan principle. At hearing,
      the appellant maintained he was an Iranian. The judge rejected this,
      concluding that he was Afghan.

   6. The appellant gave evidence about his change of religion and his
      evangelisation. The judge heard from various witnesses to confirm his
      change of religion. The judge rejected both aspects of his claim. The
      judge accepted he attended the Baptist Church and had been baptised
      there and currently was attending another Christian church. However,
      the judge concluded this was purely to promote his new claim.

The Upper Tribunal

   7. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis the judge erred in
      failing to have regard to whether the appellant would face a risk by
      reason of his outward observances of Christianity, irrespective of his
      true beliefs (the `Danian'point.)

   8. It was also argued judge failed in the assessment of the genuineness
      of his beliefs and in the assessment of the witnesses called in
      support. Permission to appeal was granted on a renewed application
      based upon comments in a joint minute following a referral to the
      Court of Session.

   9. At hearing Mr Govan explained that First-tier Tribunal Judge Mill did
      not have the benefit of the decision in TF and MA v The Secretary of
      State for the Home Department [2018] CSIH 58. The guidance there was
      relevant to the consideration of evidence from church members. Lord
      Glennie delivered the Opinion of the court.

  10. His Lordship pointed out that in assessing credibility and the truth
      of the underlying claim the fact that an individual may have lied
      about one point does not necessarily mean that he is lying about other
      matters. Regarding the evidence of church members, they were
      expressing an opinion based partly on the person's conduct as observed
      by them and partly from their knowledge and understanding about the
      traditions and processes of the church.

  11. It is wrong in principle to form a concluded view of the probable
      veracity of particular items of evidence and then, from that fixed
      point, to allow that view to govern the assessment of other evidence
      in the case. The proper approach is to adopt a "holistic" approach.

  12.   The evidence from the church members fell into three categories.
      Firstly, there was the factual evidence about what the appellant did
      and said in relation to their attendance at the Church. They could
      then give evidence about the practices of the church itself. They can
      then express an opinion based upon their observations of the
      genuineness of the conversion. The evidence in the last two categories
      could be considered as expert.

  13. Bearing in mind the points made and the fact both representatives are
      in agreement, a material error of law has been demonstrated in
      relation to the assessment of the claimed conversion. In particular,
      this relates to how the judge dealt with the evidence from the church
      members. As indicated, the judge did not have the benefit of the Court
      of Session decision which was issued afterwards.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mill materially errs in law and
is set aside. The matter is remitted for a rehearing de novo in the First-
tier Tribunal.

Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.

Dated 07 August 2019





