
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06357/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 June 2019                       |On 12 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    S. A.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Stainthorpe, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant, a citizen of Iran, entered the UK illegally and made a
protection claim which was refused on 2 May 2018. The Appellant's appeal
against that decision was heard, and dismissed, by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Mensah, in a decision promulgated on 20 March 2019, following a
hearing on 31 January 2019. The Appellant's application for permission to
appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird on 16 April 2019 on
the basis it was arguable the Judge had made inconsistent findings of fact,
and/or had gone behind a concession made by the Respondent. The Respondent
reply to that grant with a Rule 24 response on 14 May 2019.

The Appellant's case was that both her father, and her sister, had been
granted refugee status in the UK. She said that although they had left
Iran, the family home continued to be visited by members of the Etelaat on
a number of occasions. On 16 October 2017, during one such visit she said
she had been the subject of a serious sexual assault by two men who she
understood to be Etelaat officers, visiting the home as part of this
pattern of behaviour. The assault had been filmed by them, and the
Appellant had been threatened by them with further "home visits", with a
clear inference that their behaviour would be repeated.

The Respondent accepted the Appellant's Iranian nationality, the
immigration history of her father and sister, and, that the Appellant had
been subjected to a serious sexual assault. Although the Respondent
disputed that the sexual assault had been perpetrated by officers of the
Etelaat he did not suggest that the assault had occurred on a different
occasion, or in a different location, to that described. The Respondent
offered no alternative explanation for who the perpetrators might be, or,
how they came to gain access to the Appellant's family home.

The Appellant was recognised as a vulnerable witness by the Tribunal at an
early stage. The appeal was made subject to an early direction that it
should be heard in an all female court, given its nature. This regrettably
did not however occur when the appeal was actually heard by the First tier
Tribunal. The Respondent chose to be represented by a male officer, who
asserted that no female officer was available to do so. The Tribunal was
not alerted in advance to any staffing problems, and no adjournment was
sought to allow the Respondent to comply with the direction. The Judge
chose not to adjourn the appeal, noting an agreement between the
representatives that the hearing could proceed if no questions were asked
of the Appellant in relation to the sexual assault. The clear difficulty
with that approach was that whilst the mechanics of the sexual assault
might not have been the subject of questioning, it is plain that the focus
of the hearing was the sexual assault. Thus it would appear the Appellant
was questioned about whether Etelaat officers had previously visited the
family home, and why she believed the two individuals who perpetrated the
sexual assault upon her were Etelaat officers.

When the appeal was listed for hearing in the Upper Tribunal the question
of an all female court was raised once again. The stance taken by the
Appellant's solicitors was that they would be content for the error of law
hearing to be conducted by a male judge, so long as a female interpreter
was booked by the Tribunal for the hearing. The Appellant's solicitors made
no concession to the Respondent once again being represented by a male
officer. Regrettably, although the Upper Tribunal caseworker acceded to
this request on 3 June 2019, no interpreter was in fact booked for the
hearing of either sex, and the Respondent was once again represented by a
male officer. Once again the Respondent failed to alert the Tribunal in
advance to any staffing problems that meant he was unable to comply with
the direction, and failed to seek an adjournment.

In the circumstances, when the appeal was called on for hearing before me,
the Appellant was faced with a hearing which did not have in place the
safeguards for her vulnerability that had been accepted by the Tribunal as
necessary. That is extremely regrettable, and a copy of this decision will
be provided to the Principal Resident Judge at Field House, so that any
necessary lessons might be learned to avoid such a situation arising again.


Faced with the choice between proceeding in these circumstances, or, an
adjournment and a further delay in the resolution of her status (with no
doubt further anxiety), Ms Cleghorn advised me that since the challenge to
the Judge's decision turned upon a very narrow point the Appellant would
prefer to proceed. Whilst I acceded to that choice, I regret that it was
one that she should not have been forced to make.

Before me the parties were agreed that the Judge described the claim that
the Appellant had been subject to a serious sexual assault by Etelaat
officers as plausible [19]. She then went on to reject that claim as
untrue, apparently because she was unpersuaded; (a) that the Iranian
authorities had any interest in the Appellant's family, and/or, (b) that
two male Etelaat officers would have any sexual interest in the Appellant,
a striking young woman, if they encountered her alone in her home. There
are in my judgement obvious difficulties with both limbs to that approach
given the applicable low standard of proof.

Worryingly, and notwithstanding the Respondent's concession, the Judge also
went on to reject as untrue the Appellant's evidence that she had been the
subject of a serious sexual assault [32].

Mr Stainthorpe sought to defend the Judge's approach on the basis that I
should infer that the Judge had meant to express herself as finding that a
sexual assault of the type described by the Appellant had occurred, but
that it had been inflicted upon her by two individuals who were not Etalaat
officers. I am not persuaded that this was the Judge's approach; in my
judgement her rejection of the sexual assault is clear [32]. Accordingly,
in my judgement, the decision discloses a clear error of law in the
approach taken to the Appellant's evidence, and to the Respondent's
concession.

In the circumstances it is, perhaps, unnecessary for me to comment upon the
Judge's approach to the undisputed fact that the Appellant's father and
sister are recognised by the Respondent as refugees from Iran. On the other
hand I am concerned to note that the Judge concluded that they were of no
interest to the Iranian regime, when no challenge was made before her to
their refugee status, or, to the basis upon which it had been claimed.
However, this finding would then appear to have been used by the Judge as
the foundation for a finding that their close family members in Iran were
in turn of no interest to the regime. That approach is in my judgement
flawed. Moreover, however dishonest their dealings with immigration
officers had been, the ability of the Appellant to use her sister's
passport to enter the UK was likely to be of little evidential value in an
analysis of whether it had been Etelaat officers who had perpetrated the
serious sexual assault the Respondent had accepted had occurred, or someone
else.

Both parties agreed that in the event I were to find the material error of
law relied upon by the Appellant, that a fresh hearing of the appeal was
the only pragmatic course open. I agree. As set out above the Appellant's
evidence concerning the sexual assault is unchallenged. It must stand, and
it must form the foundation for the Tribunal's approach to the evidence as
to whether the Appellant has made out her case, namely that there is a real
risk that this assault was perpetrated by Etelaat officers, that she faces
a risk of further assaults, and that this adverse attention is the result
of her family connection to her father and sister.

In circumstances such as this, when it would appear that the relevant
evidence has not properly been considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the
effect of that error of law has been to deprive the parties of the
opportunity for their case to be properly considered by the First Tier
Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.
Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding exercise required is such
that having regard to the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the
appeal should be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of
the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.

    To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Mensah, at the North Shields Hearing
    Centre.

    A female Farsi interpreter is required.

    The Appellant must file and serve any further evidence upon which she
    intends to rely in support of her appeal by 5pm 28 June 2019. If the
    Appellant is unable to meet this timetable she must inform the
    Tribunal, explaining the circumstances, and offering a new timetable
    that she is able to meet.

    Given the history of the failure to comply with the direction for an
    all female court, the Appellant's solicitors must inform the Tribunal
    in writing by 5pm 28 June 2019 whether this direction may now be
    waived, or should be confirmed for any future hearing of the appeal.

    The remitted appeal may not be suitable for the short warned list, and
    if either party considers this to be the case they must inform the
    Tribunal in writing by 5pm 28 June 2019. Absent any objection the
    Tribunal is however likely to call the appeal on for hearing at short
    notice after 1 July 2019.

Notice of decision

 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing, with the directions set out above.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 7 June 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
