
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06500/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 January 2019                            |On 18 February 2019           |
|Extempore                                     |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Robinson, instructed by Duncan Lewis solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Walker promulgated on 31 August 2017 dismissing his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse his  protection
    and human rights claim.  I should set  out  at  the  outset  that  this
    matter comes before me as a result of permission being refused both  by
    the First-tier and the Upper Tribunal resulting in  a  "Cart"  JR,  the
    application  being remitted to the Upper Tribunal permission then being
    granted by the vice president.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt and it is  his  case  that  he  was
    whilst there exploited and  trafficked  by  somebody  who  offered  him
    employment in Qatar. He was exploited there and then was trafficked  to
    the United Kingdom.  He states his former  employer  who  is  a  Qatari
    national has informed the Egyptian authorities that he is a  member  of
    the Muslim Brotherhood. This has put  him  at  risk  and  the  Egyptian
    authorities have shown an interest in him, speaking to members  of  his
    family and enquiries being made.  These are set out in the decision  of
    the judge but essentially the challenge in this case is to the findings
    of credibility he reached by Judge.

 3. The Secretary of State did  not  accept  the  appellant's  account  and
    whilst there was an initial decision  by  the  NRM  in  favour  of  the
    appellant, there was a conclusive decision that he was not a victim  of
    trafficking.  Although the narrative of what had  happened  to  him  in
    Egypt and subsequently in Qatar was accepted, the NRM finding that what
    had occurred in Qatar did not lead to the necessary threshold to amount
    to exploitation.

 4. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and  also  had  before  him
    three expert reports:  a report  from  a  psychiatrist,  Dr  Foster;  a
    report from an expert on trafficking, Miss Flint; and, third, a  report
    of Dr Miles relating to the country situation and risks in Egypt.

 5. The judge did not find the appellant to be credible. That conclusion is
    based primarily on inconsistencies in his account set out at paragraphs
    28 and 29 of the decision.  The first point made is that  there  was  a
    discrepancy or inconsistency in the appellant's account of whether  his
    mother believed that it was the police who were the three men in  black
    who came to the family home.  The  second  is  regarding  a  number  of
    inconsistencies about how his uncle had died it  being  noted  that  in
    information he gave to the psychiatrist, Dr Foster, he claims his uncle
    had been killed but that he had denied saying that  in  oral  evidence.
    It was noted also the appellant's evidence about his uncle's death  was
    variable. The judge recorded that "these  inconsistencies  lead  me  to
    conclude that these events did not happen  as  claimed.    Further  the
    appellant has accepted that there had been no  other  visits  from  the
    authorities or any other interest shown in him."

 6. The judge drew adverse inferences from other inconsistencies about  the
    circumstances in which the appellant had been arrested and  whether  he
    had in  fact  been  working  unlawfully.   The  judge  also  found  the
    appellant had not been a victim of trafficking rejecting the report  of
    Miss Flint on a number of grounds rejecting also at paragraph [36]  the
    country report produced by Dr Miles.  It is however only  at  paragraph
    [38] of the decision that the judge refers to the psychiatric report of
    Dr Foster which assessed the appellant as suffering from  a  depressive
    episode of a severe degree without psychotic features this report being
    based and relying upon the account of being  trafficked  and  being  at
    risk in Egypt,  the  judge  concluding  that  this  was  not  a  severe
    condition as he was not being treated.  Accordingly,  the  judge  found
    that that was not made out and the appellant would not be  at  risk  on
    return to Egypt and dismissed the appeal.

 7. There are three principal grounds to this appeal numbered one to three.
     There are an additional two grounds which it is accepted are in effect
    parasitic on the other two and I will deal with those at the  end.   It
    is I think sensible to set  out  the  headings  in  which  the  grounds
    proceed as they require a significant degree of analysis.

 8. The grounds are that:

    (i)   the  judge  erred  materially  in  failing  to  apply  the  Joint
         Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010:  Child,  vulnerable  adult
         and sensitive to the appellant's  guidance  given  the  appellant's
         vulnerable mental health;

     (ii)    the judge's approach to credibility is flawed first in  having
         been made without reference to the psychiatric evidence, second  in
         finding the appellant was not credible and  only  then  considering
         the  country  and  trafficking  expert  evidence  contrary  to  the
         practice identified by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga  v  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367 as  being  the
         correct course.;

    (iii)    the judge's  approach  to  first  whether  the  appellant  was
         exploited in terms of Part C  of  the  trafficking  definition  and
         second whether he is at risk of  re-trafficking  is  flawed  for  a
         failure to take into account material considerations.

 9. I turn first to ground 1.  It is evident that the judge did  not  refer
    to the Joint Presidential  Guidance  but  that  is  not  necessarily  a
    material error.  The difficulty is, as I put to Ms Robinson,  that  the
    psychiatric report does not set out and  indeed  the  doctor  does  not
    appear to have been asked whether there were  any  particular  problems
    which  gave  rise  to  difficulties  either  in  giving  evidence,   in
    recalling, in being consistent or whether there  were  any  adjustments
    that required to be made in order for him to obtain a fair hearing that
    goes to the materiality of the error.  The difficulty I have  with  the
    report is that, as I have already prefigured,  it  does  not  state  in
    terms that there were any difficulties with recall or memory.

10. What is said in the report is at [43] is that the appellant  reports  a
    poor memory and concentration, his cognition was not  formally  tested.
    Whilst at paragraphs [47] to [49] the doctor does consider the Istanbul
    Protocol and states that there is evidence that individuals  have  been
    traumatised under extremely situations of emotional arousal, experience
    difficulty in both encoding and recalling autobiographical memories  in
    detail which can on  occasions  account  for  a  lack  of  accuracy  in
    narrative accounts of ill treatment, that is a reference  back  to  the
    Istanbul Protocol.  At [49] the doctor said she had also met people who
    have been traumatised  and  experienced  particular  difficulties  with
    direct  interviewing  especially  in  contexts  which  seemed  to  them
    adversarial, research suggesting that such difficulties  could  not  be
    seen as evidence of reduced credibility.

11. The difficulty with this is that it is not specific;  what  the  doctor
    does not say is that this applies to the appellant.  Not all  of  those
    people who suffer depression  have  difficulties  in  recalling  or  in
    giving evidence and it is noticeable  there  is  no  statement  to  the
    effect that this appellant has problems.  It is not possible  to  infer
    from a generic and general statement about people in that position that
    is something which affects this appellant.

12. On that basis despite the fact there are findings  of  vulnerabilities,
    there is nothing  said  here  as  to  any  adjustments  that  would  be
    necessary in order to give the appellant a fair hearing and  for  these
    reasons although I accept that the judge erred in not taking account of
    the medical report in not referring to the Joint Presidential  Guidance
    and I note the fact was a point which concerned Mr Justice Walker  when
    granting permission, I am not satisfied that that is a  material  error
    in this case.

13. I now turn on to ground 2.  I consider that it is clear  that  in  this
    case the judge did not look at the expert evidence until after  he  had
    made credibility findings that is as identified by the Court of  Appeal
    in Mibanga a difficult issue.  I do not consider it  necessary  to  set
    out what the Court of Appeal said at paragraph [24] of  that  decision;
    it is well-known and is accepted law.  But it is important to note that
    the Court of Appeal said that a what a fact-finder does at his peril is
    to reach a conclusion by reference only to the appellant's evidence and
    then enabled him to ask whether the conclusion should be shifted by the
    expert evidence.

14. I have already dealt in some detail with the psychiatric evidence of Dr
    Foster.  In this case she does  make  a  number  of  findings  which  I
    consider were well made, but it is difficult to see for the  reasons  I
    have already given how that could have affected  the  approach  to  the
    appellant's credibility the issue on which this case turned.  As I have
    already said it does not explain any discrepancies.

15. What is more difficult is the approach to the reports of Miss Flint and
    Dr Miles.  In both cases and particularly in the case of Dr Miles there
    is a clear error of fact as to what the expert had taken  into  account
    in reaching his decision and in the case of Dr Miles that for  a  large
    part of the reasons for rejecting it.  The judge held that  the  doctor
    had not taken into  account  relevant  material  specifically  the  NRM
    decision letter or the refusal letter where it is clear from the report
    that he did so.  Mr Wilding for the Secretary  of  State  submits  that
    this is not material  given  that  Dr  Miles'  report  did  not  go  to
    credibility but rather went to the situation on return where the  facts
    were made out.

16. Turning then to the report of Miss Flint, on the  material  before  the
    judge it was not entirely clear what she  had  taken  into  account  in
    reaching her decision.  She is criticised for not taking  into  account
    or referring to refusal decisions and it would appear  from  subsequent
    correspondence that she had in fact looked at them but did not  comment
    on them.  What the judge did however is to reject  her  report  on  the
    basis that she simply accepts the appellant's case as presented by  him
    and his representatives the respondent's view has not  been  considered
    at all.  The difficulty with this is that the NRM did  accept  a  large
    part of what he said which the judge  acknowledges  in  the  subsequent
    paragraph so there is  at  best  an  inconsistency  of  approach  here.
    Turning back then to the grounds of appeal, there is a tension  between
    what the judge has  said  in  accepting  parts  of  the  narrative  yet
    rejecting what Miss Flint did for in fact doing the same thing.

17. I turn to ground 3.  This is in  effect  as  Ms  Robinson  accepted,  a
    submission that the judge failed to consider the second aspect  of  the
    claim: that is, not that he is at risk on account of being suspected of
    being a member of the Muslim Brotherhood but rather that he is at  risk
    of being re-trafficked. The submission is that, given what happened  to
    him in the past (the narrative accepted by the NRM), while it might not
    amount to trafficking because of a lack of exploitation,  the  fact  is
    that he is a vulnerable person is at risk  in  that  context  of  being
    trafficked in the future.

18. It is at  this  point  that  the  doctor's  comments  about  him  being
    vulnerable come into play.  It is  in  this  aspect  in  which  I  have
    considered that the judge has compartmentalised the claim in incorrect.
     He has not properly set out what he accepted and what he did not.   He
    has dismissed on grounds of credibility the account  of  what  happened
    about the Muslim Brotherhood but he has also implicitly accepted  large
    parts of the rest of the account and has adequately  explained  why  he
    has rejected one part and not another.  In the context of rejecting the
    report of Miss Flint and in considering her report only after  he  made
    credibility findings, I consider that in the facts of  this  case  what
    the judge has  done  is  put  himself  in  jeopardy  as  identified  in
    paragraph 24 of Mibanga and that the errors in approach to  the  expert
    reports have infected the credibility findings which for the reasons  I
    have given cannot stand.

19. Accordingly, for these reasons I am satisfied that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of law in that  the
    credibility findings are flawed and are unsustainable.  On that basis I
    set the decision aside.

20. Given that the credibility findings have been set aside, and given that
    this appeal turned on credibility, fresh findings of fact on all issues
    will need to be made and, accordingly, it is  appropriate,  having  had
    regard to the relevant guidance, to remit the appeal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for to be heard afresh.  None of the findings of fact made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal are preserved.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. The decision is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  determined
    afresh by a different judge.

 3. I make an anonymity order in this case. Unless and until a Tribunal  or
    court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report
    of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any
    member of their family.  This direction applies both to  the  appellant
    and to the respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 13 February 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
