
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06280/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 7 January 2020                    |On 14 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MT
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the claimant: Mr P Turner, Imperium Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Swinnerton  promulgated  7.10.19,  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal on human rights grounds only against the decision  of
    the Secretary  of  State,  dated  17.6.19,  to  refuse  his  claim  for
    international  protection  made  on  5.10.15,  based  on  a   fear   of
    persecution on return to Zimbabwe because of imputed political opinion.



 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Saffer  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    25.10.19.

 3. I note that there has been no cross appeal in relation to the dismissal
    of the  protection  claim  on  Convention  or  humanitarian  protection
    grounds, nor in relation to any of negative findings in respect of  the
    factual claim.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons set out below, I found such error of law in the  making
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to require it to  be  set
    aside and remade by dismissing the appeal.

Relevant Background and Chronology

 5. The claimant arrived in the UK in August 2003 on  a  visit  visa,  then
    just 8 years of age. He was subsequently  granted  various  periods  of
    leave through to 2015. However, on 22.11.13, he was sentenced to a term
    of three years' detention in a Young Offenders Institution for the very
    serious criminal offence of possession and use of a prohibited  weapon,
    namely a handgun. In consequence, in 2014 he was made the subject of  a
    deportation decision and deportation order. His  subsequent  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal was  dismissed  and  he  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted (ARE) in August 2015.

 6. In October 2015 he claimed international protection, asserting  a  fear
    that on return he would be targeted by  ZANU-PF  because  he  had  been
    publicly critical of ZANU-PF's  human  rights  abuses,  lobbying  high-
    profile figures, attending anti-ZANU-PF demonstrations, publishing  his
    criticisms online and in print.

 7. The original decision of the respondent,  refusing  his  asylum  claim,
    dated 4.4.16, was withdrawn for reconsideration  of  his  claim  as  an
    application for revocation of the deportation order. In  the  meantime,
    the claimant made further submissions, all of  which  were  taken  into
    account in the final decision of the respondent issued on  15.8.18.  It
    is this decision which is the subject matter  of  the  present  appeal.
    Whilst the respondent accepted that there was a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood  that  the  claimant  had  both  demonstrated  and   written
    critically against ZANU-PF and the Mugabe regime,  it  did  not  accept
    that he met the definition of being a 'clear high  profile'  individual
    who would be at risk on return. In any event, the respondent  certified
    the protection claim under s72 of the 2002 Act.

 8. At [32] of the impugned  decision,  Judge  Swinnerton  found,  for  the
    reasons given, that the claimant had rebutted the presumption under s72
    that he is a danger to the community of the UK, given that he  had  not
    reoffended in the five years since his release, accepting the  evidence
    that he had worked hard to rehabilitate himself.

 9. The judge then went  on  to  substantively  assess  the  asylum  claim,
    concluding at [39] that the claimant had not  established  the  general
    credibility of his claim, and at [40] he would not reasonably be likely
    to engage in any anti-ZANU-PF political activity on return to Zimbabwe.
    At [41] the judge found that the claimant failed to demonstrate a well-
    founded fear of persecution on return and  thus  did  not  qualify  for
    asylum. Similarly, at [42] and [43] the judge rejected the humanitarian
    protection claim and concluded there was no reasonable likelihood  that
    the claimant would be at risk of serious harm from ZANU-PF, the police,
    or the government and authorities on return to Zimbabwe.

10. The judge also concluded at [45] that removing the claimant from the UK
    would not breach his article 8 ECHR rights to respect for  private  and
    family life, applying paragraph 399 and 399A test  of  undue  harshness
    (although referring to the paragraph numbers incorrectly). However,  at
    [51] to [53] of the decision, the  judge  concluded  that  in  all  the
    circumstances, including the delay in dealing with his claim,  and  the
    matters specifically set out in paragraphs [51]  to  [53],  the  public
    interest  in  the  claimant's  deportation  had  "reduced   such   that
    deportation in the particular  circumstances  of  this  case  would  be
    disproportionate and there are very  compelling  circumstances  why  he
    should not be deported."

11. The grounds assert that the judge made a material misdirection  in  the
    approach to dealing with a second appeal on  the  same  facts  and  the
    application  of  the  Devaseelan  (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -   Extra-
    territorial Effect) Sri Lanka [2002]  UKAIT  00702  principles.  It  is
    pointed out  that  in  2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  no  very
    compelling circumstances to justify allowing the claimant to remain  in
    the UK. Judge Swinnerton had not reasoned any changes since  2015  that
    merit overturning the appeal on essentially the same factual matrix. It
    is further submitted that the reasoning provided, essentially contained
    in a few lines of generalised statement, is entirely inadequate.

12.  In  granting  permission  to  appeal  on  all  grounds,  Judge  Saffer
    considered  it  "arguable,  given  the  previous  adverse  asylum   and
    deportation decision, the fresh adverse findings made  in  relation  to
    the asylum and human rights claim, and the public interest in  removing
    foreign criminals, that the judge has materially erred in  relation  to
    the decision in the case for the reasons set out in the grounds."

13. I accept and agree with the submission that the approach of the  First-
    tier Tribunal was in error of law. As a foreign criminal, the  starting
    point is that there is a strong public interest in his deportation. The
    more serious the offence, here possession of  a  handgun,  the  greater
    that public interest. The judge's suggestion that the  public  interest
    has somehow "reduced" is a  fundamental  misunderstanding  of  law  and
    principle which undermines any confidence that the  balancing  exercise
    has been adequately performed.  Although  personal  considerations  may
    ultimately outweigh the public  interest  in  any  particular  case,  a
    claimant's personal circumstances cannot diminish the  public  interest
    in his deportation.

14. Further, having found that the claimant was unable to meet any  of  the
    tests under paragraph 399  and  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
    conclusion in a relatively  short  section  at  the  very  end  of  the
    decision that there are very compelling circumstances  over  and  above
    the already high threshold of undue harshness is patently  inadequately
    reasoned. No one reading this part,  or  indeed  the  entire  decision,
    would be able to understand why it is the circumstances are said to  be
    very compelling so as to outweigh the significant  public  interest  in
    the claimant's removal from the UK.

15. I accept that it was not necessary for the judge to set out findings in
    respect of every factor relevant to an assessment as to  whether  there
    are  very  compelling  circumstances.  In   Budhathoki   (reasons   for
    decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal stated that, "It
    is  generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for   First-tier   Tribunal
    judgements to rehearse every detail or issue raised  in  a  case.  This
    leads to judgements becoming overly long and  confused  and  is  not  a
    proportionate approach to deciding cases. It is, however, necessary for
    judges to identify and  resolve  key  conflicts  in  the  evidence  and
    explain in clear and brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can
    understand why they have won or lost."

16. Similarly, in Brent LBC v Tudor [2013] EWCA Civ 157, Beatson LJ stated,
    "It is... clearly established, see eg Knight v Clifton [1971] Ch 700 at
    721 and Eagil Trust Co Ltd v Pigott-Brown [1985] 3AER 119 Ast 122  that
    there is no duty on a judge when giving his reasons to deal with  every
    submission presented by counsel. What is important is for  the  parties
    to know why one has lost and the other has  won.  In  English  v  Emery
    Reimbold & Strick Ltd [2002] 1 WLR 2409 at [19] this court stated  that
    this requirement:

         "... does not mean that every factor which weighed with  the  judge
         in  his  appraisal  of  the  evidence  has  to  be  identified  and
         explained. But the issues the resolution of which were vital to the
         judge's conclusion should be identified and the manner in which  he
         resolved them explained."" (emphasis added).

17. The reasoning in the impugned decision does not adequately  explain  or
    justify how and why the claimant's circumstances are very compelling.

18. I also find  that  the  judge  placed  too  great  a  reliance  on  the
    significance of rehabilitation,  historical  evidence  of  past  mental
    health issues, and the unexplained delay in  making  the  decision.  At
    best the rehabilitation is but a neutral factor and no positive  credit
    can be derived from the absence of further offending, merely doing what
    is required of any person, to abide by the law of the land. In Taylor v
    Home Secretary [2015] EWCA Civ 845, the Court  of  Appeal  stated  that
    whilst it would not want to diminish the importance of  rehabilitation,
    "the  cases  in  which  it  can  make  a  significant  contribution  to
    establishing the compelling reasons sufficient to outweigh  the  public
    interest in deportation are likely to be rare."

19. Whilst Mr Turner took me at some length through the decision,  as  well
    as relying on positive findings from the  previous  tribunal  decision,
    including that the claimant was not involved  in  gang  culture,  I  am
    driven  to  the  clear  conclusion   that   whether   individually   or
    cumulatively none of the factors relied on can properly amount to  very
    compelling circumstances on the facts of this case.

20. I note that at [41] of the impugned decision, after  referring  to  the
    claimant's age, fitness and health,  in  assessing  the  socio-economic
    conditions he would face on return to Zimbabwe, Judge Swinnerton  noted
    that the findings of the previous tribunal in  this  regard,  including
    the likelihood of practical and financial assistance from family either
    in Zimbabwe or South Africa, and from his supportive mother in the  UK,
    before stating, "there is no convincing evidence before me, (that)  the
    appellant's situation has changed since them so as  to  contradict  the
    Tribunal's finding that in his case,  socio-economic  factors  did  not
    constitute very compelling circumstances. I do not find it unreasonable
    to expect the appellant to return to Zimbabwe. He has not  demonstrated
    a well-founded fear of persecution and  does  not  qualify  for  asylum
    status." Effectively, the judge was there endorsing the findings of the
    previous tribunal that there were no very compelling  circumstances  on
    the facts of this case, which makes the conclusion to the  contrary  at
    the end of the decision rather puzzling.

21. Reading the decision as a whole, there are so  many  negative  findings
    made about the claimant and/or endorsing or upholding the  findings  in
    the previous decision of the Tribunal that it is rather  difficult  and
    in my view, impossible, to understand on what  basis  Judge  Swinnerton
    could  reach  the  conclusion  from  [51]  onwards  that,  despite  all
    previously stated, there were very compelling circumstances within  the
    meaning of paragraph  398  of  the  Rules  to  justify  permitting  the
    claimant to remain. Several of the findings appear in  fact  to  be  in
    direct contradiction with the final conclusions allowing the appeal.

22. Looking at [51] to [53] of the decision, I find that the reasons  given
    by the First-tier  Tribunal  in  support  of  the  conclusion  of  very
    compelling circumstances are woefully inadequate  and  insufficient  to
    sustain the conclusion reached. The  judge  relied  on  the  claimant's
    youth on arrival in the UK and when committing the  index  offence,  as
    well as the fact that he had not reoffended but to the  contrary  shown
    remorse and rehabilitated himself. It would appear that primarily,  the
    judge  relied  on  the  close-knit  family  relationship  with  mother,
    stepfather, sibling and cousin, described by the previous  Tribunal  as
    close family ties. The judge was impressed by the emotional support  he
    provided to his cousin, so that his removal would  be  distressing  for
    each of them. The judge also considered that he had  especially  strong
    social and cultural ties to the UK. However, none of these factors  can
    demonstrate very compelling circumstances over and  above  the  'unduly
    harsh' threshold in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.

23. In all the circumstances, it is clear that in an otherwise careful  and
    competent decision of the First-tier Tribunal, the final assessment  of
    very compelling circumstances is unsupportable and discloses a material
    error of law requiring the decision to be set aside and remade.

Remaking of the Decision

24. In the absence of any  cross-appeal  against  the  other  findings  and
    conclusions of the First-tier Tribunal, the findings of the  First-tier
    Tribunal in relation to asylum, humanitarian protection, article 8 ECHR
    private and family  life,  and  article  3  ECHR  in  relation  to  the
    claimant's mental health issues must all stand as made, that is to say,
    dismissed for the reasons given in the decision.

25.  In  setting  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal,   I
    specifically preserved all findings other than those in the section  of
    the decision addressing and headed 'Very Compelling Circumstances.'  It
    is not necessary to rehearse those findings or reasons here, except  as
    necessary to the remaking of the decision, as set out below.

26. The sole issue in remaking the decision is confined  to  whether  there
    are very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  the  circumstances
    described in paragraphs 398 to 399A:

         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and

         (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

         (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;
         or

         (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of  the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for  the
         law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
             the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the  immigration
             decision; and in either case

                  (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in  the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

         (b) the person has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and

             (i) the relationship was formed at  a  time  when  the  person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the
             country to which the person is  to  be  deported,  because  of
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain  in
             the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
         life; and

         (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c) there would be very significant obstacles  to  his  integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.

27. However, it is  clear  for  the  unchallenged  reasons  given  in  both
    previous First-tier Tribunal decisions the  claimant  cannot  meet  the
    'unduly  harsh'  threshold  or  the  'very  significant  obstacles   to
    integration' tests of paragraphs 399 and 399A. It follows  that  it  is
    only where there are very compelling circumstances over and above those
    described in paragraphs 399 and 399A that the claimant can  succeed  in
    defeating deportation on human rights grounds.

28. I pointed Mr Turner to the directions issued by the Upper  Tribunal  on
    the grant of permission to appeal, notably the presumption at [4] "that
    in the event of the Tribunal deciding that the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is to be set aside as erroneous in law, the  remaking  of
    the decision will take place at the same hearing. "The  fresh  decision
    will normally be based on the evidence before the FtT and  any  further
    evidence  admitted  (see  [5]  below),  together  with   the   parties'
    arguments. The parties must be prepared accordingly in every case." [5]
    notes that the Tribunal is empowered to permit new or further  evidence
    to be admitted in the remaking of  the  decision,  but  where  this  is
    sought the parties must comply with Rule 15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal's
    Procedure Rules. No such Rule 15(2A) application had been made,  either
    within the timetable set out in the  directions,  or  at  all.  In  any
    event, no application was made by Mr Turner to adduce further evidence,
    documentary or oral, even though the claimant was in attendance at  the
    hearing, and no adjournment to do so was sought.

29. Mr McVeety had no further submissions to make, relying  on  those  made
    earlier in asserting and error of law. I advised Mr Turner that it  was
    not necessary for him to repeat his earlier submissions in relation  to
    the challenge to the very compelling circumstances finding of the First-
    tier Tribunal, but invited him  to  make  any  further  submissions  he
    wished on the remaking of the decision, which he  proceeded  to  do.  I
    have made a careful note of both his  earlier  and  later  submissions,
    which perhaps necessarily involved some repetition, and have  addressed
    the relevant matters in my considerations set out below.

30. Mr Turner  invited  me  to  carefully  consider  the  large  bundle  of
    materials relied on by the appellant before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    which I have examined  and  taken  into  account  before  reaching  any
    findings of fact.

31. It is clear that there are a significant number of positive factors, to
    the claimant's credit, which Mr Turner submitted were  highly  relevant
    to the issue of very compelling circumstances. Whilst I have taken  all
    of those into account in the remaking of the decision, several  are  of
    limited relevance to the crucial issue.

32. It may be helpful to set out in  summary  form  the  principle  factors
    relied on  by  the  claimant  in  addition  to  those  matters  already
    referenced above:

      a) That he came to the UK from Zimbabwe at  the  young  age  of  8,  a
         child, and has effectively been raised here.  The  judge  concluded
         that he had especially strong social and cultural ties to  the  UK,
         where he has been educated, has friends, and  where  his  immediate
         family members reside;

      b) The decision of the previous First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  no
         evidence of gang-related activity by the claimant;

      c) The positive features  found  by  that  judge  were  and  remain  a
         starting point for consideration today. Those included  the  extent
         of his private and family life in the UK;

      d) Judge Swinnerton also found that  the  claimant  had  rebutted  the
         presumption that he is a danger to the community;

      e) There was no suggestion of gang affiliation or membership and  when
         sentenced by the Crown Court had been of hitherto  good  character.
         Neither had he reoffended, but had been living a blameless life  in
         the community for over 5 years;

      f) Since his release, he had thrown himself into voluntary  charitable
         work, including the responsible position of becoming  the  governor
         of a NHS Trust, a position of trust, and thereby demonstrating  his
         contribution to society;

      g) At [48] Judge Swinnerton found that the claimant had been convicted
         of a 'one-off' crime and has  shown  a  good  family  and  academic
         background;

      h)  The  judge  also  accepted  that  he   has   shown   remorse   and
         rehabilitation;

      i) Since release he represents no risk to the public;

      j) He has some mental health issues, including depression and anxiety;

      k) His educational qualifications are also to his credit;

      l) He has a degree of family life in the sense that he lives with  his
         mother, step-father, sibling, and cousin,  which  Judge  Swinnerton
         described as a close-knit household;

      m) He has a particularly close relationship with his cousin who relies
         on him for advice and emotional support. If removed  from  the  UK,
         the experience would be distressing to each of them;

      n) Whilst he was charged with affray and prosecuted, he was  acquitted
         of the allegation;

      o) His asylum  claim  had  been  pending  since  January  2016.  Judge
         Swinnerton accepted that this  delay  had  adversely  affected  the
         claimant's mental health, increasing his depression and anxiety.

33. There are a number of factors that are either neutral or weigh  against
    the claimant:

      a) Judge Swinnerton accepted, as do I, that the claimant has committed
         a serious crime and is a foreign criminal. Given the serious nature
         of the crime, the public interest in his removal  from  the  UK  is
         high;

      b) His immigration status has always been precarious so that  pursuant
         to section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
         little weight is to be given to a private life developed in the UK;

      c) Whilst he is not financially independent, as he is supported by his
         mother, he is independent of support by the state. However, this is
         a neutral factor;

      d) That he speaks English is also a neutral factor;

      e) He has lived in the UK most of his life so  that  at  [48]  of  the
         decision Judge Swinnerton found that he is socially and  culturally
         integrated in the UK, despite his criminal conviction and sentence;

      f) He has a girlfriend but has never lived with her, so that he has no
         family life with a partner within the meaning  of  the  Immigration
         Rules;

      g) He has no children  and  thus  no  family  life  with  a  child  to
         consider. Whilst he has a  close  relationship  with  other  family
         members, he is not a primary carer for any of them;

      h) He has no well-founded fear of persecution and  would  not  face  a
         real risk of serious harm on return to Zimbabwe.  At  [43]  of  the
         decision Judge  Swinnerton  found  that  there  was  no  reasonable
         likelihood that the claimant would be at risk of serious harm  from
         ZANU-PF, the police, or the government and authorities on return to
         Zimbabwe. It had also been conceded on his behalf that his  removal
         would not breach article 3 ECHR on the basis of any medical  issue.
         These are all relevant considerations in the assessment of  whether
         there are very compelling circumstances on the facts of this case;

      i) His mental health issues are insufficient to reach  the  article  3
         threshold. At [51] the Judge was not  satisfied  that  he  has  any
         serious mental health condition and/or  any  physical  illness  for
         which he  would  not  be  able  to  obtain  suitable  treatment  in
         Zimbabwe. It follows that his mental and  physical  health  is  not
         relevant to the issue of very compelling circumstances;

      j) He is otherwise fit  and  able-bodied,  able  to  work  to  support
         himself. As Judge Swinnerton also noted,  the  previous  First-tier
         Tribunal decision found the claimant to be a fit young man of sound
         health. Judge Swinnerton was  not  satisfied  that  the  claimant's
         health had deteriorated materially since that previous finding;

      k) Judge Swinnerton found no reason to depart from  the  finding  that
         the claimant would likely have practical and financial support from
         family in Zimababwe or South Africa, as well as a supportive mother
         in the UK, so that Judge Swinnerton  found  that  at  [48]  of  the
         decision  no  sufficient  reason  in  the   further   evidence   or
         submissions to depart from the previous findings  of  the  Tribunal
         that there were no very significant obstacles to his integration in
         Zimbabwe;

      l) It is significant that at [41] of  the  decision  Judge  Swinnerton
         also found no reasons in the further  evidence  to  contradict  the
         previous tribunal's  finding  that  the  claimant's  socio-economic
         circumstances did not constitute very compelling circumstances.  It
         appears that the  judge  correctly  relied  on  Devaseelan  (Second
         Appeals - ECHR - Extra-territorial Effect) Sri Lanka  [2002]  UKAIT
         00702 principles to take the  previous  findings  as  the  starting
         point,  but  after  considering   the   new   evidence   found   no
         justification to depart from those findings;

34. I confirm that I have taken all the above matters fully  into  account,
    both those for and against the claimant. However, in the light  of  the
    comprehensive findings of Judge Swinnerton, this Tribunal must  proceed
    on the basis that the claimant will on return be relatively young,  fit
    and healthy, and able to integrate in Zimbabwe, and  will  likely  have
    family practical and financial support in doing  so.  At  [41]  of  the
    decision, nothing in relation to the circumstances  of  the  claimant's
    return to Zimbabwe were found by Judge Swinnerton  to  amount  to  very
    compelling circumstances, the judge entirely agreeing with the findings
    of the previous tribunal in this regard, and at  [44]  the  judge  also
    found that he had not provided any grounds "which would warrant a grant
    of discretionary leave" outside the Rules.

35. Many of the factors relied on in Mr Turner's submissions may well be to
    the claimant's general  credit,  but  the  submissions  demonstrated  a
    misunderstanding of what can amount to very compelling circumstances in
    relation to a person subject to  deportation.  The  claimant's  removal
    from the UK is conducive to the public good and in the public interest.
    Given that his sentence was over 12 months  but  under  4  years,  both
    previous decisions  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  very  properly  gave
    consideration to paragraphs 399 in relation to family life and 399A  in
    relation to private life. As explained above, and  is  not  challenged,
    the claimant cannot meet any of the requirements in  399  or  399A,  so
    that it is only where there are very compelling circumstances over  and
    above those under  399  and  399A  that  the  public  interest  in  the
    claimant's deportation can be outweighed.

36. However, the factors relied on  by  Mr  Turner  cannot  even  begin  to
    demonstrate any very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
    under paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules. For example, as
    explained above, little weight can  be  given  to  the  fact  that  the
    claimant has worked hard to rehabilitate himself. The fact that he  has
    not reoffended means only that he has done what  was  expected  of  any
    person living in the UK. To live a law-abiding life and  to  contribute
    to society and cannot be in any sense of  the  words  be  described  as
    'very compelling'. Whilst there is a degree of family life with mother,
    stepfather, sister and cousin, even Judge Swinnerton concluded at  [45]
    that interference to those  relationships  by  the  claimant's  removal
    would not infringe article 8 ECHR. Having considered the new  evidence,
    at [47] Judge  Swinnerton  also  agreed  with  the  assessment  of  the
    previous judge and found no reason to depart from the  conclusion  that
    the claimant could not meet the high 'unduly harsh' threshold  test  in
    paragraph 399 in respect of family life with a  child  or  partner.  At
    [48] the judge also agreed with the previous finding  that  nothing  in
    the claimant's private life circumstances demonstrated very significant
    obstacles to his  integration  in  Zimbabwe.  It  follows  that  it  is
    difficult to see anything in the personal, private and family  life  of
    the claimant which could amount to very  compelling  circumstances.  If
    the claimant cannot even bring himself within article 8 ECHR on  the  R
    (Razgar) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]  UKHKL  27
    stepped approach, and cannot bring  himself  within  the  circumstances
    described under paragraphs 399 and 399A, it is necessarily difficult to
    see what could, even  taken  at  the  highest,  could  amount  to  very
    compelling circumstances. Taking in  the  round  full  account  of  all
    factors arising from the oral and documentary evidence, whether or  not
    specifically identified above, I find that there are in  fact  no  very
    compelling circumstances on  the  facts  of  this  case  sufficient  to
    outweigh the significant public interest in the claimant's deportation.

37. It follows that the appeal cannot succeed and must be dismissed on  all
    grounds.

Decision

38. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.
                    I set aside the decision.


                    I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it on
                    all grounds.


                    Signed






                    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated 8 January 2020


