
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06943/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 January 2019                   |On 6 February 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                   MR S K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Cohen, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan. His  date  of  birth  is  in
    dispute. The appellant claims he was born on 20 September 2000  whereas
    the respondent relies on an age assessment by Croydon City  Council  to
    the effect that the appellant was born on 30 September 1997.  That  age
    assessment is currently being challenged by the appellant challenge  by
    way of judicial review.

 2. The appellant entered the UK illegally on 29 December 2015 and  claimed
    asylum on 30 December 2015. His claim was refused by the respondent  on
    16 June 2016 but he was given discretionary leave to  remain  until  20
    March 2018 as an unaccompanied asylum  seeking  child  (notwithstanding
    the age assessment).  A notice of appeal, on asylum grounds, was lodged
    on the appellant's behalf  on  5  July  2016  but  withdrawn  by  those
    representing him at the time, City Legal Partnership,  by  fax  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 18 October 2016.   The  withdrawal  was  shortly
    before a pre-hearing review scheduled in the First-tier Tribunal for 20
    October 2016, with the substantive hearing listed for 3 November  2016.



 3. On 14 March 2018 Lawrence  Lupin  Solicitors  Ltd,  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant,  wrote  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  requesting  that  the
    appellant's asylum appeal be "re-opened" because the appellant had  not
    been fully aware of the consequences of withdrawing  his  appeal;  this
    had not been explained to him by his  former  representatives.   Lupins
    noted that the appellant had been assessed as an adult at the time  but
    that this age assessment was being  challenged  by  Wilsons  Solicitors
    LLP, on his behalf, in the light of new  evidence  which  had  come  to
    light following the assessment by Croydon City Council.

 4. A clerk to the First-tier Tribunal responded  on  4  May  2018  to  the
    effect that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction to hear  the  application.
    Lupins sought clarification in the light of AP (Withdrawals  -  nullity
    assessment) Pakistan [2007] UKAIT 00022 (cited in the initial request).
      The application was set down for hearing on 18 September 2018.

 5. The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Gribble  ("the  FTTJ")
    on that date. The appellant was represented by Lupins.   The  appellant
    pursued his application on the grounds that paragraph 57(f)(iii) of  AP
    applied, namely:

          "A  withdrawal  has  been  communicated  to  the  Tribunal  by  a
          representative  without  there  being  clear  understanding,   or
          meeting  of   the   minds,   between   an   Appellant   and   the
          representative"

 6. The FTTJ decided the withdrawal was "valid" and declined to "reinstate"
    the appeal.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on various  grounds  which  I
    summarise as follows:

      i)  Failure  to  take  account   of   relevant   evidence,   confining
         consideration to certain documents only,  despite  the  appellant's
         bundle having been appropriately served prior to the hearing.

     ii)  Failure  to  take  account  of  the  totality  of  the   evidence,
         particularly  the  medical  evidence  which  was  relevant  to  the
         assessment of whether the appellant had  satisfied  the  burden  of
         proving that AP applied, particularly as at paragraph 57(e) of that
         judgment.

 8. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in the following terms:

         "It is arguable that the Judge has fallen into error at paragraph 1
         of the decision in referring to the issue  to  be  decided  in  the
         terms set out in paragraph 1.  It is arguable that  the  Judge  has
         approached the matter on an arguably incorrect footing  namely  the
         question of reinstatement of the  appeal  in  contradistinction  to
         deciding the validity of the withdrawal.  It is arguable  that  the
         Judge  has  not  set  out  a  sufficient  analysis  or   attributed
         sufficient weight to the evidence relating to the mental health  of
         the Appellant, his vulnerability, his  capacity  in  respect  of  a
         meeting of minds, the relevancy [sic] of the receiving  of  therapy
         from the Children Society, the period during  which  the  Appellant
         had been suffering from PTSD and the context of the timing  of  the
         receipt of legal advice, the impact of "low mood", the relationship
         between the vagueness referred to by  the  Judge  and  the  factors
         appertaining to the position of the Appellant, the  impact  of  the
         application of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2  in  terms
         of the applicability  of  this  prior  to  the  commencement  of  a
         hearing, the measures taken at the time of the receipt  of  advice,
         the role of the Appellant's uncle set against the other factors and
         an assessment of the cumulative impact of the  intermixing  of  the
         factors referred to."

 9. Hence the matter came before me.  At the date  of  hearing  before  me,
    Wilsons Solicitors LLP were acting on this matter, in addition  to  the
    judicial review relating to the age assessment.

Background

10. As regards his asylum claim, the  appellant's  case  is  that  he  left
    Afghanistan in 2015 for fear of forced recruitment by the  Taliban  and
    because of the general situation in that country.

11. The appellant's uncle, who resides in the UK, had instructed City Legal
    Partnership on the appellant's behalf to pursue an appeal  against  the
    refusal of asylum. His uncle was present during most of the appellant's
    appointments with solicitors but there  was  no  qualified  interpreter
    present.  The appellant's case is that his uncle  did  not  attend  the
    appointment with solicitors during which he signed the  instruction  to
    withdraw the appeal, This document was written in English; it was  read
    to him in English but "never properly translated into Dari".   He  says
    he was told by the solicitors he would be able to  appeal  against  any
    future decision to  refuse  an  extension  of  discretionary  leave  to
    remain. He did not understand at the time, although he has  since  been
    told, the difference between the possibility of the  grant  of  refugee
    status as against  that  of  discretionary  leave.   As  a  result,  he
    challenged the validity of the withdrawal of  his  appeal  against  the
    refusal of asylum on  the  grounds  that  he  had  not  understood  the
    implications of the withdrawal.

Submissions

12. At the outset of the hearing I indicated  to  the  two  representatives
    that it was clear from the date stamps on the appellant's  two  bundles
    of documents, that these had been received by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    prior to the hearing: one on 12 September 2018 and  the  second  on  14
    September 2018. Furthermore, I noted the appellant's skeleton  argument
    makes reference to the  existence  of  medical  evidence  of  PTSD  and
    depression (albeit in the context of Article 3).

13. Ms Cunha conceded for the respondent that the failure of  the  FTTJ  to
    have regard to the expert report of Dr Cohen, Consultant Physician,  in
    his assessment of the evidence of the appellant was a procedural  error
    of law; materiality was, however, in issue.

14. For the appellant, Ms Cohen identified the chronology of events leading
    to the hearing before the FTTJ and expanded upon the grounds of  appeal
    which I have summarised above. She submitted that, in  particular,  the
    failure of the FTTJ to have regard to the expert medical evidence of Dr
    Cohen was a material error of law. She identified the relevant passages
    from that report. She submitted that, had the FTTJ taken the content of
    this report into account, he  would  have  been  bound  to  manage  the
    hearing in accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of
    2010: Child, vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance, and  to
    have applied it in his assessment of the evidence as to the appellant's
    state of mind at  the  date  of  withdrawal  of  the  appeal.   It  was
    submitted  that  the  failure  of  the  FTTJ  to  take  this   guidance
    substantively into account was a procedural error of law which  led  to
    objective unfairness in the decision-making.  Ms  Cohen  also  drew  my
    attention to the guidance in SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ  1284  and  In  FP  (Iran)  and  MB
    (Libya) v SSHD 2007 EWCA Civ 13.

15. Ms Cohen further submitted that it was clear  from  Dr  Cohen's  report
    that the appellant's diagnosis of PTSD related  to  events  which  pre-
    dated his arrival in the UK; on a common sense  analysis  he  had  been
    suffering from PTSD at the date of withdrawal. This was relevant to his
    ability to understand the legal advice he was given.

16. For the respondent, Ms Cunha  conceded  the  failure  of  the  FTTJ  to
    consider all the evidence adduced by the  appellant,  and  particularly
    the expert evidence of Dr Cohen, was a procedural error. She  submitted
    that it was not necessarily material  to  the  outcome.  She  noted  Dr
    Cohen's evidence suggested that, notwithstanding his state of mind,  he
    was  able  to  make  rational  decisions  and  that  he  trusted  those
    representing him  at  that  time,  City  Legal  Partnership;  he  "felt
    comfortable" with his solicitors. She submitted that he was capable  of
    a meeting of minds with his solicitors at that point; he  engaged  with
    them. She submitted that the report did not  indicate  the  appellant's
    state of mind at the date of withdrawal, albeit Dr  Cohen  referred  to
    the appellant's PTSD being caused by events pre-dating his  arrival  in
    the  UK.   Ms  Cunha  told  me  the  respondent  did  not  dispute  the
    appellant's diagnosis of PTSD and the cause of it, as  set  out  in  Dr
    Cohen's report. However, she considered the report did not  assist  the
    appellant: it indicated he  was  capable  of  giving  instructions  and
    evidence in court, albeit pursuant to the Presidential Guidance and  AM
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ  1123.   She  submitted  that  the
    existence of PTSD would  not  have  impacted  on  the  ability  of  the
    appellant to give instructions to his City Legal  Partnership.  It  was
    submitted that the attendance note of the  solicitor  who  advised  the
    appellant on the merits of withdrawal of the proceedings demonstrated a
    meeting of minds.  The solicitor noted she had  advised  the  appellant
    she would be happy to proceed with the hearing if the appellant  wished
    her to  do  so.   This  suggested  the  appellant  had  given  informed
    instructions.

17. Ms Cunha further  submitted  the  FTTJ  had  accepted  the  appellant's
    claimed age when considering the application;  he  had  considered  the
    evidence of the appellant's support worker; he  had  engaged  with  the
    evidence (albeit not that of Dr Cohen).  It was submitted that, even if
    Dr Cohen's evidence had been taken into account, the outcome would have
    been the same given the FTTJ  had  implicitly  (at  [30])  applied  the
    Presidential Guidance. It was submitted the FTTJ did not need to engage
    with the PTSD diagnosis which was linked by Dr Cohen  to  events  which
    occurred prior  to  the  appellant's  arrival  in  the  UK.   Ms  Cunha
    summarised her submissions by saying it was accepted  the  FTTJ  should
    have considered the expert report but that, in real terms, had he  done
    so the outcome would have been the same;  the  FTTJ  had  accepted  the
    existence of psychological trauma and  taken  mitigating  factors  into
    account.  Ms  Cunha  accepted  the  guidance  in  TPN  (FtT  appeals  -
    withdrawal) Vietnam [2017] UKUT 00295 was  relevant,  albeit  it  post-
    dated the withdrawal.

Discussion

18. The appellant  had  adduced  an  expert  report  by  Dr  Juliet  Cohen,
    Consultant Physician, dated 31 August 2018 for the hearing  before  the
    FTTJ.  Dr Cohen's  report  includes  her  opinion  on  the  appellant's
    ability to participate in the hearing and her diagnosis with regard  to
    his mental health.  Ms Cunha accepts the failure of the  FTTJ  to  take
    this into account is an error of law.

19. Some documents listed in the index to the appellant's bundle containing
    Dr Cohen's report are highlighted with a marker pen.  I  conclude  that
    this was done by the FTTJ since he  makes  reference  to  some  of  the
    highlighted documents in his decision.  This  is  consistent  with  the
    bundle having been received by  the  Tribunal  prior  to  the  date  of
    hearing. The report of Dr Cohen is not highlighted in the index. Nor is
    there any reference to Dr Cohen's report  or  her  conclusions  in  the
    FTTJ's decision.  I bear in mind the guidance at  paragraph  49  of  MA
    (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49,  that  "Where  a  tribunal  has  referred  to
    considering all the evidence, a reviewing body should be very  slow  to
    conclude that that tribunal overlooked some factor, simply because  the
    factor is not explicitly referred to in the  determination  concerned".
    However, the evidence of Dr  Cohen  is  highly  relevant  both  to  the
    conduct of the hearing and the appellant's  application  and,  had  the
    FTTJ considered it, he would have referred to it.

20. As regards the appellant's ability to participate in  the  hearing,  Dr
    Cohen states

         "in  my  opinion  he  is  not  unfit  to  give  evidence  but   his
         vulnerability in light of  his  stated  age  and  experiences,  and
         current mental health, should be taken into consideration.  He  may
         become stressed in a hearing,  feel  scared  or  anxious  and  have
         difficulty with his concentration and memory so that his  abilities
         in  understanding  questions,  recalling  information,  and  giving
         coherent explanations are affected."

21. Dr Cohen states this with  regard  to  the  appellant's  mental  health
    generally:


         "he  meets  the  diagnostic  criteria  for  post  traumatic  stress
         disorder (ICD 10 criteria appended). While the  re-experiencing  of
         symptoms are not particularly prominent in his presentation, I find
         that he is also suffering significantly low mood and other features
         of depression (ICD 10 criteria appended) including low energy, loss
         of interest in activities and low self-esteem,  and  these  may  be
         masking some of the PTSD symptoms.  PTSD and depression commonly co-
         exist."

22. Dr Cohen refers to the appellant's  condition  as  having  been  caused
    cumulatively by events which pre-date the appellant's  arrival  in  the
    UK. On that basis, it is, at the least, arguable the appellant may have
    been suffering from symptoms of PTSD in 2016  when  he  instructed  his
    solicitors to withdraw his appeal and that this could have impacted  on
    his ability to understand what he was  being  told  by  his  solicitors
    about the merits and impact of withdrawal.

23. The FTTJ states at [30]:

         "I make these findings bearing in mind the appellant's age as being
         a minor on any view of matters in 2016. I find  his  oral  evidence
         was vague around the advice he had and make every allowance for his
         age and the evidence from Ms Bonney of his later struggles with his
         mood.  I accept he  did  not  have  an  interpreter  at  solicitors
         appointments. However he had his  uncle  with  him  as  appropriate
         adult, a man who had been assessed by social services to  care  for
         him, and a man who had been in the UK since 2001."

24. This is not an accurate reflection of the  parties'  positions  at  the
    time: the appellant's claimed date  of  birth  was  20  September  2000
    whereas the respondent relied on an age assessment that he was born  on
    30 September 1997 (albeit, contrary to this position,  he  had  granted
    the  appellant  discretionary  leave  to  remain  because  he  was   an
    unaccompanied asylum seeking minor).  Thus the appellant's claimed  age
    in October 2016 (the date of withdrawal) was 16 and his deemed age  was
    19.

25. Furthermore, there is no specific reference in the FTTJ's  decision  to
    the application of the Presidential Guidance  or  the  guidance  in  AM
    (Afghanistan) either with regard to the conduct of the  hearing  itself
    or the assessment of the evidence both at the date  of  withdrawal  and
    the date of hearing.  The evidence of Dr Cohen makes it clear that  the
    appellant was a vulnerable witness at the date of hearing and that  his
    mental health issues were caused by events which pre-date  his  arrival
    in the UK. On any reading, the FTTJ should have considered whether  the
    appellant might have been suffering from PTSD at the date of withdrawal
    and the impact of this on his ability to engage with his legal  adviser
    and indeed to take part in the proceedings. Instead, the FTTJ only  had
    regard to the evidence of Ms Bonney, the  appellant's  contact  at  the
    Children's Society.

26. It was submitted by Ms Cunha that the attendance note of the  solicitor
    who  advised  the  appellant  on  the  merits  of  withdrawal  of   the
    proceedings demonstrated a meeting of minds.   The  solicitor  recorded
    she had advised the appellant she would be happy to  proceed  with  the
    hearing if the appellant wished her to do so.  This suggested,  it  was
    submitted, the appellant had given informed instructions.  However,  in
    assessing that evidence the FTTJ failed to take into account the expert
    evidence of Dr Cohen.  That  evidence  has  a  direct  bearing  on  the
    assessment of the  ability  of  the  appellant  to  have  a  meaningful
    exchange with his  legal  adviser  (irrespective  of  the  lack  of  an
    official interpreter).  The appellant's uncle was not  present  at  the
    appellant's meeting  with  his  legal  representative  (albeit  he  was
    telephoned during the meeting) when the appellant signed  the  form  of
    authority for withdrawal; thus the  appellant's  evidence  as  to  what
    occurred at that meeting is at the  heart  of  the  application.   That
    evidence should have been assessed with the expert medical evidence  in
    mind.

27. The FTTJ finds at [28] and [29] the advice of the legal  representative
    to the appellant was "clear" but that was not the issue to be  decided:
    it was whether there was a meeting of minds and whether  the  appellant
    understood what he was being advised  (per  AP,  paragraph  57(f)(iii),
    which the FTTJ partially cited as "57(iiii)" at [25]).   The  FTTJ  has
    made a finding only with regard to  the  information  provided  by  the
    legal representative not the appellant's understanding of it.  The FTTJ
    has not therefore addressed the crux of the application.  Nor  has  the
    FTTJ stated why he rejects the appellant's own evidence on  the  issue,
    namely that  the  appellant  did  not  understand  the  impact  of  the
    withdrawal. These failures, together with  the  failure  to  take  into
    account the expert evidence of Dr  Cohen  render  the  FTTJ's  findings
    unsustainable.

28. In summary, I agree with Ms Cunha that the failure of the FTTJ to  have
    regard to the existence and content of Dr  Cohen's  report,  given  its
    reach, is a procedural error of law. This  evidence  should  have  been
    taken into account not only in considering the conduct of  the  hearing
    but in the round with the remaining evidence on the substantive  issue,
    namely the validity of the withdrawal. Had it been, the  assessment  of
    the appellant's own evidence and his ability to understand  the  advice
    of his solicitor in October 2016 might have  been  different.   As  was
    said by Keene LJ in IA (Somalia) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2007] EWCA Civ 323:


         "... in public law cases, an error of law will be regarded as
         material unless the decision-maker must have reached the same
         conclusion without the error ... [A]n error of law is material if
         the Adjudicator might have come to a different conclusion ... "

29. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be  set
    aside in its entirety.

30. It was submitted that the evidence  was  sufficient  to  enable  me  to
    remake  the  decision  as  regards  the  validity  of  the  withdrawal.
    However, I am unable, for the reasons set out above,  to  preserve  any
    findings of fact.  It is not appropriate for me simply to adopt  as  my
    findings  the  appellant's  witness  statement   without   giving   the
    respondent the opportunity to cross-examine him and the  appellant  did
    not attend the hearing before me. Furthermore, the appellant's  current
    solicitors, Wilsons, have  issued  proceedings  to  challenge  the  age
    assessment undertaken by Croydon City Council  and  Ms  Cohen  told  me
    judgment was due to be handed down a few days after the hearing  before
    me.  That judgment has a bearing on this case:  it  will  identify  the
    appellant's age in October 2016, when  the  notice  of  withdrawal  was
    lodged.

31. I therefore remit this matter to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    decision to be taken on the validity of the withdrawal and,  if  it  is
    declared invalid, for a decision on the appeal against the  refusal  of
    asylum.

Decision

32. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  a
    material error on a point of law.  The  decision  is  set  aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,
    pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v), before  any  judge  aside  from
    FTTJ Gribble.

33. Given the nature of this appeal, the appellant is entitled to anonymity
    in these proceedings.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 4 February 2019




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 4 February 2019
                                 DIRECTIONS


 1. Any further documentary and/or witness evidence relied upon  by  either
    party is to be filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other  party
    by no later than 28 days before the date of the hearing  in  the  First
    Tier Tribunal.


 2. The appellant and/or his representative is to file  and  serve  on  the
    respondent a chronology of events relating to  the  withdrawal  of  the
    appeal and the substantive asylum claim.

 3. The appeal is listed at Taylor House with a time estimate of four hours
    to be heard at 10.00 am on ............................   The  tribunal
    will decide, as a preliminary issue, the challenge to  the  appellant's
    withdrawal of his  asylum  appeal  and,  if  that  is  successful,  the
    substantive appeal against the refusal of asylum.

 4. A Dari (Afghan) interpreter is required.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 4 February 2019
