
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06734/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by way of a remote hearing     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 June 2021                      |On 13 July 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     A H
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Juss, Counsel on behalf of the appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge TR Smith (hereinafter referred to as  the
         "FtTJ")  promulgated  on  the  29  October  2019,  in   which   the
         appellant's appeal against the decision to  refuse  her  protection
         and human rights claim was dismissed.


      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


      3. The hearing took place  on  23  June  2021,  by  a  remote  hearing
         conducted on Microsoft teams which has been consented  to  and  not
         objected to by the parties. A face- to- face hearing was  not  held
         because it was not practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all
         issues could be determined  in  a  remote  hearing.  The  advocates
         attended remotely via video as did the appellant who could see  and
         hear  the  proceedings  being  conducted.  There  were  no   issues
         regarding sound, and no technical problems were encountered  during
         the hearing and I am satisfied both advocates  were  able  to  make
         their respective cases by the chosen means.

Background:

      4. The appellant is a citizen of Jordan. The following immigration
         history is derived from the records provided by the Respondent.

      5. The appellant claimed she lived in Iraq between 1997 to 2005.

      6. She then moved to Jordan where she stayed for less than a year
         before moving to the United Arab Emirates.

      7. The appellant applied for a visitor visa to the United Kingdom on
         23 October 2018 which was granted on 04 November 2018. Under the
         terms of that visa the Appellant was permitted to remain in the
         United Kingdom until 04 May 2019.

      8. The appellant left the UAE on 24 December 2018 arriving the United
         Kingdom that same day.

      9. The appellant claimed asylum on 10 January 2019.

     10. The factual basis of her claim was that the appellant contended she
         was born in Iraq and she was a Palestinian, originally living in
         Iraq. Her husband was a Jordanian Palestinian, but his Jordanian
         citizenship was removed from him in 1996. However, he remained in
         Jordan without documents until 2003. The appellant married her
         husband in Iraq on 26 September 2004, during which time she was
         living in Jordan. The appellant subsequently lived in Iraq but upon
         falling pregnant was told by the Iraqi authorities to leave the
         country.

     11. On arrival at the border with Jordan the appellant was told to
         report the intelligence services where she claimed she was
         questioned about her paternal uncles' involvement with the PLO and
         what she had been doing in Iraq.

     12. In 2005 the intelligence services told the appellant to leave
         Jordan. At this time the appellant's husband was already living in
         Iraq before leaving for the UAE. The appellant left Jordan and went
         to the UAE where she and her husband lived and worked.  The three
         youngest children were born in the UAE, the eldest in Jordan. All
         the children are dependent upon the appellant's claim for asylum.
         The appellant's husband remains living in the UAE.

     13. The appellant contended if returned to Jordan her family would be
         dispersed as her husband and children were stateless. She also
         feared the intelligence services in Jordan who questioned her about
         her paternal uncles' involvement with the PLO.

The decision of the respondent:

     14. In a decision letter of 1 July 2019, the respondent refused her
         protection claim.  The respondent considered the issue of
         nationality at paragraphs 19 - 27 and by reference to the documents
         provided by the appellant which included birth certificates and the
         documents submitted for her visa application. In respect of the
         children's birth certificates, it was noted that the nationality
         was stated "Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan" and thus based on that
         alongside the country information recorded at paragraph 22, it was
         considered that the appellant had shown suitable and valid
         identification documentation to the UAE in order for the children's
         birth certificates to have been issued. Further concerns were set
         out at paragraph 24 in relation to the eldest child's birth
         certificate and it had not been explained why the birth certificate
         stated her nationality was "Palestinian" given that it did not
         state the nationality of the mother or father.


     15. At paragraphs 29 - 36, the respondent set out her reasoning as to
         why the appellant's claim that she would be of interest to the
         Jordanian authorities on return was rejected.

     16. Paragraphs 37 - 44 considered the issue of statelessness but
         reached the conclusion that her claim that the children were
         stateless was inconsistent with the Visa applications for the
         children in which she had stated her children were Jordanian. The
         passport was said to be passports rather than travel documents as
         they have the code P upon them. For the reasons given in the
         decision letter, the respondent rejected the appellant's claim that
         her family members were stateless.

     17. The remainder of the decision letter considered Article 8 of the
         ECHR noting that the appellant could not meet the requirements
         under Appendix FM or in relation to private life under the rules
         either on the basis of the short length of residence or on the
         basis that there would be very significant obstacles to their
         integration (see paragraph 75 - 79). The decision letter also
         considered the claim in respect of the appellant's eldest child and
         her medical condition but that the evidence provided did not
         indicate that her medical condition was at such a critical stage
         that it would be inhumane to remove the family from the United
         Kingdom and it did not reach the threshold of severity to breach
         Article 3 or Article 8. Furthermore by reference to the country
         materials reference to paragraph 87, treatment for scoliosis was
         available in Jordan. In reaching the overall conclusion, section 55
         of the 2009 act was fully considered within the decision letter.


     18. Consequently her claim was refused on protection and human rights
         grounds.

The decision of the FtTJ:


     19. The appellant appealed that decision, and it came before the FtT
         (Judge TR Smith) on 11 October 2019. In a decision promulgated on
         29 October 2019 the FtTJ dismissed her appeal. The FtTJ had the
         opportunity of hearing the appellant's oral evidence and considered
         the claim made in the light of the expert report of Dr George and
         the country materials. He overall concluded that he did not find
         the Appellant to be a credible witness and made a number of adverse
         credibility findings in his overall assessment which included those
         under section 8 of the 2009 Act as regards the destruction of the
         passports which he found was a "deliberate and calculated act".


     20. As to her claim that she would be at risk on return, at paragraphs
         80-86 the FtTJ did not accept the Appellant faced a real risk of
         persecution from the Jordanian authorities if returned on the basis
         of her alleged family connection to a member of the PLO.

     21. The issue of nationality was considered at paragraphs 87 - 107. The
         FtTJ made the following factual assessment:

         1)  the appellant is a Jordanian national who is entitled to reside
            in Jordan and has a Jordanian passport.

         2) In Jordan a person's citizenship derives from their father's
            citizenship. and the Jordanian nationality laws are such that
            children born to Jordanian mothers and non-Jordanian fathers do
            not acquire Jordanian nationality.

         3) It is plausible that the appellant's husband may have had his
            Jordanian nationality removed. The Jordanian authorities have
            such a power under Article 18 of its constitution. Further Dr
            George noted that in 1988 Jordan stripped many of its former
            citizens from the West Bank of their Jordanian citizenship. It
            is for this reason I give no weight to the respondent's
            contention as to the appellant's husband's birth certificate.

         4) Whilst the children appeared to have Jordanian passports, the
            FtTJ stated "I am more persuaded by Dr George's opinion that
            the apparent Jordanian passports,  which the children have, are
            designated "T series"  which does not confer Jordanian
            citizenship but are in effect  travel documents. This is
            evidenced by the letter "T" on the document which refers to the
            temporary nature of the  document and does not carry a national
            number which only appears on passports of  those holding
            Jordanian citizenship".

         5) The appellant said in her statement dated 01 October 2019 that
            the children could live in Jordan but with very limited rights
            but in cross examination claimed that they could not, and this
            was a mistake when the statement was drafted. The FtTJ did not
            accept that the appellant would not have taken time to read her
            statement carefully and did not accept this contention. He also
            noted she said in her statement dated 04 June 2019 that the
            children were entitled to live in Jordan (paragraph 6).

         6) There is no suggestion from Dr George that the appellant
            possesses anything other than Jordanian nationality.

         7) The FtTJ accepted the evidence of Dr George that the passports
            issued to the children were akin to travel documents, rather
            than proof of nationality.

         8) When considering the decision in EB (Ethiopia) -v- SSHD [2007]
            EWCA Civ 809 he did not consider that it materially assisted the
            appellant citing Pill LJ that the mere deprivation of
            nationality in itself did not give rise to a right to  refugee
            status. Neither did a voluntary departure, unconnected with
            persecution, followed by a refusal to allow re-entry necessarily
            give rise to refugee status (paragraph 54).   The FtTJ also
            cited Longmore LJ who had adopted the same position and
            indicated that the loss of citizenship itself was not
            necessarily persecutory, it was the consequences in the
            particular case that might amount to persecution and this
            involved looking at the seriousness of those consequences.

         9) The FtTJ found no steps had been taken by the Jordanian
            authorities to deprive the appellant of her Jordanian
            nationality. Nor had it been suggested to him that she merely
            has a travel document. She is a Jordanian national. The FtTJ did
            not accept she would not be readmitted to Jordon.

        10) The FtTJ found that he reasons she left Jordan was to join her
            husband in the UAE. She was not removed by the Jordanian
            authorities.  The appellant had not been subjected to
            persecution by the Jordanian authorities and she continued to
            have the rights and privileges of a Jordanian national if she
            was to return.

        11) The position of the children was that the eldest was taken
            outside Jordan with the appellant so she could join her husband.
            She was not forced to leave. The three younger children were
            born outside Jordan.

        12) The FtTJ addressed the expert evidence of Dr George whose report
            and the opinion he accepted. From the material, the FtTJ found
            that children of female citizens married to noncitizens receive
            the nationality of their father. However, since 2016 the
            Ministry of Education has announced that all children,
            regardless of nationality or status are entitled to be  enrolled
            in formal education. Children of Jordanian mothers and
            noncitizens fathers may gain access to certain services enjoyed
            by citizens including subsidised healthcare, the ability to own
            property, invest, and obtain a  Jordanian driver's licence and
            to have employment priority over foreigners. The FtTJ considered
            that the 2018 report went on to indicate this ruling affected
            thousands of children where their fathers lost Jordanian
            citizenship, of whom over 55,000 were Palestinian. Originally
            there was a requirement of a mother to have five years
            residency, but this apparently was removed in 2016 according to
            Dr George.

        13) He concluded that the appeal did not "falls squarely within the
            parameters of EB (Ethiopia) -v- SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 809 "as the
            appellant's counsel submitted.

        14) The FtTJ found that the appellant's children could return to
            Jordan. For example, the Jordanian authorities have been content
            to issue passports to all the children which allow them to
            travel freely, albeit they must be renewed from time to time.
            They can access services. They can own property.

        15) Whilst the FtTJ found that they  may not enjoy exactly the same
            privileges as a Jordanian national until naturalised and
            accepted "there is a measure of discrimination", citing Dr
            George and the report of  some discrimination against
            Palestinians with the majority of public sector jobs being
            retained by Jordanians whereas Palestinians tended to work in
            the private sector. There was also an element of discrimination
            in the private sector. There is a quota limits on the number of
            university admissions for Palestinian youths. The FtTJ concluded
            that "However, discrimination is not the same as persecution.
            Whilst I accept there are levels of discrimination and in very
            severe cases it might amount to persecution, I am not so
            satisfied here that it reaches such a level.  Further in NA
            (Palestinians- Not at general risk) Jordan CG 2005 UKIAT 00094
            the Tribunal concluded that the discrimination against
            Palestinians in Jordan related to third level rights and could
            not be said to be of such a nature as to amount to persecution
            or a breach of Article 3".

        16) The FtTJ placed weight on the report of Dr George where he
            stated at paragraph 69 it is possible to live permanently in
            Jordan  even as a non-national, holding a Jordanian travel
            document. The FtTJ found that the children could remain in
            Jordan until naturalised.

        17) He also found that there was no suggestion that the Jordanian
            authorities would refuse the children's entry into Jordan and
            recorded that the appellant conceded this herself in her most
            recent witness statement. As Dr George had pointed out it is
            possible for the children to naturalise in accordance with the
            conditions set out by Jordanian state, as explained by Dr George
            in paragraphs 70 and 71 of his report although this would depend
            on residency and could take some years.

        18) The FtTJ found "This is   not a case where the children will for
            ever in their life carrying the psychological worry as to their
            status."

        19) He finally concluded at [107] "I therefore find, having weighed
            up all the evidence and with particular reliance on the report
            of Dr George, do not find either the appellant or the children
            would face a real risk of persecution if returned to Jordan."
     22. At paragraphs [108 - 135] the FtTJ address the issue under
         paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi) and whether there were "very significant
         obstacle to the applicant's integration" to Jordan but concluded
         having undertaken a broad evaluative judgement and holistic
         assessment of the factual circumstances that there would be no very
         significant obstacles. In undertaking that assessment, the judge
         took into account length of prior residence, linguistic and
         cultural ties, family ties that remained in Jordan on her husband's
         side, her ability to obtain employment taking account of her
         education, skills, and experience and that she would be able to
         obtain accommodation in Jordan and the children could access
         education and healthcare.


     23. In relation to Article 8, he noted that the family unit had been
         ready fragmented by the appellant's decision to leave the UAE and
         to claim asylum and that the appellant's husband had made no
         attempt to join her but had remained in the UAE. The FtTJ concluded
         that the appellant would be able to develop a private life in
         Jordan; she was free to return there and that the evidence pointed
         to the fact that the children would also be allowed entry to
         Jordan. As to her husband circumstances, whilst it was said he had
         had his Jordanian citizenship removed, he had been granted a "T"
         passport thus would be able to travel. The judge also took into
         account that after the removal of her husband's Jordanian
         citizenship in 1996, it is accepted by the appellant that she and
         her husband were able to reside in Jordan as they obtained a permit
         to stay with her husband leaving in 2003/2004 and the appellant
         later. Thus he concluded "there is no cogent evidence before me as
         to why the appellant's husband could not obtain a permit to stay in
         Jordan.


     24. He was not satisfied either that the appellant had any intention to
         live with her husband for the reasons set out at paragraph 151. The
         judge addressed the section 117 public interest considerations, and
         the best interests of the children but overall concluded that the
         refusal of leave to remain was not disproportionate having weighed
         all the evidence "in the round".

     25. The FtTJ therefore dismissed the appeal.

     26.  Permission  to  appeal  was  issued  and  on  12  November   2019,
         permission to appeal was refused  by  FtTJ Manuell but  on  renewal
         was granted by UTJ Lane on 10 February 2020.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     27. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions   indicating that it was provisionally of the view  that
         the error of law issue could be determined without a face- to- face
         hearing and directions were given for  the parties to provide their
         written submissions.

     28. The following written submissions were filed:

         1) The appellant's skeleton argument filed on 10 July 2020.

         2) The appellant's submissions filed on the 14 July 2020.

         3) The respondent's submissions filed on 14 July 2020.

     29. On the 16 April 2021 Upper Tribunal Judge Owens gave directions for
         the hearing to take place as a remote hearing  and that this  could
         take place via Teams. Both parties have indicated  that  they  were
         content for the hearing to proceed by this method.  Therefore,  the
         Tribunal listed the hearing to enable oral submissions to be  given
         by each of the parties with the assistance of their advocates.

     30. Mr Juss, Counsel instructed on behalf of the appellant relied  upon
         the written grounds of  appeal  and  the  written  submissions  and
         skeleton argument.

     31.  On behalf of the respondent  Mr  Avery  relied  upon  the  written
         submissions dated 14 July 2020.

     32. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions. I intend  to
         set out those submissions by reference to the grounds  advanced  on
         behalf of the appellant.

The grounds of challenge:


     33. The grounds of permission on the renewed application to the Upper
         Tribunal consists of three grounds of appeal.

Ground 1"material misdirection of law: the principal in EB (Ethiopia)


     34. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that it was argued that
         as her daughters were deprived of their Jordanian nationality to
         which they are entitled because of their father's Palestinian
         nationality, they had been deprived of nationality arbitrarily and
         were entitled to refugee status.

     35. Mr Juss referred the tribunal to the decision of the FtTJ at
         paragraphs [88], [90]  and [100] where the judge found that in
         Jordan a person's citizenship derives from their father's
         citizenship and the Jordanian nationality laws are such that the
         children born to Jordanian mothers and non-Jordanian fathers do not
         acquire Jordanian nationality (at[88]) and that the children were
         not Jordanian nationals ( at [90]) and that children of female
         citizens married to non-citizens receive the nationality of their
         father.

     36. Mr Juss submitted that Longmore LJ at paragraph 60 recorded the
         submission made on behalf of the appellant in EB and at paragraph
         66 recorded that the "Secretary of State's acceptance that if EB
         had, in fact, been deprived of citizenship by the arbitrary action
         of state employees, that would have prima facie  been persecution
         within the terms of the Refugee Convention" and that at
         paragraphs[70] and [74] and [75] of the decision reached the
         opposite conclusion to that of the FtTJ.

     37. Mr Juss submitted that if the appellant's husband had his
         nationality removed and as the children's nationality is consequent
         upon that, and they were given "T" nationality status, the
         appellant's husband and children do not have Jordanian citizenship
         and therefore would not be able to live together as husband and
         wife.

     38. He therefore submitted that the FtTJ was confused when reaching his
         decision and whilst the issue was a narrow one, the judge made an
         error in his consideration of the decision in EB (Ethiopia) by
         taking into account only the minority decision and did not take
         into account that nationality had been taken away. The decision
         demonstrated that someone who had been deprived of their
         nationality because of race established refugee status.  Mr Juss
         submitted that on that point alone it was an error of law which
         demonstrated that decision should be set aside and remitted to
         another judge to consider.

     39. On behalf of the respondent Mr Avery relied upon the written
         submissions dated 14 July 2020.

     40. As regards ground 1, the written submissions set out in detail the
         decision of MA (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 289 and the
         judgement of Elias LJ paragraphs 19, 20 and 50 and also the
         judgement of Stanley Burnton LJ at paragraphs 61 and 62 in which
         the decision of EB (Ethiopia) was discussed.

     41. It is submitted on behalf of the respondent that there was no
         misdirection by the FtTJ by virtue of one comment at [95] and that
         the determination should be read as a whole. At [96] the judge also
         took into account the comments of Longmore LJ at [96] which are not
         inconsistent with paragraph [95] and simply sets out that
         proposition that the act of deprivation in and of itself is not
         persecutory.

     42. It is submitted that on a fair reading of the FtTJ's consideration
         of nationality he considered the appellant's circumstances to be
         materially different to distinguish her case from that in EB :

            i) The Jordanians had not deprived the appellant of citizenship
               (at[97]).
           ii) Nor had the appellant been removed from Jordan but had
               voluntarily departed (at [98]).
          iii) the country position on Jordan based on recent background
               evidence was also contrasted with Ethiopia (at[100]).


     43. It was submitted that in any event the question of the appellant's
         assertion cannot be divorced from the leading authority of MA
         (Ethiopia) and that if someone has de jure nationality such as the
         appellant then the onus will be on her to show that she would be
         denied that stated in a manner constituting persecution on
         convention grounds. This could involve any contact with (or lack
         thereof from) the Jordanian embassy on the issue of applying for a
         replacement Jordanian passport given the appellant's destruction of
         her current passport.


     44. It is further submitted that whilst the judge chose a quote from
         the dissenting part of the judgement in EB (Ethiopia) it has not
         been said why the citation at [95] is either wrong as a proposition
         of law in the light of MA (Ethiopia) or why this led him to a
         material error of law in light of the totality of the consideration
         of the decision.

     45. In his oral submissions Mr Avery is submitted that when considering
         the point made about the children and their nationality that it was
         not clear that the judge conflated the issue. The judge looked at
         the children's situation at paragraphs [89] - [93] and after these
         paragraphs the judge considered the appellant's position. It was
         not argued that the children were deprived of their nationality as
         an act of the Jordanian state, and this is not the case. The law
         with respect to Jordan is that nationality is passed through their
         father there is no act by the state which deprives them of
         nationality; the fact that they do not have Jordanian nationality
         is a result of their father. In any event it had not been argued
         like this before the FtT.

     46. Mr Avery further submitted that the interpretation of EB (Ethiopia)
         was on the basis of the judge looking at the position of the
         appellant and whether she was deprived of her nationality and the
         clear position was that she had not been so deprived. There can be
         no material error of law as the appellant has never been deprived
         of her Jordanian nationality. The children were not either and
         there appears to be some confusion about the interpretation of the
         FtTJ's decision and the arguments that were presented to the FtT.

     47. By way of reply Mr Juss submitted that the issue of the appellant
         having Jordanian nationality was not in dispute but that the
         appellants were deprived of Jordanian nationality because of the
         father's Palestinian nationality and that this was supported by the
         judge at paragraphs 89 and 93.

Ground 2: faulty/inadequate reasoning: the appellant's circumstances in
Jordan.

     48. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the judge gave
         inadequate reasoning for discounting the appellant's submission
         that the cumulative impact of discrimination to the appellant's
         children would amount to persecution. In this respect the appellant
         relied upon reports in the appellant's bundle concerning the
         situation affecting stateless Palestinians in Jordan.

     49. The grounds assert that Palestinians without citizenship are
         excluded from public health care services leaving them vulnerable
         and that such citizens are not allowed to be employed by the state
         or own land houses or shops.

     50. It is submitted that at paragraph [79] the FtTJ made a passing
         reference to the country materials but otherwise did not engage
         with it. Therefore the judge was in error on the basis of a lack of
         reasoning.

     51.  Mr Juss submitted that at paragraph [100] reference had been made
         to the 2018 country report but that the judge referred to the
         circumstances in 2016. The judge did not deal with the
         circumstances set out in the 2018 US State department report which
         was 2 years after 2016 and which the expert Dr George relied upon.
         It is submitted that the judge erred in law by failing to engage
         with the evidence.

     52. On behalf of the respondent it was argued that this was in essence
         a "reasons challenge "with the appellant arguing that the judge had
         not provided adequate reasons as to why the cumulative effect of
         discrimination amounted to persecution. At paragraph [60] the judge
         reiterates that a lack of mention of a particular document does not
         mean that it has not been considered and when considering the
         evidence in the appeal the judge took into account the expert
         report of Dr George at paragraphs 77 - 79 which the judge expressly
         attached greater weight to the background evidence which it was
         considered against and also the US State Department report on
         Jordan in 2018 at paragraph [100].

     53. The judge considered the entitlement to be enrolled in education,
         access to subsidised healthcare, to invest in whole property, to
         drive and have preferential access to the labour market. The judge
         book ended his consideration by stating "I therefore find, having
         weighed up all the evidence and with particular reliance on the
         expert report of Dr George, do not find that either the appellant
         or her children would face a real risk of persecution if returned
         to Jordan."

     54. It is further submitted that the background evidence that has been
         emphasised post decision in the grounds of appeal is predicated on
         a finding that the appellant does not have Jordanian nationality
         which has not been established (see paragraph [97]) and is also
         contradictory to the US State Department report cited by the FtTJ.
         The grounds do not set out why the judge made a material error of
         law on the basis of adequacy of reasons.

     55. Mr Avery in his oral submissions submitted that the judge looked at
         the evidence in detail including the evidence of Dr George which he
         gave considerable weight. The appellant is a Jordanian national and
         there was no specific evidence that she would face discrimination
         amounting to persecution and in respect of the children and the
         conclusion reached was that they could go back and acquire
         Jordanian nationality. He submitted that the points taken against
         the judge are a disagreement and it cannot be said that the judge
         did not go through the background material or failed to take into
         account.

Conclusions on grounds 1 and 2:

     56. It is convenient to consider grounds 1 and 2 together.  Dealing
         with ground 1, the central thrust of the submissions advanced on
         behalf of the appellant is that  the FtTJ was referred to the
         decision of EB(Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 809 but that the FtTJ
         wrongly cited the minority speech of Pill LJ with which Longmore LJ
         and Jacob LJ disagreed. Therefore when the FtTJ stated at paragraph
         [95] that he did not consider that the case materially assisted the
         appellant by stating the view of Pill LJ the judge was in error. It
         is submitted that the judge misunderstood the effect of the
         judgement in EB (Ethiopia).


     57. In support of his submissions Mr Juss on behalf of the appellant
         has cited part of the FtTJ's decision but in my judgment it is
         necessary to set out the factual assessment made by the FtTJ by
         refence to the issue of nationality  and in the context of the
         decision of EB (Ethiopia).

     58.  The FtTJ stated as follows:

         "Nationality

        87. I find the Appellant is a Jordanian national who is entitled to
            reside in Jordan and has a Jordanian passport (AIR 53).

        88. I find that in Jordan that a person's citizenship derives from
            their father's citizenship. and the Jordanian nationality laws
            are such that children born to Jordanian mothers and non-
            Jordanian fathers do not acquire Jordanian nationality.

        89. It is plausible that the Appellant's husband may have had his
            Jordanian nationality removed. The Jordanian authorities have
            such a power under Article 18 of its constitution. Further Dr
            George noted that in 1988 Jordan stripped many of  its former
            citizens from the West Bank of their Jordanian citizenship. It
            is for this reason I give no weight to the respondent's
            contention as to the Appellant's husband's birth certificate.

        90. I reject that because the children appear to have Jordanian
            passports, they are Jordanian nations. I am more persuaded by Dr
            George's opinion that  the apparent Jordanian passports,  which
            the children have, are designated "T series"  which does not
            confer Jordanian citizenship but are in effect  travel
            documents. This is evidenced by the letter "T" on the document
            which refers to the temporary nature of the  document and does
            not carry a national number which only appears on passports of
            those holding Jordanian citizenship.

        91. The Appellant said in her statement dated 01 October 2019 that
            the children could live in Jordan but with very limited rights
            but in cross examination claimed that they could not, and this
            was a mistake when the statement was drafted. I do not accept
            that the Appellant would not have taken time to read her
            statement carefully and do not accept this contention. I also
            note she said in her statement dated 04 June 2019 that the
            children were entitled to live in Jordan (paragraph 6).

        92. There is no suggestion from Dr George that the Appellant
            possesses anything other than Jordanian nationality, although
            the position as regards the children is different.

        93. I accept Mr Greer's submission that merely because the children
            have what appears to be Jordanian passports it does not follow,
            they are of Jordanian nationality and I am more persuaded by the
            evidence of Dr George that in effect the passports issued to the
            children were akin to travel documents, rather than proof of
            nationality.

        94. Mr Greer took me to the case of EB (Ethiopia) -v- SSHD [2007]
            EWCA Civ 809.

        95. With respect I do not consider that case materially assists the
            Appellant. As Lord Justice Pill stated the mere deprivation of
            nationality in itself did not give rise to a right to refugee
            status. Neither did a voluntary departure, unconnected with
            persecution, followed by a refusal to allow re-entry necessarily
            give rise to refugee status (paragraph 54).

        96. Lord Justice Longmore adopted the same position and indicated
            that the loss of citizenship itself was not necessarily
            persecutory, it was the consequences in the particular case that
            might amount to persecution and this involved looking at the
            seriousness of those consequences.

        97. The first point to make is that no steps have been taken by the
            Jordanian authorities to deprive the Appellant of her Jordanian
            nationality. It is not suggested to me that she merely has a
            travel document. She is a Jordanian national. I do not accept
            she would not be readmitted to Jordon.

        98. The question is why is the Appellant outside Jordan? The reason
            she left Jordan was to join her husband in the UAE. She was not
            removed by the Jordanian authorities. On my findings of fact,
            the Appellant has not been subjected to persecution by the
            Jordanian authorities. She continues to have the rights and
            privileges of a Jordanian national if she was to return. The
            practical issue of lack of documentation is not a matter the
            authorities say I must take into account.

        99. The position of the children is that the eldest was taken
            outside Jordan with the Appellant so she could join our husband.
            She was not forced to leave. The three younger children were
            born outside Jordan.

       100. Dr George quoted extensively and approved in his report, a US
            State Department Country Reports on Human Rights Practices
            issued in 2018. I accept the report and the opinion of Dr
            George. Children of female citizens married to noncitizens
            receive the nationality of their father. However, since 2016 the
            Ministry of Education has announced that all children,
            regardless of nationality or status are entitled to be enrolled
            in formal education. Children of Jordanian mothers and
            noncitizens fathers may gain access to certain services enjoyed
            by citizens including subsidised healthcare, the ability to own
            property, invest, and obtain a Jordanian driver's licence and to
            have employment priority over foreigners. The report went on to
            indicate this ruling affected thousands of children where their
            fathers lost Jordanian citizenship, of whom over 55,000 were
            Palestinian. Originally there was a requirement of a mother to
            have five years residency, but this apparently was removed in
            2016 according to Dr George.

       101. Thus, this is not a case that falls squarely within the
            parameters of EB (Ethiopia) -v- SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 809 as Mr
            Greer would urge.

       102. The Appellant's children can return to Jordan. For example, the
            Jordanian authorities have been content to issue passports to
            all the children which allow them to travel freely, albeit they
            must be renewed from time to time.

       103. They can access services. They can own property. Whilst they may
            not enjoy exactly the same privileges as a Jordanian national
            until naturalised, and I accept there is a measure of
            discrimination. For example, Dr George reported some
            discrimination against Palestinians with the majority of public
            sector jobs being retained by Jordanians whereas Palestinians
            tended to work in the private sector. There was also an element
            of discrimination in the private sector. There is a quota limits
            on the number of university admissions for Palestinian youths.
            However, discrimination is not the same as persecution. Whilst I
            accept there are levels of discrimination and in very severe
            cases it might amount to persecution, I am not so satisfied here
            that it reaches such a level.  Further in NA (Palestinians- Not
            at general risk) Jordan CG 2005 UKIAT 00094 the Tribunal
            concluded that the discrimination against Palestinians in Jordan
            related to third level rights and could not be said to be of
            such a nature as to amount to persecution or a breach of Article
            3.

       104. As Dr George noted in his report at paragraph 69 it is possible
            to live permanently in Jordan even as a non-national, holding a
            Jordanian travel document. The children can remain in Jordan
            until naturalised.

       105. There is no suggestion that the Jordanian authorities will
            refuse the children's entry into Jordan and indeed the Appellant
            conceded this herself in her most recent witness statement. As
            Dr George has pointed out it is  possible for the children to
            naturalise in accordance with the conditions set out by
            Jordanian state, as explained by Dr George in paragraphs 70 and
            71 of his report although this would depend on residency and
            could take some years.

       106. This is   not a case where the children will for ever in their
            life carrying the psychological worry as to their status.

       107. I therefore find, having weighed up all the evidence and with
            particular reliance on the report of Dr George, do not find
            either the Appellant or the children would face a real risk of
            persecution if returned to Jordon".

     59. I am satisfied that there was no error in the FtTJ's  consideration
         of the decision of EB (Ethiopia). The facts of that case  concerned
         the process established by the Ethiopian authorities  in  1998  for
         identifying ethnic Eritreans who might pose a risk to the  national
         security of Ethiopia, following the outbreak  of  war  between  the
         countries, was not arbitrary or contrary to international  law,  in
         many cases people were  arbitrarily  expelled  to  Eritrea  without
         having been subjected to that process. Those  perceived  as  ethnic
         Eritreans, who remained in Ethiopia during the war,  and  who  were
         deprived of Ethiopian nationality,  suffered  arbitrary  treatment,
         contrary to international law. Those who left Ethiopia at this time
         or who were then already outside Ethiopia were arbitrarily deprived
         of  their  Ethiopian  nationality.  Also  during  this  time,   the
         Ethiopian authorities made a practice  of  seizing  and  destroying
         identification documents of those perceived as ethnic Eritreans  in
         Ethiopia.


     60. Against that background, the appellant in EB was a female Ethiopian
         national whose father was  of  Eritrean  origin.   On  appeal,  the
         Asylum and Immigration Tribunal found that EB had been deprived  of
         her identity documents by the Ethiopian authorities, prior  to  her
         departure  from  that  country,  and  that  the  reason   for   the
         deprivation had been to make it more difficult for EB to prove  her
         Ethiopian  nationality.    The   AIT   concluded   that   EB   was,
         consequently, stateless but dismissed her appeal on the ground that
         the removal of identity documents had not itself resulted  in  ill-
         treatment and she was not otherwise at risk of such  treatment,  if
         returned to Ethiopia.


     61. Longmore LJ identified the issue between the  parties  as  follows.
         EB contended that she  had  effectively  lost  her  nationality  or
         citizenship when her identity documents were removed by the  action
         of the executive arm of the state of Ethiopia (albeit  not  in  the
         manner described by the appellant).  The Secretary of State, whilst
         accepting that deprivation of citizenship by arbitrary action would
         prima facie constitute persecution, submitted that the mere removal
         of identity documents did not constitute persecution.  The AIT  had
         found that EB suffered no ill-treatment whilst she was in  Ethiopia
         and  she  would  accordingly  not  have  a  well-founded  fear   of
         persecution if she were hypothetically returned there (albeit  that
         this  could  not  currently  happen).   Longmore  LJ  continued  as
         follows:-

         "63. To my mind the important finding [of  the  AIT]  is  that  the
         removal of EB's  identity  documents  was  not  an  activity  which
         resulted in ill-treatment of EB while in Ethiopia.  What the AIT do
         not appear to  have  considered  is  whether  the  removal  of  the
         documents was itself ill-treatment, done as it was with the  motive
         of making it difficult for EB in  future  to  prove  her  Ethiopian
         nationality.  The reason why the  AIT  did  not  consider  this  is
         because they considered that  even  loss  of  nationality  was  not
         sufficient to constitute persecution.  If that is right it would no
         doubt follow that for a state merely to make it difficult to  prove
         one's  nationality  would  not  be  persecution  either.   The  AIT
         considered that the previous decision  of  the  Immigration  Appeal
         Tribunal in MA (Ethiopia)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2004]  UKIAT  324 compelled  their  conclusion.  MA
         (Ethiopia) was itself based on the decision of the Court of Appeal
         in Lazarevic v Secretary of State for the Home Department [1997] 1
         WLR 117."

     62. In  the  light  of Lazarevic,  Longmore  LJ  considered  that  the
         Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  had  erred  in MA (Ethiopia)  in
         concluding that an effective deprival of citizenship "does  not  by
         itself amount to persecution but the  impact  and  consequences  of
         that decision may be of such  severity  that  it  can  be  properly
         categorised as persecution" (paragraph 33).  Longmore LJ  explained
         that the reasoning in Lazarevic, properly  interpreted,  was  that
         Yugoslavia's refusal of re-entry to  draft  evaders  failed  to  be
         persecutory because  it  was  not  "persecution  for  a  Convention
         reason, not because it  did  not  lead  to  treatment  constituting
         'serious harm'".   In  EB's  case,  the  removal  of  her  identity
         documents was plainly for  a  Refugee  Convention  reason,  whether
         categorised as "race" or "membership of a particular social group".

     63. Longmore LJ explained that the reason  why  actual  deprivation  of
         citizenship  by  arbitrary  action  would  prima  facie  amount  to
         persecution was that such action "does  away  with  that  citizen's
         individual rights which attach to her citizenship.   One  of  those
         most basic rights is to be able freely to leave and freely  to  re-
         enter one's country.  (There may well be others such as  the  right
         to vote).  Different considerations might arise  if  citizens  were
         deprived of their nationality by duly  constituted  legislation  or
         proper judicial decision but  a  deprivation  by  executive  action
         would almost always be arbitrary  and,  if  EB  had  in  fact  been
         deprived  of  her  citizenship  by  the  removal  of  her  identity
         documents by state agents, it would certainly have been  arbitrary"
         (paragraph 67).

     64. Returning to the facts of EB's case, Longmore  LJ  considered  that
         there could be "no difference between" the seizure of her  identity
         documents to make it more difficult for her to prove nationality in
         the  future  "and  an  actual  deprivation  of  citizenship.    Her
         precariousness is the same; the 'loss of the right to have  rights'
         is the same; the  'uncertainty  and  the  consequent  psychological
         hurt' is the same".  The IAT in MA (Ethiopia) were in Longmore LJ's
         view "wrong to conclude that some further (presumably physical) ill-
         treatment was required" (paragraph 70).

     65. At paragraph 71, Longmore LJ recognised that this did not  conclude
         the question "since the  hypothetical  question  whether  EB  would
         suffer persecution ... on her return is the critical question which
         has to be addressed".  This was so, notwithstanding that the matter
         was hypothetical because Ethiopia would not currently allow her  to
         return to its country.  "Once it is clear that  EB  was  persecuted
         for a Convention reason while in Ethiopia, there  is  no  basis  on
         which it can be said that that state of affairs has now changed.  I
         would therefore  conclude  that  EB  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution for a Convention reason and that she is now entitled to
         the status of refugee."

     66.  Jacob LJ agreed with the judgment of Longmore LJ.  Notwithstanding
         the prima facie establishing of refugee status, the question  still
         had to be asked, whether EB  would  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution if returned today.  "But in  the  absence  of  contrary
         evidence, someone who has been deprived of nationality  because  of
         race would, if returned, be in a near-impossible position -  unable
         to vote, to leave the country or even unable  to  work.   They  may
         well be  treated  as  pariahs  precisely  because  they  had  their
         nationality taken away.  They have 'lost the right to have  rights'
         (Warren CJ's vivid words).  And they have already been put  in  the
         position that their home state will not let them in -  they  cannot
         even go home."  There being "no rebuttal evidence showing that  the
         claimant would not suffer from being stateless in the ways  I  have
         identified" and given the length of time that EB's appeal had  been
         pending, Jacob LJ did not consider it necessary  or  desirable  for
         her appeal  to be remitted to the AIT (paragraph 75).

     67.  Although agreeing on the legal issues raised in the  appeal,  Pill
         LJ dissented on whether EB's appeal should be allowed outright  or,
         as he considered to be appropriate, remitted to the AIT.  This  was
         because  the  question  of  whether  the   removal   of   documents
         constituted persecution "is essentially  a  question  for  a  fact-
         finding Tribunal and this Tribunal  should  not  assume  facts,  as
         Jacob LJ has done, contrary to the findings of the Tribunal.   That
         would be to  arrogate  to  this  court  the  role  contemplated  by
         Parliament for the Tribunal" (paragraph 59).

     68. When the appeal was  before  the  FtT  Counsel  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant made no reference to the later decision in MA  (Ethiopia)
         [2009] EWCA Civ 289, which has  been  raised  in  the  respondent's
         submissions. In that decision there were two reasoned judgments, of
         Elias LJ and Stanley Burnton LJ.  Mummery LJ agreed with  both.  It
         is not necessary to consider the legal points raised in that appeal
         but what is relevant is that Elias LJ  concluded  by  dealing  with
         "two miscellaneous matters".  It is the  second  of  those  matters
         which is relevant for the present appeal which concerned  what  the
         effect was of the decision of the court in EB.


     69. For appellant MA, it was  contended  that  the  majority  judgments
         "clearly establish that someone deprived of his nationality  for  a
         Convention reason thereby necessarily  suffers  persecution  within
         the meaning of the Convention".  Although Elias LJ  accepted  there
         were  passages  in  the  judgments  in EB that  supported  that
         interpretation, he did not think it was  possible  to  state  as  a
         universal proposition "that  deprivation  of  nationality  must  be
         equated with persecution.  Persecution is a  matter  of  fact,  not
         law.  Whether ill-treatment amounts to persecution will depend upon
         what results from refusing to afford the full status of a  de  jure
         national  in  the  country  concerned."   Treating   someone   less
         favourably than a person afforded the full rights and  benefits  of
         nationality "would be discrimination, but discrimination  does  not
         necessarily amount to persecution.  That would be a matter of  fact
         in  each  case  depending  upon  the  nature  and  degree  of   the
         disadvantage suffered.   Generalised  references  to  'deprival  of
         nationality' will often tend to obscure rather than illuminate what
         is in issue" (paragraph 59).


     70. However, an arbitrary refusal of the right to  return  to  Ethiopia
         was of a different order:-

         "60.  In  my  judgment,  however,  the  correctness  or   otherwise
             of EB does not arise directly in  this  case  since  if  the
             appellant were able to establish that she has been arbitrarily
             refused the right to  return  to  Ethiopia  for  a  Convention
             reason, that would in my view amount to persecution.  It would
             negate  one  of  the  most  fundamental  rights  attached   to
             nationality, namely the right to live in the home country  and
             all that goes with that.  Denial of that right to abode  would
             necessarily prevent the applicant from exercising a wide range
             of  other  rights  -  if  not  all  -  typically  attached  to
             nationality,  as  well  as  almost  inevitably  involving   an
             interference with private and/or family life in breach of  Art
             8 for the European Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human
             Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 1950  (European  Convention)."
             (paragraph 60)

     71. Stanley Burnton LJ began by noting the "unfortunate tendency in the
         law of asylum to treat findings of fact as decisions on  points  of
         law, and binding authority in subsequent cases".  Such was the case
         with EB (Ethiopia), which  was  "regarded  as  authority  for  the
         proposition that the removal  of  a  person's  nationality  by  the
         authorities  of  his  or  her  home  state  is  as  a matter   of
         law sufficiently serious ill-treatment as to constitute persecution
         which, if done  for  reasons  referred  to  in  Art  1A(2)  of  the
         Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees 1951,  entitles  that
         person to refugee status" (paragraph 61).

     72. Stanley Burnton LJ was "troubled by  this  proposition".   What  is
         meant by persecution is a question of law but whether ill-treatment
         in a particular case constituted persecution "is a  mixed  question
         of fact and law:  it  is  the  application  of  the  denotation  of
         persecution to the particular facts".  He did not consider  that  a
         refusal to confer nationality could without  more  be  regarded  as
         persecutory; although it could  do  so  "if  the  consequences  are
         sufficiently serious" (paragraph 66).  Furthermore, deprivation  of
         nationality could be "one aspect of ill-treatment by the state that
         in its totality amounts to sufficiently serious ill-treatment as to
         constitute persecution".

     73. At paragraph 74, Stanley Burnton LJ turned to analyse the judgments
         in EB.  What had happened to appellant EB in  Ethiopia,  including
         the removal of her identity  documents,  meant  that  she  had  "in
         effect lost her Ethiopian nationality".  Nevertheless, if effective
         nationality were restored, it was accepted that she would cease  to
         be a refugee.  It was submitted on her behalf "that the refusal  of
         the  Ethiopian  Government  to  permit  EB's  return   was   itself
         persecution".  Stanley Burnton LJ considered  this  submission  was
         "impossible to reconcile ... with the last sentence  of  the  above
         citation from Hutchison LJ's judgment in Lazarevic".

     74.  At paragraph 76, Stanley Burnton LJ considered the concession made
         by the Secretary of State in EB, that deprivation of citizenship by
         arbitrary action "would have prima facie  been  persecution  within
         the terms of the Refugee Convention", as  a  "curious  concession".
         It was, nevertheless, the basis of  Longmore  LJ's  judgment.   The
         curious nature of the concession arose "because it is  implicit  in
         it that once a person claiming asylum has shown to the  appropriate
         standard that she has in fact been deprived of her citizenship,  it
         is for the Secretary of State to show that that deprivation did not
         amount to persecution.  But it is trite law  that  it  is  for  the
         claimant to prove persecution or a well-founded fear of it, not for
         the  Secretary  of  State  to  prove  that  there  has   not   been
         persecution" (paragraph 76).  So far as  Jacob  LJ's  judgment  was
         concerned, Stanley Burnton LJ assumed that the serious consequences
         of the loss of nationality, such as inability to  vote,  leave  the
         country or inability  to  work,  "had  either  been  found  by  the
         Tribunal as facts or assumed by him, subject  to  evidence  to  the
         contrary".  If found as facts, there were "no  comparable  findings
         in the present case"; insofar as it was an assumption, it was based
         on the Secretary of State's concession "and in any event could  not
         be binding on subsequent courts or Tribunals because, as  I  stated
         above, it related to questions of fact rather than law"  (paragraph
         76).

     75.  In MA's case there was no evidence that  the  appellant  had  been
         deprived of her Ethiopian nationality.

     76. I am satisfied that there is no error in the FtTJ's consideration
         of the relevant principles set out in the decision of EB
         (Ethiopia). Whilst the FtTJ referred to the judgement of Pill LJ,
         he did not dissent on the legal issues of the appeal as the FtTJ
         stated at paragraph 104 when citing the judgement of Longmore LJ.

     77. Therefore when the FtTJ stated at paragraph [96] that "the loss of
         citizenship itself was not necessarily persecutory, it was the
         consequences in the particular case that might amount to
         persecution and this involves looking at the seriousness of those
         consequences" was entirely consistent with not only the decision in
         EB (Ethiopia) but also what had been stated in MA (Ethiopia) at
         paragraphs 59, 61 and 66.

     78. In my judgement the FtTJ was correct to consider the factual
         evidence in assessing whether the circumstances of the appellant or
         those of her children amounted to persecution for a Convention
         reason and that the assertion that there was a deprivation of
         nationality had to be considered in the context of the particular
         factual circumstances.

     79. The FtTJ found as a fact that the appellant was a Jordanian
         national who would be entitled to reside in Jordan and had a
         Jordanian passport (at paragraphs [87 - 88]). He also found that no
         steps had been taken by the authorities to deprive her of her
         Jordanian nationality nor that she had been removed from Jordan but
         that she had voluntarily departed (at [98]). Earlier in his
         decision he had set out his reasoning for rejecting her account
         that she would be of any adverse interest to the Jordanian
         authorities for the reasons given at paragraphs [80]-[86] of his
         decision. Therefore the assessment made by the judge that she would
         be admitted to Jordan as a national of that country was
         unassailable.

     80. Mr Juss on behalf of the appellant submitted that the argument
         proceeded on the basis that the appellant's daughters were deprived
         of their Jordanian nationality and that this was an arbitrary act
         and it followed that they were entitled to refugee status.

     81. Having carefully considered the decision of the FtTJ in the context
         of the material and the submissions made before him, I am not
         satisfied that the judge erred in law when addressing the decision
         in EB (Ethiopia) in this context either. As both the decision in EB
         (Ethiopia) and MA (Ethiopia) make plain, it is necessary to
         consider the factual evidence and that persecution is a matter of
         "fact and not law" and that treating someone less favourably than a
         person afforded the full rights and benefits of nationality would
         be discrimination, but "discrimination does not necessarily amount
         to persecution".

     82. The FtTJ was aware that the children had Jordanian passports but
         that they were designated "T series "passports which in effect
         provided for travel but did not confer Jordanian citizenship (at
         [90] and by reference to the expert evidence). The judge also
         accepted the expert evidence that in Jordan a person's citizenship
         derived from their father's citizenship and that the Jordanian
         nationality laws was such that children born to Jordanian mothers
         and non-Jordanian fathers do not acquire Jordanian nationality.

     83. This was not an arbitrary exercise by the executive, but a law
         passed in the country set out in the Jordanian constitution adopted
         in 1952 which states that citizenship is a matter to be regulated
         by law as reflected in the Jordanian Nationality Law-Law number 6
         of 1954, as amended in 1987 : Jordanian citizenship applies to "any
         person whose father holds Jordanian nationality." This is not a
         unique position, and it is said that there are 27 countries which
         state that citizenship does not pass through the nationality of the
         child's mother (see page 108AB).

     84. Against that background the FtTJ was required to consider the
         factual evidence concerning the ability of the appellant and the
         children being able to return and live in Jordan.

     85. In this context at paragraph [91] the FtTJ referred to the evidence
         of the appellant herself that the children could live in Jordan
         although with limited rights. Whilst she sought to resile from this
         in cross examination, the judge was entitled to consider the
         appellant's evidence set out in 2 witness statements which had been
         to the same effect that the children were entitled to live in
         Jordan.

     86. Not only was that the appellant's evidence but it was also the
         position supported by the expert evidence. At paragraph [104] the
         FtTJ recorded the expert evidence that it was possible to live
         permanently in Jordan even as a non-national holding a Jordanian
         travel document and that the children could remain in Jordan until
         they were naturalised. At [105] the FtTJ found that there was no
         suggestion that the appellant's children would not be granted entry
         to Jordan, based not only on the appellant's own evidence but that
         of the expert.

     87. As to the circumstances for the children in Jordan, the FtTJ had
         regard to the expert evidence of Dr George and considered the
         circumstances of the children cumulatively at paragraphs [100 -
         107] when reaching the conclusion on this issue and that neither
         the appellant nor the children would face a real risk of
         persecution if returned to Jordan.

     88. It is in this context that ground 2 arises. As summarised above, it
         is submitted on behalf of the appellant the judge made a "passing
         reference" to the country materials and "did not engage with it"
         and therefore there was a lack of reasoning in his overall
         conclusion at [107].

     89. The FtTJ had the benefit of considering expert evidence from Dr
         George and he was satisfied that in light of his expertise it was
         report which merited weight (see [77 - 78]).

     90. At paragraph [100] the FtTJ cited the report of Dr George who had
         "extensively quoted and approved" in his report the US State
         Department report of human rights practices issued in 2018. That
         was an entirely correct observation made by the judge as the report
         contained quotes from the 2018 report at pages 9 - 14 and page 18.

     91. When considering the circumstances of the children and  accordance
         with the country materials the FtTJ accepted the expert opinion
         that whilst the children derived their nationality from their
         father, it was possible for the children to be naturalised in
         accordance with the conditions set out by the Jordanian State as
         set out at paragraph 70 and 71 of Dr George's report. Whilst this
         depended on residency and that it could take some years, the
         ability to naturalise was a course open to the children and was a
         relevant consideration as part of the holistic assessment the judge
         was required to undertake (see paragraph [105]).

     92. Furthermore the FtTJ made a finding from the country materials that
         regardless of their nationality and status, the children would also
         have rights in Jordan. At [100] the judge considered the issue of
         education and that since 2016, the Ministry of education had
         announced that all children, regardless of nationality and status
         were entitled to be enrolled in formal education. I pause to
         observe here that Mr Juss's submission that the FtTJ had considered
         a 2016 report rather than the US State Department report of 2018 is
         wrong. Whilst the reference is made to 2016, the FtTJ had directly
         taken the citation from the report of Dr George at paragraph 66
         (page 21 of the report) which Dr George considered offered " a
         concise overview of the position of non-national residents in
         Jordan" and this was taken from the 2018 US State Department
         report. The evidence stated that children of noncitizen fathers and
         Jordanian mothers may be able to gain access to certain services
         enjoyed by all citizens including subsidised healthcare, the
         ability to own property, invest, and obtain a Jordanian driver's
         license and to have employment priority over foreigners. The ruling
         affected thousands of children when their fathers lost Jordanian
         citizenship, of whom over 55,000 were Palestinian. The judge went
         on to state "originally there was a requirement of the mother to
         have 5 years residency, but this apparently was removed in 2016
         according to Dr George.


     93. In so far as it is argued in the grounds at paragraph  5 that the
         FtTJ did not consider other evidence in the appellant's bundle, in
         particular the report referred to in the grounds entitled
         "responses to information request dated 9/5/14 page 84 - 97), it
         was open to the FtTJ to take the view that he should attach greater
         weight to the report of Dr George than the other objective evidence
         given that that had been prepared before Dr George's report and
         that Dr George's report was a "more comprehensive overall
         assessment" which "relied upon numerous external sources of
         information." The weight attached to the evidence was entirely a
         matter for the judge.

     94. Furthermore the grounds are selective in their description of
         evidence and that report. The report does not say Palestinians
         without citizenship are excluded from public health services but
         states that Palestinians without citizenship face restrictions on
         their access to healthcare. It does not say that all healthcare is
         excluded, and reference is made to health care being available
         albeit at higher cost.

     95. In my judgement the FtTJ undertook a proper assessment of the
         materials and was entitled to conclude at [103] that whilst
         noncitizens may not enjoy the same privileges as a Jordanian
         nationals until they are naturalised and that there was a measure
         of discrimination against Palestinians, and that in very severe
         cases it might amount to persecution, in light of the evidence in
         the circumstances of this particular appeal, it did not reach the
         threshold of persecution. In reaching that assessment the judge was
         entitled to take into account the country guidance decision in NA
         (Palestinians - not a general risk) Jordan CG [2005] UKIAT where
         the tribunal concluded that the discrimination against Palestinians
         in Jordan related to third level rights and could not be said to be
         of such a nature as to amount to persecution or a breach of Article
         3. Whilst the decision is of some age, the judge properly
         considered the more recent evidence which he analysed within his
         decision but upon which he concluded did not lead him to depart
         from that view.

     96. Consequently there is no error in the FtTJ's conclusion reached at
         paragraph [107] that having weighed up all the evidence and giving
         particular weight and reliance to the report of Dr George, that the
         appellant and the children would not face a real risk of
         persecution on return to Jordan.

     97. I would also add that at [150] the FtTJ referred to the appellant's
         husband having his citizenship removed but that whilst that was the
         position, he was granted a "T" passport and was able to travel.
         Furthermore even after the removal of the appellant's husband's
         Jordanian citizenship in 1996, the appellant accepted in her 1st
         witness statement that she and her husband were able to reside in
         Jordan as they obtained a permit to stay, with her husband leaving
         in 2003/2004 and the appellant a couple of years later. Thus it was
         open to the judge to find there was no cogent evidence before him
         as to why the appellant's husband could not obtain a permit to stay
         in Jordan. Therefore it would not be correct to assert that the
         assessment made by the FtTJ would necessarily separate the family
         unit.

     98. In my view there is no merit in the submission made that the judge
         erred in law by inadequacy of reasoning. Following Budhathoki
         (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 341 (IAC) judges need to
         resolve the key conflicts in evidence and explain in clear and
         brief terms their reasons for preferring one case to the other so
         that parties can understand why they have lost. Reasons need not be
         extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
         the material accepted by a judge: Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:
         set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC), at [10]. In my judgment the FtTJ
         made a clear decision in which adequately reasoned findings were
         made and in accordance with the evidence.

     99. As the respondent submits, the judge set out with a degree of care
         the material relied upon and the factual conclusions reached on
         that material giving adequate and sustainable reasons for reaching
         his overall conclusions. For those reasons grounds 1 and 2 are not
         made out.


Ground 3: "mistake of fact".

    100. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the judge made
         findings of fact in respect of uncontentious matters over which
         there was no evidence and that he engaged in speculation and
         reached incorrect conclusions in respect of the following matters:


            i) At [35] it was not correct that the Iraqi authorities told
               the appellant to leave Iraq when she was pregnant.
           ii) At [37] it is not correct that the appellant's husband was
               already living in Iraq he was in fact in the UEA at that
               time.
          iii) At [86] the judge found "a further credibility point that
               goes against the appellant that she contended that to leave
               Jordan to the UEA with the eldest daughter she arranged for
               her daughter's name he placed on her passport (AIR 45). Dr
               George indicated in his report, that the best of his
               knowledge, children of Jordanian mothers and foreign partners
               could not be registered on their mother's passport (paragraph
               61)." It is submitted that this is not correct, and that the
               information recorded at the interview question 45 was
               corrected in the appellant's statement dated 4/6/2019 para 14
               where she confirmed that her daughter's name had to be added
               to her husband's passport to allow her daughter to leave
               Jordan.


           iv) At [132] the judge appeared to misunderstand the appellant's
               chronology: the appellant has not lived in Jordan apart from
               8 months at the time of the birth of eldest daughter and
               cannot said to have been assimilated there in the past. In
               his oral submissions Mr Juss submitted that the judge was
               wrong to speak about "re-assimilation" when she had lived
               only there for a period of 8 months.

            v) At [134] it is not correct as the judge stated that there was
               no medical documentation before him as to the appellant's
               daughters current condition. This was in error as there was
               medical evidence pages 48 - 74 of the appellant's bundle. Mr
               Juss submitted that the judge overlooked the evidence.

           vi) At [151] the judge expressed "grave concerns" as to whether
               the appellant had any intention deliver the husband. In fact
               the genuine and subsisting nature of the appellant's
               relationship with her husband is not in dispute and judge
               Smith did not put this matter to the appellant the hearing.
               In his oral submissions Mr Juss submitted that there could
               have been any number of reasons why her husband may not have
               felt able to leave and join them. By saying that it was a
               "grave concern" is not procedurally fair.

    101. The written grounds assert that those errors may arguably be
         material as they speak to the circumstances of the appellant and
         her family may face an expulsion to Jordan.


    102.  On behalf of the respondent it was submitted that the grounds fail
         to advance how the purported errors are established by reference to
         the decision in E and R v SSHD (cited at paragraph 9 of the written
         submissions).


    103. It is submitted that in relation to (v) this was not relevant to
         the protection claim and would only be relevant to article 8
         (paragraph 276AD(vi) which is not the subject of a challenge in the
         grounds.

    104. It is submitted that the grounds at (iv) is not a mistake of fact
         but a disagreement with the judge's conclusion on her ability to
         assimilate and the appellant being in Jordan for 8 months at the
         time of the birth of the appellant's child is not inconsistent with
         the judge's comment that the appellant had not lived in Jordan for
         some years as set out at paragraph 132. On the appellant's own
         evidence, she speaks Arabic and has lived in the country of
         nationality for 8 months previously, is educated to degree level
         and has an employment history across the Arabian Peninsula and in
         the circumstances the decision appears to be entirely open to the
         judge bearing in mind the test set out in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA
         Civ 813.

    105. As to the appellant's husband, questions appear to have been put
         the appellant as to why her husband had not joined in United
         Kingdom but remained in the UAE ( see [151) but the judge was not
         satisfied to the requisite standard with the burden being upon the
         appellant. Mr Avery submitted that the judge was entitled to draw
         an inference from the evidence given that the appellant's husband
         had not joined her and there had been no real reason offered for
         his absence. There is no requirement upon a judge to raise every
         issue. In any event it has not been established that the
         appellant's husband would not be able to go to Jordan and she would
         have to demonstrate by reference to Jordanian law that they would
         not permit him to enter or stay and that had not been provided in
         any evidence.

    106. It is further highlighted in the respondent's submission that the
         appellant's claim continues to evolve in that it is now stated that
         her family will be broken up because the family are "stateless"
         however there is no engagement of family life for the purposes of
         article 8 -a finding which has not been challenged by the appellant
         at [153].

    107. Mr Avery submitted that in relation to the medical evidence any
         error if there was one was not material given the findings of fact
         made by the judge. He was aware that in re-establishing herself in
         Jordan she chose to go there to have one of the children and
         therefore it was not an alien place for her and that the judge went
         through the factors to demonstrate that she would not have any
         substantial difficulty in establishing herself in Jordan and these
         were very valid points.

    108. Furthermore even taking the grounds at their highest it is
         difficult to see why (i) and (ii) are material; whether the Iraqi
         authorities (as a country that the appellant has not been returned
         to) asked the appellant to leave that 3rd country and whether the
         husband was living in Iraq or the UAE in 2005 is not material.

    109. By way of reply Mr Juss submitted that the report in the bundle at
         page 52 (repeated at paragraph 10 of the skeleton argument 10/7/20)
         referred to her scoliosis. He submitted that she could not obtain
         this in Jordan and would not be able to obtain treatment. When it
         was pointed out to him that there had been no claim made on the
         basis of a health claim (set out at paragraph [30] of the FtTJ
         decision), Mr Juss submitted that it was a "Mibanga point" or put
         on an Article 8 basis.

Conclusions on ground 3:


    110. I have carefully considered the matters raised in ground 3.  It is
         submitted that


            i) at [35] it was not correct that the Iraqi authorities told
               the appellant to leave Iraq when she was pregnant and
           ii) at [37] it is not correct that the appellant's husband was
               already living in Iraq he was in fact in the UEA at that
               time.


    111. Contrary to the submissions made by Mr Juss, paragraphs 35 and 37
         are not findings of credibility. These paragraphs are part of the
         FtTJ's summary of the appellant's claim and taken from the evidence
         that was before him. The factual background of paragraph 35 is
         taken from the appellant's answers and interview at questions 28 -
         29. When asked why she had left Iraq  (at Q28) the appellant
         replied "after the war in Iraq, 2003 the invasion in Iraq, and
         people of Palestinian origin were being harassed and getting your
         documentation became very hard because the authority started to
         become very strict there too many restrictions, and because my
         husband was in Jordan, when he came back to Iraq in 2004, he had no
         residency permit. His application was refused. I don't know because
         I wasn't the one he was dealing with the application. When I got
         married I had to leave the family house, I had to carry my
         husband's name and the problem is my husband at the time he had no
         permanent residency in Iraq."


    112. At Q 29, the appellant was asked "so you left in 2005?" (Referring
         to leaving Iraq) and the appellant replied "yes, and I spend the
         time, they told me to go and contact this department who are in
         charge of Arab affairs and that is why I was forced into leaving."
         The appellant's witness statement at paragraph 9 does not seek to
         correct what is set out at questions 28 and 29. Therefore there was
         no factual error made.

    113. Similarly there is no factual error at paragraph 37. The judge's
         reference was taken from her asylum interview question 45 and that
         in 2005 she gave birth to her daughter and that "I was supposed to
         leave the country the beginning of 2006. At that time my husband
         was in Iraq, so he arranged to go to the Emirates...".

    114. This is not inconsistent with what the FtTJ had stated at paragraph
         37.

    115. Even if it could be said that there were errors of fact (although
         in my view there were no such errors), they would be of no
         materiality given that they were not findings on credibility, nor
         has it been demonstrated that those 2 particular factual matters
         were ones which the judge later relied upon adversely.

    116. Point (iii) in paragraph 6 refers to the FtTJ's decision at
         paragraph [86] where he stated:

         "[86] Finally, a further credibility point that goes against the
         Appellant is  that she contended that to leave Jordan for the UAE
         with her eldest daughter she arranged for her daughter's name to be
         placed on her passport (AIR 45.). Dr George indicated in his
         report, that the best of his knowledge, children of Jordanian
         mothers and foreign partners could not be registered on their
         mother's passport (paragraph 61)."

    117. The evidence in support of this was set out in the appellant's
         account giving in her interview at question 45 and related to the
         circumstances in which she left Jordan. She stated "at that time my
         husband was in Iraq, so he arranged to go the Emirates, so his only
         problem was how to get me out, so they were against granting my
         daughter the required document. They told me if I wanted to get
         out, I had to bring my countries passport, so we entered her name
         on my daughters passport which is how we managed to get out."


    118. Whilst in her witness statement she sought to clarify her response
         to question 45 by stating "I wish to clarify that I was to bring my
         husband's passport (travel document) not my "countries" (at
         paragraph 14) that does not explain her account given in answer to
         question 45 that "we entered her name on my daughters passport
         which is how we managed to get her out." In my view the FtTJ was
         entitled to consider her earlier explanation at question 45 which
         was contrary to the expert evidence at paragraph 61.


    119. In any event, as to a point of credibility it was only 1 of a
         number of credibility points that the judge found to be adverse to
         the appellant. They can be summarised as follows:


         1) he did not find the appellant to be a credible witness (at
            [64]).
         2) The appellant had destroyed both her own and her children's
            original passport after having arrived in the United Kingdom.
            The FtTJ considered her explanation for that conduct but having
            done so gave reasons for rejecting it at paragraphs [69 - 70],
            and further made a finding at [70] that she destroyed the
            passport because she felt it would prevent her removal to the
            UAE and at [71] the judge recorded that she had given "various
            inconsistent account of why she destroyed the passports." At
            [72] he found that she had no interest in attempting whatsoever
            to redocument and at [75] concluded that the destruction of the
            passport was a "deliberate and calculated act".
         3) At [73] the judge found that she failed to make an asylum
            application at the 1st available opportunity.
         4) At paragraphs [80 - 85] the judge rejected her account that she
            would be at risk of persecution from the Jordanian authorities
            if returned on the basis of her alleged family connection to a
            member of the PLO finding that her account of detention was
            vague and lacking detail and that she had been allowed to leave
            the country despite her claim to remain someone of interest to
            the authorities. Her claim was also contrary to the expert
            evidence (at [85].
         5) At [91] the FtTJ did not accept her account of the differences
            in her evidence.
         6) At [124] the FtTJ set out his reasons as to why he did not
            accept her claim that she could not work in Jordan without a
            "good conduct" certificate.
         7) At [152] the judge did not accept her evidence that both her and
            her husband had lost their jobs in the UAE.


    120. It therefore follows that even of there was an error of fact, which
         I do not accept), it has not been demonstrated that this finding
         undermined the FtTJ's overall credibility assessment made nor did
         this point undermine or otherwise affect the FtTJ's conclusions on
         the core issue of the ability of the appellant and her family
         members to be able to live in Jordan.


    121. The grounds also challenge the FtTJ's finding at paragraph [151]
         where he stated:


             "[151]I also have grave concerns as to whether the Appellant
             has any intention to live with her husband. I say this because
             the Appellant's husband has been working in the UAE as a
             technical manager. When the Appellant was asked why her
             husband had not come to the United Kingdom to seek asylum she
             said it was because they were happy in the UAE. That does not
             explain why the Appellant's husband remains in the UAE when on
             her account he has lost his job and cannot work and is
             separated from his family. When the Appellant was interviewed
             at a screening interview on 11 January 2019, she said his
             employment had ended that he would be leaving in a maximum of
             two months, that is March 2019. Before the she said her
             husband remains in the UAE. I simply did accept the
             Appellant's evidence on this point that there is an intention
             to live together".



    122. In my judgement there is no error in that factual finding made by
         the FtTJ. The judge had the opportunity to hear the evidence of the
         appellant and for that to be the subject of cross examination. From
         a fair reading of paragraph 151 questions were put to the appellant
         as to why her husband had not joined her in the UK but had remained
         in the UAE. Her response in evidence was recorded by the FtTJ as
         stating, "because they were happy in the UAE". In my view it was
         entirely open to the judge to reach the conclusion that the answer
         given that he had remained in the UAE and that the explanation
         given that they were happy there was inconsistent with her account
         that he had lost his job and could not work and was separated from
         his family. The judge also took into account her evidence in the
         screening interview where she said that he would be leaving the UAE
         after a maximum of 2 months (that would be in March 2019) but at
         the date of the hearing in October 2019, well in excess of the
         period of 2 months, her husband remained there.


    123. In my view the judge was entitled to draw an inference from the
         evidence given that the appellant's husband had not joined her and
         that there was no proper reason given in her evidence which stood
         up to any scrutiny. Consequently, that was a finding properly open
         to FtTJ to make.

    124. The remaining points raised relate to the following:

           iv) At [132] the judge appeared to misunderstand the appellant's
               chronology: the appellant has not lived in Jordan apart from
               8 months at the time of the birth of eldest daughter and
               cannot said to have been assimilated there in the past. In
               his oral submissions Mr Juss submitted that the judge was
               wrong to speak about "re-assimilation" when she had lived
               only there for a period of 8 months.

            v) At [134] it is not correct as the judge stated that there was
               no medical documentation before him as to the appellant's
               daughters current condition. This was in error as there was
               medical evidence pages 48 - 74 of the appellant's bundle. Mr
               Juss submitted that the judge overlooked the evidence.

    125. In relation (iv) the grounds assert that the judge misunderstood
         the chronology in his finding at paragraph [132] that she could
         "quickly re-assimilate to Jordan" and that the judge failed to take
         into account that she had only lived in Jordan for a period of 8
         months.


    126. In my judgement paragraph [132] should be read in the context of
         the overall findings made at paragraphs [108 - 135] which were
         relevant to the assessment of paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi) and
         whether there would be "very significant obstacles to the
         applicant's integration into the country to which she would have to
         go if required to leave the United Kingdom".

    127. I am satisfied that the judge did not misunderstand the appellant's
         chronology. At [132] the judge was plainly aware that it had been
         some years since she had lived in Jordan and expressly said so in
         that paragraph but was entitled to reach the conclusion based on
         the overall findings that he had made and set out at length at
         paragraphs [108 - 135] that irrespective of her last length of
         residence, the cumulative effect of her circumstances demonstrated
         that it had not been shown that there were such "very significant
         obstacles to her integration" to Jordan.

    128. No challenge is expressly raised in the grounds to the FtTJ's
         conclusion on the issue of "very significant obstacles" and
         paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi). However Mr Juss sought to argue that
         paragraph [132] failed to properly consider the issue of
         integration to Jordan.

    129. I accept that at paragraph 7 of the grounds it is said "that the
         error may be material as it speaks to the circumstances that the
         appellant and her family members may face on expulsion". However
         that is far removed from an actual challenge to the assessment of
         paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi).

    130. Even if I accepted there was a challenge raised on this basis
         relying on the finding made at paragraph [132], in my judgement
         such a challenge would be bound to fail.

    131. The FtTJ properly directed himself to the test set out in SSHD v
         Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 at paragraph 14 and it is plain in my
         judgement that he undertook a "broad evaluative judgement" based on
         the evidence before the tribunal.

    132. The FtTJ considered the issue of language and that the appellant
         and the children spoke Arabic and also spoke some English and the
         situation appeared to be the same in respect of the children.
         Arabic being the principal language spoken in Jordan (paragraph 112
         - 115). As to the issue of religion, the judge took into account
         that the appellant spent the last 12 years of her life in the UAE
         and that she was of the Muslim faith.

    133. As to the issue of education, at [117] he recorded that no cogent
         evidence had been placed before him that the children's education
         (other than the contention that it was not available in Jordan,
         which he did not accept) would be disrupted to a significant level
         or the particular friendships formed in the UAE would be broken.
         The judge noted at [118] that their length of residence in the
         United Kingdom had been for a short period of time and that they
         would not have formed "significant roots within the United
         Kingdom".

    134. He concluded that the family had cultural and linguistic ties with
         Jordan and that the appellant and a husband whom the FtTJ both
         described as "intelligent people" and would take every step to
         ensure that the children's integration to Jordan was successful.

    135. The FtTJ considered the issue of employment and that there was no
         medical evidence to suggest she could not work; she was highly
         educated to degree level and had a degree in computer science. At
         [123] the FtTJ found that she had worked for a number of years in
         the field of human resources/payroll and that her abilities "may
         well extend beyond human resources" by reference to her evidence
         about an offer of employment in public relations. At [124] the
         judge gave reasons for rejecting her claim that she could not work
         in Jordan without a "good conduct certificate" and was satisfied
         overall that given her education, skills and experience she would
         be able to earn a living to provide accommodation for herself and
         her family and thus he did not find she would be destitute . Also
         in this context, he found that if she returned voluntarily she
         would be entitled to financial assistance under the Home Office
         reintegration scheme which would address issues such as short-term
         accommodation (at [129]) and  in any event she had access to money
         based on her own evidence in a Visa application.

    136. The judge also took into account that she had relatives on her
         husband's side living in Jordan and that no evidence was before him
         that they would not be prepared to offer some support to the
         appellant and the children, at least on a short-term basis. That
         assessment led to paragraph [132], the paragraph under challenge,
         where the judge having accepted that the appellant had not lived in
         Jordan for some years, was entitled to reach the conclusion based
         on the factual findings made in the preceding paragraphs that her
         knowledge of customs and traditions, the linguistic background,
         religious background, and ability to work and the relatives present
         in Jordan, would demonstrate that she would be "enough of insider
         in terms of understanding how life in the society and that other
         countries carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to
         have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, and operate on
         a day-to-day basis" thus applying the decision in Kamara,  and
         Parveen v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 932 and AS v Secretary of State the
         Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1284 at paragraphs 58 and 59).

    137. The last point relates to paragraph 134.  Whilst the grounds refer
         to this as a factual error that may not necessarily be the case.
         The judge was aware that the appellant's daughter had scoliosis.
         The appellant's daughter had treatment for corrective surgery in
         2018. The operation was a success save that a few days after the
         operation she was readmitted for post-operative wound discharge.
         This was done on 24th of July 2018. Following the surgery and post-
         operative procedure no further medical treatment was undertaken in
         the UAE and she left the UAE a few months later in December 2018
         and entered the UK on a visit visa.

    138. Mr Juss referred the tribunal to the medical evidence at page 52.
         However this was the earlier medical evidence relevant to her
         surgery in 2018 and was not current material. The current evidence
         was at page 50 which made reference to a review of the appellant's
         daughter and her condition. However on the evidence before the
         judge no firm plan had been made as to any future treatment and it
         was stated that this would be considered after an assessment.

    139. The issue relates to the materiality of any error. In my judgement
         even if the judge was in error the material did not support the
         appellant's assertion of "serious consequences" of scoliosis. The
         medical evidence as it stood referred to the lack of infection and
         whilst reference is made to surgery as an option for further
         treatment by way of choice, this had not been substantially
         accepted and was still subject to further assessment.

    140. Whilst Mr Juss sought to argue that the appellant's daughter would
         not be able to obtain treatment in Jordan, no such argument was
         advanced in the grounds nor can I see that such an argument was
         advanced before the FtT. The appellant was previously represented
         by different solicitors and different counsel before the FtT and at
         paragraph 30 the judge recorded as part of the summary of the
         issues he had to decide, that there was no medical health claim
         made or advanced under article 3 in relation to the appellant's
         daughter. When addressing article 8 at paragraph 27 under "issues
         in the appeal" it reflected the case advanced on behalf of the
         appellant that she was unable to develop a private life in Jordan.

    141. In the light of the way the claim was argued, it has not been
         demonstrated that any error, if there was one, was material to the
         outcome. Furthermore, the objective material does not demonstrate
         that the appellant's daughter would be unable to obtain any medical
         treatment and even if it was at a cost to the appellant and it had
         not been demonstrated that the appellant, in the light of the
         factual findings made by the judge of her ability to obtain
         employment and have the support of her husband's family relatives,
         that the cost of treatment and support would not be available to
         her. Nor that she would be unable to access such treatment outside
         of Jordan as she did when resident in the UAE.

    142. Drawing together the issues raised, I am satisfied that the FtTJ
         undertook a careful analysis of the claim but was entitled to reach
         the conclusions that he did on the evidence and the material that
         was before him. The grounds are no more than a disagreement with
         the conclusion that he reached and do not demonstrate in my
         judgement any error of law in his approach in either law or fact
         which would have led to any other outcome.


    143. Consequently for the reasons given above, I am satisfied that the
         decision of the FtTJ did  not make an error  on a point of law and
         the decision of the FtT stands. The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision.

    144. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT
         stands.




Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated    8 July 2021


I make a direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008 as  the  proceedings  relate  to
the circumstances of a protection claim. Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise the appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her. This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make a
written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if the notice of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.
