
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06341/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 November 2018                |On 3 December 2018                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                 RAJA AFZAAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal last came before me on 2 October 2018. At the  hearing,
         neither the appellant nor his representative appeared. As far as  I
         was aware, the appellant was still acting through  his  solicitors,
         Staines & Campbell of Ealing.  However,  on  28  September  2018  a
         letter was drafted  by  them  indicating  that  they  were  without
         instructions and asked to be removed from the  court  record.  That
         letter was not received by the Tribunal until 5 October 2018, three
         days after the hearing before me on 2 October. The directions  that
         I made on 2 October 2018 required  the  appellant's  solicitors  to
         explain why neither they nor the  appellant  were  present  at  the
         hearing. Having now seen their letter of 28 September 2018,  it  is
         apparent why they did not attend then or today.

      2. The appellant was originally served at a former address but shortly
         before their application to be removed from the  file,  his  former
         solicitors notified the Tribunal of what they believed was his last
         address. The appellant was served at that address, namely  [  ~  ],
         with a notice of hearing returnable today, 28 November 2018.  I  am
         satisfied that he was properly served. He did not attend.

      3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who  was  born  on  20  July
         1983. He has a lamentable immigration history.  In  particular,  he
         applied on 22 May 2014 for a residence card in accordance with  the
         EEA Regulations. He accepted that this application was  fraudulent.
         His asylum claim was only made as a last-ditch attempt to remain in
         the United Kingdom on the day he was  served  with  an  enforcement
         notice in 2016.

      4. I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  properly  applied  the  guidance
         provided by HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v. the Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31. The  judge  comprehensively
         disbelieved the evidence of two of the appellant's  witnesses.  The
         judge had to ask himself whether the undoubted  fact  of  living  a
         life without revealing his sexuality would, on return to  Pakistan,
         be the result  of  a  fear  of  persecution  or  his  own  personal
         preference to live a life that is sometimes referred to as  'living
         discreetly'. That was a legitimate question to ask, guided  by  the
         appellant's own evidence as to his conduct in  the  United  Kingdom
         which could  not  reasonably  have  been  prompted  by  a  fear  of
         persecution.

      5. The appellant's evidence was undoubtedly  tainted  by  his  earlier
         fraudulent application, notwithstanding his shrill protestations to
         the contrary, based on his unsupported claim  that  the  fault  lay
         with his former solicitors.

      6. There was no reasonable prospect of the appellant  establishing  on
         the material before the First-tier Tribunal Judge his claim that he
         was at risk  of  persecution.  The  judge  came  to  a  sustainable
         conclusion, doubtless supported by his late application for  asylum
         made in circumstances where the appellant knew he was  in  imminent
         danger of removal and sought any means to prevent it.

    DECISION

    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  no  error  of   law   and   his
    determination of the appeal shall stand.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                                            28 November 2018
