

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/06142/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 February 2020                            |On 4 March 2020              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     Y A
                            (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Smyth, Kesar and Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. This appeal comes before us following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal to the appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bristow on 18
          December 2019 against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge Froom, promulgated on 29 October 2019 following a hearing at
          Hatton Cross on 22 October 2019.




          Issues


       2. The issues in this appeal are: (1) whether it was an error for the
          judge to fail to assess the human rights of the appellant's foster
          carer when making his article 8 findings; (2) whether he erred  in
          his  approach  to  a  "durable  solution"  following  JS   (former
          unaccompanied child - durable solution)  Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT
          568 (IAC);  and  (3)  whether  the  judge  failed  to  assess  the
          circumstances of the article  8  claim  as  at  the  date  of  the
          hearing.


          Background


       3. The appellant is a Bangladeshi national born on 15 June  2001;  he
          was 18 at the date of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal.
          He entered the UK as a visitor on 19 June 2013 accompanied by  his
          mother and  older  brother,  H,  following  a  successful  hearing
          against the refusal of entry clearance. They were sponsored by the
          appellant's  maternal  uncle  who  gave  evidence  at  the   entry
          clearance hearing and confirmed that the family would return after
          a month's visit. In August 2013, the appellant's  mother  returned
          to Bangladesh and left the children behind. On 9  September  2013,
          they were found in the back of a  lorry  heading  for  France  and
          taken into the care of the  local  authority.  Subsequently,  they
          claimed asylum. Both were placed into foster care with SJ although
          H  moved  away  when  he  reached  his  majority  and  has   lived
          independently since then. He visits SJ  and  has  regular  contact
          with the appellant.


       4. The asylum applications were refused but the appellant was granted
          discretionary leave until February 2017 as an unaccompanied asylum-
          seeking child. His appeal against the decision  to  refuse  asylum
          was heard and dismissed in November 2014. His brother's appeal was
          dismissed on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds  in  March
          2018 but allowed on human rights grounds to  the  extent  that  he
          should be given leave to remain until the  appellant  had  reached
          his majority at which point both could be expected  to  return  to
          Bangladesh together. H was then  granted  12  months'  leave.  The
          appellant re-instated his asylum application before the expiry  of
          his discretionary leave, but it was refused once  again.  He  was,
          however, granted a further period  of  discretionary  leave  until
          December 2018. A subsequent in-time application gave rise  to  the
          decision of 4 June 2019, now under challenge.


       5. The appellant claimed that he would be at risk of  persecution  on
          return to Bangladesh because of his imputed political opinion.  He
          also maintained that he had established a  family  life  with  his
          foster carer, SJ.








          The First-tier Tribunal decision


       6. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Froom  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
          appellant and from SJ. H was not called as a witness.  The  asylum
          claim was not pursued and the judge found  that  it  had  been  "a
          fiction from the outset" (at 20) and that there were no reasons to
          go behind the determination of the  judge  who  had  made  adverse
          findings and  dismissed  it  in  2014.  He  also  found  that  the
          appellant had lied when he had claimed his parents  had  died  but
          found that the appellant  did  not  wish  to  contact  his  family
          because he felt he had been abandoned (at 20-21).


       7. Judge Froom accepted that the appellant's placement  with  SJ  was
          successful, that he got on well with  the  family  and  the  other
          foster children, that he had integrated well and had  commenced  a
          university foundation year, that he worked in a local  restaurant,
          undertook voluntary work for  the  Bangladeshi  community,  played
          sports and has passed his driving test. It was  conceded  for  the
          appellant that he could not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
          276ADE(1) in that there were no very significant obstacles to  his
          reintegration into Bangladesh (at  31-33).  He  properly  directed
          himself as to the task at hand noting that if the rules could  not
          be met, "it should only be in genuinely exceptional  circumstances
          that there would be a breach of article 8" (at 34).


       8. The judge accepted that the appellant had a private  life  through
          his academic progress, social ties and through SJ and  her  family
          (at 35). He also found that there  was  family  life  between  the
          appellant and SJ (at 40). He accepted that the appellant's removal
          would result in significant disruption to his private  and  family
          life and that although SJ would stay in touch  with  him,  it  was
          unlikely that she would visit him (at 45).  The  judge  considered
          the issue of proportionality  at  47-63  and  concluded  that  the
          decision was not disproportionate. In  assessing  proportionality,
          he also considered the matter  of  whether  the  case  required  a
          durable solution for the appellant to be found in the UK. He found
          that the appellant would be returning with his older brother to  a
          country where it was  accepted  that  he  would  be  able  to  re-
          integrate without very significant difficulties. Accordingly,  the
          appeal was dismissed.


       9. Permission was granted on the basis that it was "at least arguable
          that the judge had failed to assess SJ's family rights" and  "that
          the judge erred in the approach to a durable  solution".  Although
          the third ground, that of whether the matter was assessed  at  the
          date of hearing or at a future point in time, was not referred to,
          argument was permitted on all grounds.


          The Hearing before us


      10. The appellant and SJ were present for the hearing at Field  House.
          In his oral submissions before us, Mr Smyth, who also  represented
          the appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  relied  on  his
          written grounds. He submitted that there had  been  a  failure  to
          assess the impact of the appellant's removal upon SJ. Having found
          that family life existed between them, it was incumbent  upon  the
          judge to consider the rights of  all  parties.  He  admitted  that
          there was nothing explicit in the evidence about how SJ  would  be
          affected, this was still a failing by the judge as the appeal  was
          so finely balanced. There had been many positive factors  and  the
          only countervailing matter was immigration control.  He  submitted
          that the s.117B factors "did not bite"  as  the  appellant  had  a
          family life.   There  were  no  public  interest  factors  as  the
          appellant could not be blamed for his mode  of  entry.  He  argued
          that despite the absence  of  this  as  a  full  argument  in  the
          skeleton argument, it was a "Robinson obvious" point.


      11. On the second ground, Mr Smyth argued that the  appellant's  youth
          on arrival and his inability to make contact with  family  members
          meant  that  he  fell  within  the  categories  set  out   in   JS
          (Afghanistan). He submitted that  the  judge  had  been  wrong  to
          distinguish the appellant's case on the basis that he would not be
          returning unaccompanied. He submitted that was not relevant.  What
          had to be considered were the positive factors. Again, as this was
          a finely balanced case, small margins were material and the  judge
          had erred in his approach.


      12. On the third and final point, Mr Smyth submitted  that  the  judge
          had speculated about family life tailing off as the appellant grew
          older and more independent. He submitted that those  matters  were
          irrelevant and that the judge was required  to  undertake  a  full
          assessment on the basis of current family life.


      13. Ms Fijiwala replied. She submitted that  there  was  no  error  in
          respect of the first ground and that the findings on  SJ's  rights
          were implicit in the determination; she referred to  paragraph  45
          where there had been specific consideration of SJ despite the fact
          that no evidence of any specific impact  on  SJ  had  been  placed
          before  the  judge.  She  pointed  out  that  there  had  been  no
          particularization of the impact of the appellant's removal on  SJ.
          She submitted that this was a fostering relationship for which  SJ
          was paid and that it was always known to both that the arrangement
          would end. H,  who  had  also  been  fostered  by  SJ,  now  lived
          independently. She submitted that SJ also fostered other  children
          and that was a relevant factor.


      14. On the matter of a durable solution, Ms  Fijiwala  submitted  that
          the facts of this case differed to  those  of  JS.  The  appellant
          would be returning with a family member. The relevant matters  for
          consideration, where the appellant was no longer a minor, were set
          out in head note (4) : "age, background, length  of  residence  in
          the UK, family and general circumstances including any  particular
          vulnerability and whether an appellant will have family  or  other
          adult support on return  to his home country  appropriate  to  his
          particular needs". She submitted that all these factors  had  been
          considered in the proportionality assessment. She  also  submitted
          that there was nothing in that  head  note  to  suggest  that  the
          durable solution had to be found in the UK. The appellant had  not
          been here for at least seven years and he would be able to  return
          with his brother.


      15. On the final ground, Ms Fijiwala submitted that there had been  no
          speculation.  There  was  evidence  before  the  judge  that   the
          appellant wanted to  leave  foster  care  and  to  live  with  his
          brother.


      16. In his response, Mr Smyth repeated the submission that  the  judge
          had found there was family life between the appellant and  SJ.  It
          was not open to the  respondent  to  seek  to  undermine  that  by
          arguing that it was a fostering relationship. The  fact  that  the
          appellant had not been in the UK for seven years did not  heighten
          the public interest in removal; it was a neutral factor  and  none
          of the sub sections applied in this case.


      17. That completed the submissions. Both parties agreed that  were  an
          error of law to be found, the matter  should  be  re-made  in  the
          Upper Tribunal; oral evidence from SJ would be called.


      18. At the conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my decision  which  I
          now give with reasons.


          Discussion and Conclusions


      19. Having considered all the evidence and the  submissions  made,  we
          conclude that there are no material errors of law in Judge Froom's
          determination. We consider it to have been thorough,  clear,  well
          reasoned and carefully prepared. It  is  plain  that  Judge  Froom
          approached the case with sympathy for  the  appellant's  situation
          and that he was impressed by both the appellant  and  SJ.  Several
          positive findings were made. Nevertheless the judge concluded that
          removal was appropriate and his findings and reasoning are, in our
          view, entirely sustainable.


      20. All three grounds amount to a challenge to the judge's approach to
          article 8. Taking each as it was argued,  we  make  the  following
          observations.


      21.  It is for the appellant to present  his  case  and  not  for  the
          Tribunal to make it for him. In this case, the appellant has  been
          legally  represented  by  experienced  solicitors  throughout  the
          proceedings. He and SJ were called to give oral  evidence  and  it
          was for them and the appellant's representatives  to  decide  what
          matters were relevant and what evidence should be put to the judge
          both by way of written evidence and in oral testimony.  Given  the
          fact that the judge's alleged  failure  to  have  regard  to  SJ's
          rights was relied  on  as  a  primary  ground  of  appeal,  it  is
          surprising to say the least that this was never argued before  the
          judge. We accept that there is a brief sentence at paragraph 11 of
          the skeleton argument which  maintains  that  "where  family  life
          exists...the rights under article 8 of  each  individual  must  be
          taken into account", however nothing further is said and there  is
          no expansion whatsoever in the  skeleton  argument  of  what  SJ's
          rights are or of how the appellant's  removal  would  impact  upon
          her. Nor was this question put to her in examination in chief.  It
          was not amplified or touched on in  her  witness  statement  other
          than her expression of fondness and love for the appellant. In the
          circumstances, it is very difficult to see what  the  judge  could
          have done. It is always easy for advocates to criticize judges for
          failing to consider something even when it is  not  argued  before
          them and when there is no evidence to assist, but they  and  their
          clients must accept the responsibility for this, given  where  the
          burden of proof falls.


      22. The judge noted SJ's fondness for  the  appellant.  He  noted  the
          closeness between them, found that they would stay in  touch  even
          after the appellant's removal and that SJ  would  be  unlikely  to
          visit him due to the expense. Whilst it would have been preferable
          if the judge had clearly spelt out that he had had regard to  SJ's
          position, we find that in the absence of any evidence  as  to  how
          she would be affected, there was no error in his failure to do so.
          Moreover,  we  find  that  given  the  judge's  findings  on   the
          proportionality of the appellant's removal in the context  of  his
          circumstances, it is difficult to see how the impact on  SJ  could
          swing the balance in the appellant's favour.


      23. We have had regard to JS and to  Mr  Smyth's  submissions  on  the
          issue of a durable solution.  He relied on head notes 3 and 4.  We
          set these out below:

                 (3) For an unaccompanied asylum  seeking  child,  the  best
    durable solution is to be                reunited with his  own  family
    unless   there   are   good   reasons   to   the    contrary.     Where
    reunification is not possible  and  there  are  no  adequate  reception
    facilities in the home        country, an appropriate durable  solution
    may be to grant discretionary leave during          the remaining years
    of minority and then  arrange  a  return  to  the  country  of  origin.
    Where the child is of a young age on arrival, cannot be  reunited  with
    his family and          will spend many years in the host state  during
    his minority a durable solution may            need to be found in  the
    host state.

                 (4)    Where the appellant is no longer a minor,  the  duty
    on the Secretary of State                under  s.55  of  the  Borders,
    Immigration and Citizenship Act 1999  no  longer  arises            but
    when making the assessment of whether removal  would lead to  a  breach
    of                 article 8 all relevant factors must  be  taken  into
    account including age, background,             length of  residence  in
    the   UK,   family   and   general    circumstances    including    any
    particular vulnerability and whether an appellant will have  family  or
    other  adult              support  on  return   to  his  home   country
    appropriate to his particular needs.


      24.  We note firstly that the search for a  durable  solution  for  an
          unaccompanied asylum seeking child "may" need to be found  in  the
          UK. Plainly it is not envisaged that it should always be necessary
          to find it here. Secondly, we note  that  the  appellant's  asylum
          claim has always been held to be fictitious. Two judges have found
          it so. Third, the appellant is not a minor and, fourth, as he  has
          an older brother, he is  no  longer  unaccompanied.  Head  note  4
          (expanded on at paragraph 35) is more relevant  to  his  situation
          and, as pointed out by Ms Fijiwala, that makes  no  mention  of  a
          solution having to be found in the UK. Also, as she submitted, the
          factors referred to therein were considered by the judge.  He  had
          regard to the appellant's age, length  of  residence  and  general
          circumstances when assessing  the  issue  of  proportionality.  No
          arguments about any specific vulnerability were made and indeed it
          was conceded that he would be able to re-integrate. It is accepted
          by Mr Smyth that there is no issue about any risk on return and of
          course as Judge Froom found the appellant would be returning  with
          his older brother so he would have adult support on return.

      25. We also note that the appellant is returning to Bangladesh and not
          to a war- torn country such as Afghanistan. However, even  in  the
          circumstances of a return to Afghanistan,  JS,  also  a  minor  on
          arrival, was found to be returnable. The Upper Tribunal held  that
          an earlier classification of vulnerability did not mean  he  could
          never return (at 43).  On the issue  of  foster  care,  the  court
          held: "No doubt  such a  relationship  is   capable  of  producing
          strong ties, but the foster care was always intended as  temporary
          and this would doubtless have been well known to  both  carer  and
          the cared for" (at 47). The court found that a situation where the
          respondent was unable to return any  young  male  after  residence
          here as a child because there was no satisfactory  evidence  of  a
          family  awaiting  him  there  or  similar  satisfactory  reception
          arrangements  "would  have  very   significant   impact   on   the
          respondent's practice and  successive  policies  in  dealing  with
          unaccompanied children by way of limited leave and  assessing  the
          circumstances after age 18" (at 48).


      26. In the present case, having assessed  all  the  circumstances  and
          factors put forward, Judge Froom gave weight to the fact that  the
          appellant would be returning with an adult family member and  that
          there was no need in his circumstances for a durable  solution  to
          be found in the UK particularly as the appellant's ability to  re-
          integrate into life in Bangladesh was not in doubt.


      27. The last point is an argument that the judge  speculated  about  a
          future point in time  and  did  not  reach  his  decision  on  the
          situation as at the date of hearing. This submission has no merit.
          Judge Froom was very clear as to what he was required  to  assess,
          and  this  is  clear  at  paragraph  18  where   he   specifically
          acknowledges that he is required to "look at the  position  as  at
          today's date". In  paragraphs  20-52  he  does  exactly  that.  He
          reminds himself that he must not speculate (at 59). His  reference
          to the appellant's age and growing independence and the inevitable
          consequences of that (at 53)  was  not  speculation  as  Mr  Smyth
          argued, but drawn from the appellant's and SJ's own  evidence  (at
          28 and 57), oral and written. In all  the  circumstances,  he  was
          entitled to find as he did and there is no error in his approach.

      28. For all these reasons, we conclude that there are no errors in the
          decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom.


          Decision


      29. The appeal is dismissed.


          Anonymity


      30. We continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.


    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge
       Date: 20 February 2020




