
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06557/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st September 2018                        |On 22nd October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                     MH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     M H  in person
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant a national of Iran date of birth 28  July  1972  appealed
    against the Respondent's decision  dated  19  June  2017  to  refuse  a
    protection claim based on and about a  claim  that  the  Appellant  had
    converted to Christianity and therefore on the basis  that  he  was  an
    apostate from his Muslim faith  he  faced  the  serious  risk  of  ill-
    treatment on return to Iran.  The Respondent did not  accept  that  the
    Appellant had genuinely converted to Christianity.

2.   The appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge B Lloyd who on 17 August 2017  dismissed  the
    appeal on the protection claims and also rejected the  Article  8  ECHR
    claim.  Permission to appeal that  decision  was  given  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth on 27 November 2017.  The  Respondent
    made a Rule 24 reply on 19 December 2017.  The substance of that  reply
    was that effectively the Judge had made no error of law,  was  entitled
    to reach the conclusions he did and that the  Appellant's  conduct  had
    damaged his credibility.

3.   At the hearing today the  Appellant  sought  to  affirm  his  Christian
    faith and to say that he could  really,  representing  himself  at  the
    hearing before the Judge, do no more than declare that  his  faith  was
    genuine and that  he  lived  in  accordance  with  it  each  day.   The
    Appellant was not able to identify any particular errors by  the  Judge
    save his grounds essentially amount to a disagreement with the  Judge's
    adverse conclusions in relation to the genuineness of his conversion or
    the evidence to demonstrate the genuineness of his faith.

4.   I cannot interfere with the Judge's  decision,  because  I  might  have
    reached a different conclusion, so long as there  are  no  demonstrable
    errors of law and no absence  of  sufficient  or  appropriate  reasons.
    From paragraphs 34 and 35 of the decision it is clear  that  the  Judge
    was appropriately directing himself to the relevant law and to the  old
    case now of Dorodian which makes plain that it is not a requirement  to
    produce evidence from a pastor or minister of a  Christian  Church  but
    the absence of such evidence may be telling in the context of the case.
     The Judge also took into account, as he perceived it, the inadequacies
    of the Appellant's evidence generally from the church, from members  of
    the congregation, organisers of the church or persons with whom he  was
    said to have contact.

5.   I find that the Judge gave sufficient  and  adequate  reasons  and  the
    possible  arguments  raised  in  the  permission  to  appeal   do   not
    demonstrate the likelihood of an error of law or  the  likelihood  that
    upon the same evidence a reasonably directed other Tribunal would  have
    reached a different decision.

6.   Given  the  limited  constraints  for  finding  an  error  of  law  and
    interfering with the First-tier Tribunal decision I  conclude,  without
    making any findings whatsoever  on  the  Appellant's  faith,  that  the
    Original Tribunal made no material error of law.

DECISION

7.   The Original Tribunal stands. The Appeal is dismissed.

8.   An anonymity order was made by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  in
    the circumstances for the purposes of this appeal it is continued.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 10 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed therefore no fee award is appropriate.

Signed                                  Date 10 October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


