
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06262/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 October 2018                    |On 15 October 2018                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                 shahbaz [h]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel instructed by Lexmark Legal
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 1 January  1980.
    He initially arrived in the UK in September  2011  as  a  visitor  with
    leave granted until February 2012.  Ultimately, after his arrest on  11
    March 2018 and there having been previous  immigration  proceedings  in
    the interim, the appellant made a claim for asylum on 15 March 2018.

 2. In a decision dated 2 May 2018 the respondent refused that claim.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against that decision and
    his  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hembrough   who
    dismissed the appeal.

    Judge Hembrough's decision

 3. The further circumstances of the appellant's case are best  illustrated
    with reference to the decision of Judge Hembrough.

 4. He set out the basis of the appellant's claim which is that he would be
    at risk of persecution in Pakistan on account of his  membership  of  a
    particular social group as a gay man.  He  summarised  the  appellant's
    immigration history.  He referred to the fact that on 5 April 2013  the
    appellant applied for leave to remain on human  rights  grounds.   That
    application was refused with no right of appeal.  Then, on 28 May 2013,
    the appellant applied for an EEA residence card as the extended  family
    member of Agnieska Krzyskow who is a Polish citizen whom he  claims  to
    have married in an Islamic ceremony.  That application was  refused  on
    28 January 2014 and his appeal at which Ms Krzyskow gave evidence,  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Khawar in a decision promulgated
    on 31 October 2014.

 5. A further application was submitted on 14 November 2014, again based on
    his relationship with Ms Krzyskow.  That application was again  refused
    and his appeal was dismissed by First-tier Judge Butler in  a  decision
    promulgated on 2 October 2015.  Neither the appellant nor  Ms  Krzyskow
    appeared for that hearing.

 6. It was in March 2018 that the appellant was encountered during what  is
    described as an enforcement visit to premises in Watford where  he  was
    arrested and detained and served with notice of liability  to  removal.
    That was when he claimed asylum saying that  he  had  been  beaten  and
    stabbed by his family in Pakistan when they discovered his sexuality in
    2007.  He is said to have scarring as a result.

 7. Judge Hembrough referred to a 'rule 35' medical examination carried out
    on 15 March 2018 which confirmed that he had scarring  consistent  with
    "the mechanism described".

 8. He then summarised the basis of the appellant's asylum claim as well as
    his family circumstances in Pakistan.  It  appears  from  that  summary
    that the appellant realised he was attracted to boys when he was  about
    9 or 10 years old, which was when he first engaged in a sexual act with
    a male friend who forced him  to  continue  a  sexual  relationship  by
    threatening  to  tell  others  about  it.   The  appellant   apparently
    identified himself as gay from about the age of 14 onwards.   His  case
    was that he did not tell anyone about his sexual  orientation  but  his
    family began to suspect.  The appellant said that at the  time  he  did
    not realise  that  same-sex  relationships  were  against  the  law  in
    Pakistan and only claimed to have been aware of this when he  was  aged
    about 18 or 19 years, although he always believed that it was wrong.

 9. The appellant's case was that  he  had  been  blackmailed  into  having
    sexual relationships and being forced  into  such  relationships  on  a
    number of occasions.  One of his brothers became aware of his sexuality
    and the appellant was beaten up.  The family then decided that he ought
    to get married and thus he became involved in an arranged marriage with
    a cousin but continued to have sexual encounters with men.

10. He has three children of the marriage who at the date of  the  decision
    before Judge Hembrough were aged 7, 9 and 11 years,  respectively.   In
    2007 his wife found out about  his  sexuality  and  complained  to  his
    brothers who beat him and stabbed him in the leg.  He was also  hit  on
    the back of his head with a stone and he has scarring as a result.   He
    was continually blackmailed by his friends  into  engaging  in  further
    sexual encounters.

11. Eventually his wife divorced him, although it  appears  that  different
    dates for the divorce, ranging from 2008, 2009 or 2010, were given. The
    appellant's case was that he had not had any contact with his  now  ex-
    wife or children for four or five years.  He had continued to  live  in
    the family home until he came to  the  UK,  although  his  brothers  in
    Pakistan continued to beat him.  His father passed away  in  June  2011
    and his mother in December of that year.

12. Continuing, the appellant's claim was that he came to the UK  to  visit
    his brothers and overstayed, fearing that his life would be  in  danger
    in Pakistan on account of his sexuality.  Until recently  he  had  been
    supported by his brothers here in the UK, however he did  not  disclose
    his sexuality to them as he was dependent upon them.  He has not worked
    since his arrival.  He had now fallen out with his brothers in  the  UK
    and he believes that it was they who informed on him to the immigration
    authorities.

13. As regards his relationship with Ms Krzyskow, he  said  that  they  had
    lived together for about 18 months but she  had  left  him  because  he
    spent too much time with his friends.

14. For the previous six or seven months he had been living with  a  friend
    called Naim and had been a regular attendee at a gay club, the name  of
    which he was unable to recall.  He submitted a  number  of  photographs
    showing him at a gay club.  He said that he did not claim asylum  until
    he was detained by immigration authorities as he did not know  anything
    about claiming and did not have the money to pay a lawyer to  give  him
    advice until his nephew gave him some money.

15. The refusal letter was  also  summarised  by  Judge  Hembrough.   After
    referring to the  relevant  legal  framework  and  to  the  documentary
    evidence, he summarised the oral evidence.

16. The appellant's claim was supported by a number of witnesses called  on
    his behalf.  One in particular, Saied Reza Birjandi, is the subject  of
    the grounds of appeal.  That witness said that he is an  LGBT  activist
    and hosts parties at clubs in the London and Manchester areas.  He  had
    seen the appellant regularly at such parties  many  times,  approaching
    the same person and spending the evening with  him  and  enjoying  each
    other's  company.   In  cross-examination  he  said  that  he  met  the
    appellant at Club Kali in London, some time in 2017.  When he was asked
    whether he knew the appellant was in a relationship he said that he had
    seen him mingling with the same person for the  whole  night.   He  was
    unable to say how many times he had seen them.  At [60] Judge Hembrough
    said as follows:

         "I observed that this witness  was  known  to  me  having  appeared
         before me in a previous appeal in which the  Appellant's  sexuality
         was in issue and I asked him whether he  was  being  paid  for  his
         attendance at the hearing.  He responded in  the  negative  stating
         that his work as an LGBT activist  and  with  the  NAZ  Consortium,
         which provides advice and support to members of the LGBT  community
         on sexual health and related matters, brought him into contact with
         many gay men from the South Asian community."

17. I quote that paragraph in full because it is pertinent to the complaint
    made in relation to Judge Hembrough's decision about his assessment  of
    this witness.

18. Judge Hembrough then made a number of findings.  Prior  to  making  his
    findings he remarked that having determined a number of similar appeals
    he was familiar with the respondent's operational guidance in  relation
    to sexual orientation in asylum claims and UNHCR guidance on  the  same
    matters.  He then made some general observations  in  relation  to  the
    assessment of such claims. No  complaint  is  made  about  the  judge's
    reflections in that respect.  He reminded himself that  a  rounded  and
    individualised assessment was required in each case.

19. He referred to the fact that the appellant was examined in detention by
    a Dr Pitchiah Balu who is a consultant psychiatrist and whose report in
    the appellant's bundle indicated that the appellant was found  to  meet
    the diagnostic criteria for PTSD which it was said  can  affect  recall
    and memory.  Judge Hembrough said that the diagnosis was based upon one
    interview  with  the  appellant  of   unspecified   duration   and   an
    unquestioning acceptance of the appellant's account of  the  background
    to his asylum claim and his claimed symptoms.

20. However, he also said at [69] that even on the appellant's own  account
    he had shown himself willing to lie to the Home Office and the Tribunal
    and to fabricate evidence so as to be able to achieve status within the
    UK.  His evidence was that he had  lied  when  giving  evidence  before
    Judge Khawar and the appellant had said that  the  photographs  showing
    him kissing and cuddling with Ms Krzyskow were staged.  Judge Hembrough
    then said that he treated what the  appellant  told  Dr  Balu  "with  a
    degree of circumspection".

21. At [70] he said that despite claiming to  suffer  from  depression  and
    memory issues there was  no  suggestion  that  the  appellant  was  not
    competent to give evidence on his  own  account.   Nor  was  there  any
    application that he should be treated as a vulnerable witness.  He said
    at [71] that although the rule 35 medical  report  concluded  that  the
    appellant  had  injuries  which  are  consistent  with  the   mechanism
    described, taken at its highest all it established  was  that  at  some
    time in the past he was the victim of an attack involving the use of  a
    knife.

22. At [72] he said that having considered the evidence in the round he was
    not satisfied that the appellant had given a true and accurate  account
    of the background to his asylum claim.  At  [74]  he  referred  to  the
    appellant having said in oral evidence, for the first time, that he had
    been raped aged 7 or  8,  but  that  was  not  something  that  he  had
    previously disclosed, either to his  legal  representatives  or  to  Dr
    Balu.  He said that that was not an issue that was pursued by either of
    the representatives at the  hearing,  and  whilst  he  acknowledged  as
    documented by Dr Balu that  avoidance  behaviours  are  symptomatic  of
    PTSD, he concluded that he was  left  with  the  impression  that  this
    allegation was something that the appellant made up on the spot  as  an
    embellishment to his claim.  Moreover,  he  said,  in  the  absence  of
    expert evidence he found it difficult to accept that being raped  as  a
    child would give rise to a predilection for same-sex  relationships  in
    the future.

23. He went on to conclude at [75] that he was not able  to  reconcile  his
    account that  all  of  his  same-sex  relationships  in  Pakistan  were
    "forced" with his description that they were "good relationships".

24. He found at [76] that the appellant had not  established  that  he  was
    forced into marriage with his cousin.  He noted that he was  less  than
    candid about the existence of the marriage  when  giving  his  evidence
    before Judge Khawar and he referred to [14] of Judge Khawar's  decision
    in this respect. He referred to  the  appellant's  screening  interview
    where he gave the ages of his children as 7, 9 and 11 years.  He  found
    that indicated that he had a long term  sexual  relationship  with  his
    wife right up to the point that he  left  Pakistan.   If  his  youngest
    child was 7 he would have been born in 2011 or  thereabouts.  That,  he
    said, gave the lie  to  the  appellant's  evidence  that  the  marriage
    effectively came to an end in 2007 when his wife discovered that he was
    gay and that he was divorced in 2008/9  or  2010,  as  claimed  in  the
    interview.

25. He went on to state in the next paragraph that the appellant's  account
    of his relationship with Ms Krzyskow was  similarly  inconsistent.   On
    the one hand he claimed that he had been forced into  the  relationship
    by his brothers in the UK yet he had  accepted  that  they  had  had  a
    sexual relationship which resulted in her  telling  him  that  she  was
    pregnant.  She gave evidence at the hearing before Judge Khawar to  the
    effect that their relationship  was  genuine  and  subsisting  and  the
    evidence was that they had been living  together  since  their  Islamic
    marriage on 7 February 2013.  The  hearing  took  place  twenty  months
    later on 3 October 2014.  Judge Hembrough said  that  clearly  she  was
    convinced that the relationship was genuine.  He also said that he  had
    noted that the photographic evidence was adduced showing  them  kissing
    etc. which the appellant now claimed was staged.

26. He went on to state that the appellant  was  unable  satisfactorily  to
    explain why, even if he was pressurised into marrying her, he had  made
    three applications to regularise  his  status  on  the  basis  of  that
    relationship.  Whilst he sought to explain his failure to claim  asylum
    by asserting that he did not have any knowledge of asylum law and could
    not afford legal representation, Judge Hembrough noted that all of  his
    applications were submitted by an OISC accredited legal  representative
    who also represented him  at  the  hearing  before  Judge  Khawar.   He
    therefore found that his credibility was undermined by his  failure  to
    claim asylum until encountered on 11 March 2018.

27. He went on to state that he found the appellant inconsistent as to  the
    reason why his brothers had thrown him out.  At [81] he  said  that  he
    had given a vague and unsubstantiated account of  his  sexual  history.
    In interview he had claimed to be a regular attendee at a gay club that
    he was unable to name.  Latterly however, he had  produced  photographs
    which Judge Hembrough found had been staged.  He said as follows:

         "To say that the Appellant looks uncomfortable in his  surroundings
         would  be  something  of  an  understatement.   The  more  so  when
         contrasted  with  the  happy  smiling  Appellant   shown   in   the
         photographs with Ms Krzyskow".

28. He said at [82] that he did not accept as credible that the only person
    who could have given direct evidence  as  regards  his  claimed  sexual
    orientation was a person known as Naim who did not  attend  because  he
    could not get time off work.   He  noted  that  there  was  no  witness
    statement from Naim and no evidence that an application had  been  made
    for a "witness order", as he described it, to secure his attendance.

29. He then went on to state that the  witnesses  who  gave  evidence  were
    wholly lacking in credibility and he was left with the impression  that
    they had been "bussed in" to support the appeal.  He said that none  of
    them appeared  to  know  anything  about  the  appellant.   As  to  the
    particulars of  the  evidence  of  the  witnesses,  he  said  that  the
    appellant did not even know the witness Mr Chaudri was  a  professional
    dancer at the club  where  they  claimed  to  have  met.   Mr  Mazhar's
    evidence was in direct conflict with that given  by  the  appellant  in
    that he said that his uncles and father had issued threats against  the
    appellant, whereas the appellant claimed to  be  in  fear  of  his  own
    brothers in Pakistan.  He concluded that Mr Khan simply  lied  when  he
    said that he had known the appellant for two  years.   The  appellant's
    evidence was that he had never visited a gay club  until  eight  months
    ago and that they had met four or five months previously.

30. He then dealt with the evidence of Mr Birjandi.  He said that he was  a
    familiar  witness  before  the  Tribunal,  of  whom  he  had   previous
    experience.  He said that his evidence was vague in the extreme and  to
    some extent mirrored that given in the  previous  appeal  in  which  he
    appeared before him. Judge Hembrough cited the appeal reference number.



31. He concluded that  taken  at  its  highest  the  evidence  of  all  the
    witnesses was that the appellant had simply attended gay clubs on  more
    than one occasion, but that he had done so was  simply  an  attempt  to
    bolster  a  weak  and  opportunistic  asylum  claim  based  on   sexual
    orientation.  Thus, he concluded that the appellant had not established
    that he was a  gay  man  and  accordingly  would  not  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on return to Pakistan.

32. He then dealt with Article 8 in terms of the Rules  and  s.117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, dismissing the appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

33. The grounds of appeal on which  permission  was  granted  contend  that
    Judge Hembrough gave insufficient weight to the medico-legal report  of
    Dr Balu. It is also argued that he had  erred  in  his  conclusions  in
    relation to the witness, Mr Birjandi, his not having specified how what
    he said was his knowledge of the witness had affected  the  credibility
    assessment.

34. The grounds refer to Dr Balu's report which stated that  the  appellant
    was suffering from PTSD.  It is argued that  although  Judge  Hembrough
    said  that  he  treated  Dr  Balu's   evidence   with   a   degree   of
    circumspection, his report was a very important piece of evidence which
    was afforded "insufficient weight".

35. The grounds state that prior to this appeal there had been no  previous
    determinations relating to the  appellant's  sexuality  or  history  of
    maltreatment in Pakistan, and as such it was open to Dr  Balu  to  take
    into account what the appellant said during  the  clinical  examination
    and to base an assessment of the appellant's  credibility  on  it.   Dr
    Balu had access to other information beyond  what  the  appellant  said
    during the course of the medical examination,  including  the  rule  35
    report, Home Office documents in the form of the response to  the  rule
    35 report, monthly progress reports and the asylum  interviews.   Thus,
    the grounds contend that it was wrong of Judge Hembrough to  give  less
    weight to Dr Balu's  report  "solely  on  the  basis  of  his  findings
    regarding the Appellant's credibility".

36. It is also argued that  Judge  Hembrough  erred  in  stating  that  the
    diagnosis of PTSD was based upon one interview with  the  appellant  of
    unspecified duration and an unquestioning acceptance of the appellant's
    account of the background of his asylum claim and his claimed symptoms.
     However, Dr Balu stated that he spent  about  an  hour  reviewing  the
    documents and interviewing the appellant.

37. A complaint is  also  made  in  the  grounds  about  Judge  Hembrough's
    assessment of the rule 35 report.  Although Judge  Hembrough  had  said
    that all that that evidence established was that at some  time  in  the
    past he was the victim of an attack involving the use of a  knife,  the
    grounds suggest that greater weight should have been  afforded  to  the
    opinions of two different medical professionals, that is to say Dr Balu
    and the author of the rule 35 report, with both finding the appellant's
    account consistent.

38. In submissions on behalf of the appellant  Mr  Balroop  relied  on  the
    grounds including in relation to Dr Balu's report. The complaint raised
    in the grounds in relation  to  Judge  Hembrough's  evaluation  of  the
    evidence of Mr Birjandi was the main focus for the argument advanced on
    behalf  of  the  appellant  before  me.   I  have  quoted  from   Judge
    Hembrough's decision in this respect.

39. It is said in the grounds that the appellant should have been  afforded
    the opportunity to comment on that issue. The prior  knowledge  or  the
    extent  of  it,  was  not  made  clear  to   the   appellant   or   his
    representative.  It was submitted that  this  was  a  witness  who  was
    corroborative of the appellant's sexuality  and  it  was  a  matter  of
    fairness that the appellant should have been afforded  the  opportunity
    to comment.

40. Mr Tarlow referred to specific aspects of Judge  Hembrough's  decision,
    ultimately submitting that any error on the part of Judge Hembrough  in
    respect of his assessment of  the  evidence  of  Mr  Birjandi  was  not
    material.

41. Mr Balroop in reply argued that the error of law in  this  respect  was
    material. I was  reminded  that  this  was  a  protection  claim  which
    required anxious scrutiny.

    Assessment and Conclusions

42. Dealing with the grounds in order. There is no merit in the  contention
    that it was wrong for Judge Hembrough to give less weight to Dr  Balu's
    report "solely on the basis of his findings regarding  the  Appellant's
    credibility".  It is clear  that  that  was  not  the  basis  of  Judge
    Hembrough's conclusions in this respect.  He did not afford less weight
    to that report on the  basis  of  findings  regarding  the  appellant's
    credibility.  He assessed the evidence  in  Dr  Balu's  report  in  the
    context of the evidence overall. His decision does not reveal  previous
    findings on credibility prior to his  conclusions  in  relation  to  Dr
    Balu's report.

43. What Judge Hembrough actually said was that he treated what was said to
    Dr Balu by the appellant with a degree of circumspection.  That is  not
    a rejection of everything that is contained within  Dr  Balu's  report.
    In  that  same  paragraph  Judge  Hembrough  noted  that  even  on  the
    appellant's own account he had shown himself to have lied to  the  Home
    Office and to the Tribunal and to have fabricated  evidence  so  as  to
    achieve status in the UK. That was what his claimed  relationship  with
    Ms Krzyskow was  all  about  and  the  appellant  also  said  that  the
    photographs of him with Ms Krzyskow were staged.  On that basis,  Judge
    Hembrough was entitled to treat  what  was  said  to  Dr  Balu  by  the
    appellant with a degree of circumspection.  There is no  error  in  his
    assessment in that respect.

44. It could be said that Judge Hembrough was wrong to say that the medical
    examination of the appellant was of unspecified duration, at  least  on
    one view of the evidence. However, if one accepts what is said  in  the
    medical report that about an hour was spent reviewing the documents and
    interviewing the appellant, what Judge Hembrough said  was  correct  in
    that the diagnosis was based upon one interview with the  appellant  of
    unspecified duration.  Dr Balu said that he spent an hour reviewing the
    documents and interviewing the appellant.  In  that  sense  it  is  not
    apparent how long the actual interview with the appellant was.  In  any
    event, even if it could be said that Judge Hembrough was  in  error  in
    his appreciation of the facts, it is not an error of fact that  amounts
    to an error of law, still less one that is material.

45. As to the complaint made about  Judge  Hembrough's  assessment  of  the
    evidence of Mr Birjandi, I do consider that  there  is  merit  in  that
    complaint.  It is not absolutely clear  from  [60]  that  he  made  the
    parties aware that the witness was known to him.  His decision tends to
    suggest that he did because having said at [60] that he "observed" that
    the witness was known to him, he then asked the witness whether he  was
    being paid for his attendance at the hearing. However, even if  he  did
    make it clear at that stage that he 'knew' the witness, that  does  not
    cure what seems to me to have been an error of law in his assessment in
    this respect.

46. The appellant and his representative were entitled  to  know  what  was
    behind Judge Hembrough's thinking in terms of his familiarity with  the
    witness and what it was about this witness's evidence that  cast  doubt
    on his credibility or the weight to be attached to his evidence.   This
    was an issue that ought to have been  put  to  the  appellant  and  his
    representative for comment to have been made and  the  opportunity  for
    submissions to have been advanced.  Likewise, it seems to  me  that  if
    Judge Hembrough was to refer to a copy of an earlier decision in  which
    the witness featured, and about which presumably some  adverse  comment
    had been made, that document ought to have been made available  to  the
    appellant and his representative. It is not clear that  it  was.  I  am
    satisfied that  Judge  Hembrough  erred  in  law  in  relation  to  his
    assessment of the credibility of that witness in the respects to  which
    I have referred.

47. However, I am not satisfied  that  it  is  an  error  of  law  that  is
    material. Firstly, what Judge Hembrough said  was  that  Mr  Birjandi's
    evidence was vague in the extreme.  Even without any reference to  this
    witness's  previous  evidence  or  previous  appearance  in  any  other
    hearing, or the judge's familiarity with the witness, the fact that the
    evidence was vague was undoubtedly something that would have diminished
    the weight to be given to that evidence.  Secondly, this was but one of
    a number of witnesses who gave evidence  before  Judge  Hembrough.   In
    various significant respects he found each of the  witnesses'  evidence
    to be unworthy of any weight.

48. Thirdly,  as  is  clear  from  my  summary,  there  were  a  number  of
    significant features of the appellant's account  which  undermined  his
    credibility and in respect  of  which  valid  and  legally  sustainable
    criticisms were made.  In those circumstances,  the  error  of  law  in
    relation to the assessment of  the  evidence  of  Mr  Birjandi  is  not
    material.  Even without that error of law, the outcome  of  the  appeal
    would not have been any different.

    Decision

49. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. However, its decision  is  not  set  aside  and  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds is to stand.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                        dated 10/10/18

