
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06121/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2018                            |On 5 November 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                 mr a a a h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Patel, Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant has permission to challenge the decision of  Judge  Malik
    of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on  29  June  2018  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal on humanitarian protection grounds, but  failing  to
    make any decision in respect of the appellant's asylum grounds.

2.   It is unnecessary to set out  the  grounds  in  any  detail  especially
    since the respondent's Rule 24 notice concedes  that  the  grounds  are
    valid.  The simple facts are that the appellant  claimed  asylum;  that
    this was refused by the respondent on  23  April  2018  on  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds; and that the  appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal included both asylum and humanitarian  protection  grounds.   By
    virtue of the terms of the Qualification  Directive,  a  decision-maker
    can only decide  to  grant  humanitarian  protection  if  satisfied  an
    appellant does not qualify for  refugee  status.   The  judge  gave  no
    reason for concluding that the appellant did not  qualify  for  refugee
    status.  It would appear that the judge thought that because he did not
    believe the appellant's account of his family having been  attacked  by
    the Janjaweed, or of the Janjaweed kidnapping  and  detaining  him,  he
    could not qualify as a refugee.  But on the basis of  Tribunal  country
    guidance (MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 10 (IAC)  it  was  and  is
    sufficient for persons to qualify as a refugee if appellants  are  non-
    Arab Darfuris.  Given that the judge concluded at paragraph 27 that  AA
    [the earlier CG case] and  MM  which  gave  guidance  on  international
    protection claims (not just humanitarian  protection)  "should  not  be
    departed from", in logic he should have allowed the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds and not addressed humanitarian protection.

Notice of Decision

3.   For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law and I set aside his decision.

4.   As the respondent's Rule 24 response  acknowledges,  the  only  logical
    decision I can arrive at in re-making the  decision  is  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

5.   To summarise:

     - The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside  for  material  error  of
       law.


     - The decision I re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal on  asylum
       grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 25 October 2018

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
