

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: PA/06083/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                        |    Decision promulgated                |
|On 6 March 2018                            |    On 3 May 2018                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     TAG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:                Mr Akhigbe of R & A Solicitors
For the Respondent:            Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-
        tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan, promulgated on the 14 September 2017,
        in which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  protection
        and human rights grounds.






Background


     2. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, was born on 29 April 1975. The
        appellant entered the United Kingdom with leave valid to  20  March
        2012. The appellant overstayed and the  Judge  records  periods  of
        absconding, handing himself in, failure to comply  with  conditions
        of  release,  and  eventually  on  10  March  2017  the   appellant
        submitting a human rights article 8 ECHR application. On  22  March
        2017 a further application for leave on the basis of family/private
        life was said to be  void.  On  10  April  2017  the  human  rights
        application was refused and certified and removal  directions  set.
        On 12 April 2017 the appellant was asked  if  he  wished  to  claim
        asylum which he did on 24 April 2017. On 8  June  2017  the  asylum
        claim was refused leading to the appeal before the Judge.
     3. The Judge considered the evidence in both documentary and oral form
        before setting out findings of fact from [36] of the decision under
        challenge. The Judge found the appellants evidence in  relation  to
        the core claim of risk of persecution in Nigeria on account of  his
        sexuality and evidence in relation to what had occurred to  him  in
        Nigeria  was  wholly  inconsistent  and   "neither   credible   nor
        consistent".
     4. At [46] the Judge finds that the appellant has simply made  up  the
        whole of his evidence in order to make out an asylum claim  in  the
        United Kingdom.
     5. The Judge makes the following findings at [47 - 50] of the decision
        under challenge, which should read:


             47.  I find that on the lower standard of proof, the appellant
                  has failed to establish that he  has  been  persecuted  in
                  Nigeria in the past on the grounds of his sexuality or his
                  political opinions or there is a real risk of  persecution
                  on his return to the country of  his  origin,  Nigeria.  I
                  find on the evidence before me the United Kingdom will not
                  be in breach of the Refugee Convention if the appellant is
                  returned to Nigeria.


             48.  The appellant has produced a  Psychiatric  Report  by  Dr
                  Teresa Wazniak. The report gives graphic details about the
                  scarring on the appellant's body. I was taken through  the
                  report thoroughly by the appellant's legal representative.
                  Dr Wazniak states that every scar is consistent  with  the
                  appellant's explanation as to how they came about  through
                  the torture during his  kidnapping.  It  is  suggested  at
                  paragraph 9.15 and some others that  "asylum  seekers  and
                  refugees  with  PTSD  and  expression  are  less  able  to
                  retrieve specific memories of the personal past  within  a
                  given time limit when prompted to do so". It is said  that
                  the appellant's memory in this case may have been affected
                  by the injuries he suffered. These  injuries  occurred  in
                  February 2007, there is no evidence that the appellant has
                  been  treated  for  any  mental  condition  or  any  other
                  condition since September 2007.


             49.  I accept Dr Wazniak's description of  the  scars  on  the
                  appellant's body and that they may be consistent with  the
                  method of torture but I  do  not  accept  the  appellant's
                  explanation that they were caused by the Nigerian Military
                  personnel and for the reason that he was  a  bisexual.  At
                  question 124, the appellant was asked how  these  military
                  people knew about his sexuality,  he  said  maybe  through
                  information but could not explain and said that he had  no
                  idea. The police letter written on  11/05/17  states  that
                  the appellant was kidnapped by the Niger Delta Boys.  This
                  appears to be some type of gang members of gangs can cause
                  such injuries as found on the appellant's body.


             50.  I do not accept the appellants  evidence  that  he  is  a
                  bisexual male and that his torture  resulted  from/because
                  of his sexuality. Further, I find that the  appellant  has
                  added evidence and changed it  in  order  to  bolster  his
                  asylum claim. On the lower standard of proof, I find  that
                  the appellant has failed to  establish  his  case  on  the
                  basis of his bisexuality.


     6. Clear sloppiness  in  the  dictation  and  checking  of  the  above
        paragraphs in the decision under challenge and typographical errors
        have been omitted and/or corrected for the sake of clarity  in  the
        version set out above.
     7. The Judge went on to consider risk on  return  notwithstanding  the
        appellants evidence having been totally discredited, but found  the
        appellant would not face  a  real  risk  from  the  authorities  or
        anywhere else in Nigeria and that he could  safely  return  to  his
        home state without facing a real risk of persecution.
     8. Permission to appeal was initially refused by another judge of  the
        First-tier Tribunal but renewed to the Upper Tribunal  and  granted
        in a decision dated 16 January 2017. The  operative  parts  of  the
        Upper Tribunal grant are in the following terms:


             4.   The decision is arguably unlawful as it is arguable  that
                  the complete report of  Dr  Wozniak,  which  was  arguably
                  found to be one to which weight should be given,  was  not
                  factored into the credibility assessment  but  dealt  with
                  separately afterwards in an unlawful fashion.


             5.   Further it is arguable  that  even  if  the  history  the
                  appellant  gave  was  not  believed  that  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal believed  that the appellant was tortured by  the
                  Niger Delta Boys and erred by failing  to  decide  whether
                  this placed the appellant at real risk of serious harm  on
                  return to Nigeria, and thus whether  he  was  entitled  to
                  refugee   status   or    humanitarian    protection,    or
                  alternatively failed to give reasons for a  decision  that
                  the appellant was not entitled to either  status  on  this
                  basis.


     9. The application is opposed by the Secretary State in  the  Rule  24
        response dated 2 February 2018.




Submissions



    10. On behalf of the appellant  it  was  submitted  that  the  evidence
        before  the  Judge  was  significant.  It  was  conceded   by   the
        appellant's representative that the Judge  looked  at  the  medical
        report and considered the same with the required degree of  anxious
        scrutiny but submitted that the report supported the account  given
        by the appellant.
    11. It was accepted on the appellant's behalf that the  source  of  the
        evidence before the expert was that given by the appellant and that
        it is this evidence that appears as the core of the report.
    12. It was accepted on the appellant's behalf that  if  one  reads  the
        decision it is possible to understand why the  Judge  came  to  the
        findings that he did.
    13. It was submitted that the doctor did not expect  the  appellant  to
        have a clear memory.
    14. On behalf of  the  respondent  Mr  Bates  submitted  the  grant  of
        permission  relates  to  an  alleged  compartmentalisation  of  the
        medical evidence which had not actually occurred.
    15. It was submitted the Judge considered the medical evidence  and  it
        is not for the medical expert to  decide  whether  the  appellant's
        account is credible.
    16. It was submitted that other evidence before  the  Judge  undermined
        the appellant's claim regarding causation.  It  was  submitted  the
        appellant had left Nigeria three years before the report.  Although
        the issue of PTSD  is  raised,  Mr  Bates  submitted  there  is  no
        diagnosis the appellant is suffering from PTSD in  the  report.  It
        was submitted the author of the report is not qualified to  provide
        such a diagnosis and, although referring to the  possibility  of  a
        report being  obtained  from  an  appropriately  qualified  medical
        practitioner, no such report was obtained.
    17. Mr Bates submitted that in relation  to  the  appellants  cognitive
        functioning; the report states the appellant is fully cognitive and
        was able to cope with the four-hour interview with  the  author  of
        the report. It was submitted the Judge was therefore properly  able
        to assess the evidence given by the  appellant  and  to  take  into
        account clear discrepancies.
    18. In reply, Mr Akhigbe submitted the appellant had given  an  account
        of the incidents to the expert and at interview.
    19. It is accepted on  the  appellant's  behalf  the  medical  evidence
        contained no diagnosis of PTSD.
    20. It is submitted the medical report was obtained to corroborate  the
        appellant's account.



Error of law


    21. The report considered by the Judge is that of a  General  Physician
        (GP). It is right to say the report  is  based  upon  incidents  of
        which the author was informed by the  appellant.  The  author  must
        therefore have accepted the credibility of the appellant's account.
    22. The role of an expert is  not  to  decide  whether  an  account  is
        credible. The Judge was entitled and  required  to  undertake  that
        assessment himself. The Judge  considered  the  evidence  with  the
        required degree of anxious scrutiny and has given adequate  reasons
        for the  findings  made.  That  was  conceded  by  the  appellant's
        representative in the  course  of  his  submissions  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal.
    23. It has not been made out the Judge's  conclusions  in  relation  to
        lack of credibility in the  appellant's  account  are  in  any  way
        perverse, irrational, or  contrary  to  the  evidence.  The  expert
        confirmed the appellant is fully cognitive and was clearly able  to
        cope with not only a long interview  before  the  expert  but  also
        preparation of his witness statements  and  the  evidence  he  gave
        before the First-tier Tribunal.
    24. There is no diagnosis of PTSD.
    25. Error of law only arises in the situation asserted by the appellant
        if it is  established  there  has  been  an  artificial  separation
        between the medical evidence and the adverse  credibility  findings
        made,  i.e.  that  the  Judge  arrived  at  such  findings  without
        considering all the  available  evidence.  In  this  case  no  such
        artificial separation has been made out.
    26. I find the findings both in relation to the lack of credibility  in
        the appellants claim and the lack of a credible real risk on return
        are within the range of those reasonably available to the Judge  on
        the evidence.
    27. The Judge did not make a finding the appellant faces  a  real  risk
        from the Niger Delta Boys and no legal error arises in relation  to
        this aspect.  The appellant fails to establish any  arguable  basis
        for the Upper Tribunal interfering in this decision.

Decision

    28. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    29. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 2 May 2018












