
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/06032/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Tuesday 3 December 2019           |On Thursday 5 December 2019          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     E D
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Fitzsimmons, Counsel instructed by B.H.T
                    Immigration Legal Services

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity order was not made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as
this is an appeal on protection grounds, it  is  appropriate  to  make  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant (as she was before the First-tier Tribunal) is granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her  or
any member of her family. This direction applies, amongst  others,  to  both
parties. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease  of  reference,
    we refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The Respondent appeals against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Sweet) promulgated on 10 September 2019  ("the  Decision").   By
    the Decision, the Judge allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision dated 12 June 2019 refusing  her  protection  and
    human rights claims.

2.    The Appellant is a national of Albania.  The core of  the  Appellant's
    case is that she was trafficked for the purposes of sexual exploitation
    within Albania and also suffered domestic violence at the hands of  her
    ex-husband.  She claims to fear re-trafficking on return to Albania and
    to fear harm from her ex-husband.  The Appellant also has two children,
    the eldest (a daughter) is now a young adult  and  the  Appellant  also
    fears that she will fall prey to the traffickers on return.

3.    As the Appellant raised a trafficking claim, she was referred  to  the
    Competent Authority ("CA") via the National Referral Mechanism.  The CA
    made a  positive  reasonable  grounds  decision  on  8  December  2015.
    However, based on the Appellant's  asylum  interviews  and  information
    obtained from third party sources, on 16 March 2018, the CA reached  an
    adverse conclusive grounds decision.  That decision was based on a view
    of the credibility of the  Appellant's  claim.   A  number  of  factual
    issues were  raised.   Those  issues  were  carried  forward  into  the
    Respondent's decision refusing the protection and  human  rights  claim
    which was the decision under appeal.

4.    In addition to her answers at interview, the Appellant has given  four
    witness statements dated 30 August 2017, 25 April 2018, 9 May 2018  and
    10 July 2019.  The latter coming as  it  does  after  the  Respondent's
    decision under appeal seeks to explain the  inconsistencies  raised  by
    the Respondent and to address the points made in that decision.

5.    The Appellant also relies on four expert reports as follows:

    (a)    Report of Dr Antonia Young dated  10  May  2018  concerning  the
         country situation in Albania;

    (b)    Report of Dr Enkeleida Tahiraj dated 23 July 2019, also  dealing
         with country conditions in Albania ("the Tahiraj Report");

    (c)    Report of Dr Natalie Barazzone dated 24 May  2018  dealing  with
         the Appellant's mental health ("First Barazzone Report");

    (d)    Report of Dr Barazzone dated 12 August  2019  dealing  with  the
         Appellant's mental health, focussing in particular on  her  ability
         to give evidence ("Second Barazzone Report").

6.    Dr Barazzone in the Second Barazzone Report did not conclude that  the
    Appellant was unfit to give  evidence  but  did  suggest  that  certain
    adjustments needed to be made to enable her to do so.   Ultimately,  Dr
    Barazzone said that the choice whether to give evidence should be  left
    to the Appellant.  She  chose  not  to  do  so.   The  Judge  therefore
    determined the appeal on the basis  of  the  documentary  evidence  and
    submissions alone.    He concluded that the Appellant would be at  risk
    on return to Albania based on the findings set out at [23] to  [32]  of
    the Decision.

7.    The Respondent challenges the Decision  on  two  grounds.   The  first
    criticises the Judge for providing inadequate reasons in support of his
    conclusions.   The  second  is  based   on   an   asserted   procedural
    unfairness/material misdirection in the way in which  the  Judge  dealt
    with the CA conclusive grounds decision.  It is  said  that  the  Judge
    undertook a judicial review of the CA decision  which  was  beyond  his
    remit.

8.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Chohan
    on 22 October 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 2.  The grounds assert that the judge erred  in  finding  that
             the appellant was a victim  of  trafficking;  that  the  judge
             failed to outline the objective evidence  relied  on;  and  by
             failing to give reasons as to why the appellant  would  be  at
             risk of trafficking on return to Albania.

         3. The NRM conclusion [sic] grounds had found  that  the  appellant
             was not a victim of trafficking.  However, on  the  facts  and
             evidence before the judge, the judge found that the  appellant
             had been a victim of trafficking.  That finding  was  open  to
             the judge  irrespective  of  the  findings  made  in  the  NRM
             conclusion grounds.  However, it does seem that the judge  may
             have  given  inadequate  reasons  for  concluding   that   the
             appellant would be at risk on return."

9.    The matter comes before us to determine whether the Decision  contains
    an error of law and, if we so conclude, to either re-make the  decision
    or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

10.    Although  Judge  Chohan's  grant  of  permission  is  based  on   the
    Respondent's ground one, we would not  have  limited  the  Respondent's
    entitlement to argue both grounds as Judge  Chohan  did  not  expressly
    limit the grant (as to which see Safi and others (permission to  appeal
    decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC) at headnote (1)).  However, Ms Jones
    pursued the appeal on the first ground only and we  consider  that  she
    was right to do so, in particular in the light of the guidance given by
    this Tribunal in  DC  (trafficking:  protection/human  rights  appeals)
    Albania [2019] UKUT 00351 (IAC).  As the Tribunal pointed  out  in  its
    guidance, the decision reached by the  NRM  is  based  on  a  different
    standard  of  proof  to  that  which  applies  in  protection  appeals.
    However, as the Tribunal also pointed out, the CA decision is  part  of
    the evidence which has to  be  considered  in  the  protection  appeal,
    giving such weight to that as is appropriate.

11.   We turn then to consider the Judge's findings and reasoning  on  which
    those findings are based.  We begin by noting that the  Judge  recorded
    at [10]  that  the  Respondent  relied  not  only  on  the  Appellant's
    interviews and evidence which she had produced in support of her  claim
    but also information emanating from  the  British  Embassy  in  Tirana.
    That information was the source of  some  of  the  adverse  credibility
    issues raised against the Appellant, in particular because her  account
    was contradicted in part  based  on  her  travels  outside  Albania  at
    various times.    The  Judge  also  recorded  that  the  Appellant  had
    provided four witness statements but did not give oral  evidence  ([12]
    of the Decision).  He noted at [13], [16] and [24] of the Decision that
    the Respondent took issue with the Appellant's credibility.  The issues
    raised are touched upon at [24] to [27] of the Decision but only by way
    of a summary of some of the points raised by the Respondent.  The Judge
    does not there resolve the conflicts on the evidence.

12.   The Judge then reaches  his  conclusions  at  [29]  and  [30]  of  the
    Decision as follows:

         "29.     With good cause Counsel for the appellant  submitted  that
             detailed  further  evidence  had  been  provided  since   that
             decision.  The appellant relies on two  psychological  reports
             from Dr Barazzone and country expert reports from  Dr  Antonia
             Young and Dr Enkeleida Tahiraj.  In  respect  of  her  medical
             condition, the appellant suffers from  mental  health  issues,
             including  anxiety,  depression,  suicidal   ideation,   post-
             traumatic  intrusions,  avoidance  of  behaviours  and  hyper-
             arousal and experiences symptoms of dissociation  and  somatic
             disturbances.  It  was  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  a
             vulnerable witness and as she could not therefore be submitted
             to cross-examination, it was decided on her  behalf  that  she
             would not give formal evidence, but rely on her  four  witness
             statements.  Her mental health had some impact on her  ability
             to given cogent and consistent evidence.  I have to apply  the
             lower standard of proof in respect of assessing this claim.

         30.      There is considerable  evidence  from  the  county  expert
             reports that the appellant will indeed be at risk  on  return.
             On return she would be required to register her  residence  so
             that it will be possible for her to be traced.  She  would  be
             returning as a victim of trafficking and in  need  of  medical
             care.  She would not have any support network,  save  for  the
             assistance from her parents in  looking  after  the  children.
             The shelters which might be available are  only  a  short-term
             remedy  and  she  will  not  be  receiving  any  psychotherapy
             treatment during this period.  There is evidence of her  being
             at risk of being re-trafficked and  as  found  in  TD  and  AD
             [2016]  there  are  limits  to  the   protection   which   the
             authorities can provide.  Likewise there would be difficulties
             in relocating safely."

13.   We have no difficulty accepting Ms Fitzsimmons'  submission  that  the
    expert reports are corroborative of the  Appellant's  account  and  can
    lend weight to it.  The country  experts  are  able  to  say  that  her
    account is consistent with background evidence.  The Tahiraj Report  in
    particular was not challenged  by  the  Respondent  (see  [14]  of  the
    Decision).   Dr Barazzone was able to say that the  Appellant's  mental
    health problems may well have been caused  by  being  trafficked.   The
    Appellant also said that she had been subjected to  domestic  violence.



14.   However, as Ms Jones pointed out, it is not the function of an  expert
    to make findings about the credibility of  an  appellant.   That  is  a
    matter for the Judge.   As we identified in the course of the  hearing,
    there is a quantum  leap  between  paragraphs  [29]  and  [30]  of  the
    Decision.  The Judge at [29] of the Decision identifies the evidence on
    which the Appellant relies in support of her claim.  However,  he  does
    not say anything about the content of her own evidence  nor  reach  any
    findings about why he prefers the Appellant's evidence over that of the
    Respondent or whether and why he accepts what the Appellant says  about
    the inconsistencies on which the Respondent relies.

15.   As discussed in the course of the hearing, there may be  two  purposes
    to an expert report.  The first is to provide some corroboration of  an
    appellant's account by assessing it to be plausible or consistent  with
    other  evidence.   The  second,  relevant  in  particular  to   medical
    evidence, is  to  explain  why  there  may  be  inconsistencies  in  an
    appellant's account.

16.   In that latter regard, we have given  careful  consideration  to  what
    the Judge says at [29] about  the  impact  of  the  Appellant's  mental
    health on her ability to given "cogent and  consistent  evidence".   We
    have also had regard to what the Judge says at  [16]  of  the  Decision
    that there had been "much evidence" which dealt  inter  alia  with  the
    Appellant's ability to answer questions.   We asked Ms  Fitzsimmons  to
    identify for us what of the evidence might serve to explain in  general
    terms the inconsistencies in  the  Appellant's  account  on  which  the
    Respondent relied.

17.   Insofar as Ms Fitzsimmons relied on the Second  Barazzone  Report,  we
    do not consider that this report  assists.   That  report  was  clearly
    written to provide advice as to the Appellant's ability or  fitness  to
    give oral evidence at the hearing.   In that regard, (and  contrary  to
    what the Judge says at [29] of the Decision), Dr Barazzone does not  go
    so far as to say that the Appellant is unable to give evidence although
    she does say that the Appellant's ability is "likely to be  compromised
    as a result of her mental health conditions".  However, that report  is
    targeted at her ability to give evidence at the appeal hearing and  not
    the issue as to whether the Appellant's mental health  condition  might
    explain inconsistencies in her  previous  accounts.   The  closest  one
    comes in that regard is that the  Appellant's  responses  to  questions
    during assessments "tended to omit details".   However,  those  details
    are said to be of the violence and exploitation  which  she  claims  to
    have endured and not the more mundane features of her account  such  as
    where she was, when and with whom.  We anticipate that  it  is  to  the
    Second Barazzone Report that the Judge refers at [16] and [29]  of  the
    Decision but, for the reasons we give, we do  not  consider  that  this
    report assists with the issue which causes us concern.

18.   The First Barazzone Report is also of no or negligible  assistance  as
    an  explanation  for  inconsistencies.   Our  attention  was  drawn  in
    particular to the conclusions at section [5] of that report.   However,
    if anything, that undermines any point which could be made about mental
    health causation of inconsistencies  as  Dr  Barazzone  says  that  the
    Appellant provided an "accurate  account",  that  "[s]he  answered  all
    questions without hesitation" and that "[h]er responses  and  reactions
    to differently worded questions were consistent throughout".  As  such,
    this  does  not  provide  support   for   any   suggestion   that   the
    inconsistencies might be explained by the  Appellant's  mental  health.
    In fairness to Ms Fitzsimmons, we did not understand her to argue  that
    the medical reports did provide such support.   Her  point  was  rather
    that the Appellant's account was corroborated by the  experts  who  had
    provided reports on her behalf which we have accepted is the  position.
    However, that does not obviate the need to consider whether the account
    on which those reports are based which comes from the Appellant herself
    is a credible one, particularly where,  as  here,  the  Respondent  has
    taken  issue  with  the  Appellant's  credibility  based  not  only  on
    inconsistencies or implausibility of her own evidence but based on  the
    inconsistency of her account with other information.

19.   We mention for the sake of completeness in  relation  to  evidence  of
    the Appellant's movements  in  and  out  of  Albania,  Ms  Fitzsimmons'
    submission that the information about this needs  to  be  treated  with
    caution based on what is said by  Dr  Tahiraj  about  "Border  Crossing
    Data" (section 2.4 of his report).  However, in our  view  that  misses
    the point.  That section is concerned with the absence of reliable data
    about movements of persons.   It does not explain,  for  example,  such
    factual issues as how the Appellant could be  travelling  to  Italy  in
    January 2015 when she was still being held  by  her  traffickers.   She
    says in her statement that she did not travel  and  that  someone  else
    must have used her passport which she says she had left in Tirana.  The
    Judge might of course accept that explanation  when  it  is  considered
    with the totality of the Appellant's account. The issue is not  however
    considered let alone determined.

20.   The Respondent, at [25] to [36] of the decision under appeal raises  a
    series of inconsistencies in the Appellant's account, relating  to  the
    chronology and other issues.  We accept that a Judge does not  have  to
    deal with every detail of the evidence.   However,  where  there  is  a
    conflict of evidence, the Judge needed to consider  that  conflict  and
    resolve it. The inconsistencies may be explained by  the  Appellant  in
    her four  witness  statements.  A  Judge  could  therefore  accept  the
    Appellant's explanations and find in her favour, particularly where, as
    here, that account is concluded to be plausible and consistent with the
    background evidence concerning  trafficking  within  Albania.  However,
    Judge Sweet has failed to carry out that exercise.  We  therefore  find
    the Respondent's ground one to be made out.  There is an inadequacy  of
    reasoning to support the Judge's finding, as a fact, that the Appellant
    has been trafficked and is  for  that  reason  at  risk  on  return  to
    Albania.

CONCLUSION

21.   For those reasons, we are  satisfied  that  the  grounds  disclose  an
    error of law as set out above. We therefore set aside the Decision.

NEXT STEPS

22.   Our decision has  identified  errors  due  to  the  lack  of  reasoned
    credibility findings.  Accordingly, it will be  necessary  for  another
    Judge to make credibility findings which  will  be  initial  ones.   In
    fairness to the Appellant, therefore, we  consider  it  appropriate  to
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for re-determination.



DECISION

We are satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a  material  error
on a  point  of  law.  The  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sweet
promulgated on 10 September 2019 is set aside.  The appeal  is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing  before  a  Judge  other  than  Judge
Sweet.

Signed      [pic]      Dated: 3 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
