
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
pa/06357/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 19 April 2018                          |  On 3 May 2018                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                   MR M I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N. Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Pambrook
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 4 June 1988.  He  first
    entered the  UK  on  31  July  2010  with  a  student  visa  which  was
    subsequently extended to 5 April 2013.  He then  became  an  overstayer
    and applied for an EEA residence card as an extended family  member  on
    10 February 2015, however this application was withdrawn  on  23  March
    2015.  On 1 April 2015 he applied for leave on the basis of his private
    life stating he was intending to marry.  This application  was  refused
    on 14 July 2015 with a right  of  appeal.   On  22  December  2016  the
    Appellant made an asylum claim on the basis of his sexual  orientation.
    In  a  decision  dated  20  June  2017  the  Respondent   refused   the
    application.  She did not accept that the Appellant is  a  gay  man  or
    that he would be at risk of harm in Pakistan.

 2. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Trevaskis  for
    hearing on 1 August 2017.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on  14
    August 2017 the judge dismissed the appeal  essentially  on  the  basis
    that he did not accept that the Appellant was a gay man.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis that  the
    judge misdirected himself in law in that  he  failed  to  reach  proper
    findings on the totality of the evidence or on  material  matters  with
    reference to the Appellant's claimed sexual orientation.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted upon renewal to the Upper Tribunal  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Allen in a decision dated 15 January 2018  on  the
    basis that it is arguable that the findings of the judge concerning the
    credibility of the Appellant are flawed for the reasons set out in  the
    further grounds.

 5. A brief Rule  24  response  was  filed  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
    asserting the judge's decision was sustainable.

Hearing

 6. At the hearing before me, I heard submissions by Mr Ahmed of Counsel on
    behalf of the Appellant.   He  submitted  the  only  issue  essentially
    before the First-tier Tribunal was credibility, it having been accepted
    at [28] that there was no effective state protection  in  Pakistan  for
    gay men.  He submitted it was imperative for the judge to give the case
    anxious scrutiny.  The judge's reasoning is set out at [39] to [47]  of
    the decision and is clearly flawed.  At [39] the judge held as follows:

         "The credibility of his claim depends upon his own account.   There
         is no support for his claims regarding the  difficulties  which  he
         faced in Pakistan.  Regarding his activities in the United Kingdom,
         I have heard evidence from two witnesses who claimed to have  known
         the Appellant as a gay man in the United Kingdom  for  at  least  a
         year, and one of them claims to be in a  sexual  relationship  with
         the Appellant.  It has not been  suggested  that  either  of  these
         witnesses is lying or mistaken about the Appellant, but it  may  be
         that they are doing their best  to  assist  the  Appellant  in  his
         claim.  An Appellant who  wished  to  advance  a  claim  of  sexual
         orientation which was not true may well seek the friendship of  gay
         or transgender people in order to bolster his claim, and  may  even
         engage in sexual intimacy, but that does not amount to evidence  of
         a genuinely gay lifestyle".

 7. Mr Ahmed submitted that not only were  there  two  witnesses  who  gave
    evidence to the First-tier Tribunal, there was also a supporting letter
    from NAZ, a support organisation, and  photographic  evidence.   It  is
    clear that the evidence of the two live witnesses was not challenged by
    the Respondent and corroborated the Appellant's  claim.   He  submitted
    that the judge's findings at [39] were thus unsustainable.

 8. At [40] the judge relies on the issue of the delay in making the claim,
    in that the Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2010 but did not
    seek asylum until 2016.  He noted the Appellant's explanation  that  he
    did not need to do so as he was  being  supported  financially  by  his
    family and  had  not  at  that  stage  disclosed  to  them  his  sexual
    orientation.  In this respect Mr Ahmed sought to rely on  the  judgment
    of the CJEU in A, B and C v Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en Justitie
    Cases C-148/13 to  C-150/13  where  the  court  held  Article  4(3)  of
    Directive  2004/83  and  Article  13(3A)  of  Directive  5/85  must  be
    interpreted as  precluding  in  the  context  of  that  assessment  the
    competent national authorities from  finding  that  the  applicant  for
    asylum lacked credibility merely because the applicant did not rely  on
    his declared sexual orientation on the first occasion he was  given  to
    set out the ground for persecution.  He further relied on the  judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in NR (Jamaica) [2009] EWCA Civ 56  that  it  is
    the date of the hearing that is material  for  the  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's sexual orientation.

 9. At [42] the judge held as follows:

         "Identification of sexual orientation  is  not  to  be  decided  on
         evidence  of  sexual  activity,  but  as  a  result  of  a  rounded
         assessment  of  all  the  evidence  presented  by  and  about   the
         Appellant.  I have assessed both the quality of the  evidence,  and
         its quantity, and I have attached appropriate  weight  to  it.   In
         particular I would expect an  Appellant  in  the  circumstances  to
         express more about their feelings as a gay man than  the  Appellant
         has done.  It was suggested  by  his  representative  that  he  has
         difficulty in expressing his feelings, but I have not seen evidence
         of that difficulty, rather an inability to express feelings about a
         sexual orientation which is not genuine".

    This finding was impugned by Mr Ahmed on the basis that the  judge  was
    applying far too high a standard of proof in light of the  evidence  of
    the Appellant's friendships, relationships and photographic evidence of
    attending  gay  clubs.   He  submitted  there  was  clearly  sufficient
    evidence to show that the Appellant is a gay man.

10. The judge further held at [43]:

         "I have considered the letter from NAZ; in my judgment it adds very
         little to the Appellant's claim; if he seeks  to  advance  a  claim
         based upon his gay orientation, whether it  is  true  or  false,  I
         would expect him to engage with support groups such  as  this,  and
         therefore such engagement does not enhance the credibility  of  his
         claims,  absent  further  evidence  from   the   organisation,   or
         attendance by a representative to give evidence".

    This finding was impugned on the basis that the letter from NAZ,  which
    is at page 40 of the Appellant's bundle,  makes  clear  that  he  is  a
    service user.  That letter, which is dated 12 July  2017,  provides  as
    follows:

         "I am writing to confirm that Mr MI is a service user of  NAZ.   He
         first accessed our services in  September  2015  and  has  been  in
         regular contact through phone calls, one to  one  support  sessions
         and support group sessions till present.  He identifies  as  a  gay
         man of Pakistani heritage and I believe this to be true.

         He regularly accesses monthly NAZ outreach stalls  at  South  Asian
         LGBT nightclubs  such  as  Club  Kali  and  Disco  Rani.   He  also
         regularly attends Dost, our monthly support group for  South  Asian
         gay and bisexual men".

    Mr Ahmed submitted it was difficult to reconcile the contents  of  that
    letter with the judge's finding at [43] that it adds very little to the
    Appellant's claim.

11. At [47] the judge further found that he was not satisfied the Appellant
    was suspected of being gay in Pakistan because he did  not  accept  his
    account of events there prior to coming  to  the  United  Kingdom.   Mr
    Ahmed submitted that applying the required  standard  of  proof  it  is
    clear that the Appellant is gay and thus would be persecuted for  being
    gay if he were returned to Pakistan.

12. In his submissions Mr Melvin sought to rely on the  Rule  24  response.
    He submitted the determination should be considered in a holistic  way.
    The judge has assessed all the evidence and given  his  conclusions  at
    [37] through to [49] and has made every attempt to  give  reasons.   He
    submitted that homosexual activity does not make a person gay and  that
    the Appellant had previously in 2015 sought leave on  the  basis  of  a
    heterosexual relationship.  He submitted that the findings  in  respect
    of the letter from NAZ at [43]  were  open  to  him,  nobody  from  NAZ
    attended the hearing and little weight  can  be  attached  to  it.   He
    submitted it was a matter for the Appellant to prove to the judge  that
    he is a gay  man.   The  judge  had  assessed  the  statements  of  the
    witnesses and the evidence and made sustainable findings.  He submitted
    it was open to the judge to reject the Appellant's reasons provided for
    seeking to marry a woman and that Mr Ahmed was  essentially  attempting
    to re-argue the case.  He submitted if returned to Pakistan  there  was
    no reason to suspect the Appellant of being gay and  that  the  judge's
    decision taken as a whole was legally sustainable.

13. In his reply, Mr Ahmed submitted that there  were  two  live  witnesses
    attesting to the Appellant's sexual orientation and their evidence  had
    not been rejected.  In respect of the letter  from  NAZ  there  was  no
    adverse finding in relation to that either.  He submitted the judge had
    failed to give anxious scrutiny to the case as  a  whole  and  contains
    material errors of law.

14. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my findings.

Findings

15. I find material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Trevaskis.  I consider that the judge fell into error in a number
    of respects,  perhaps  most  crucially  in  his  understanding  of  and
    application of the House of Lords judgment in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.
     The Appellant's evidence of his sexual orientation  was  supported  by
    two witnesses who gave evidence and were cross-examined.  That evidence
    was not challenged by the Respondent, as the judge records at  [39]  of
    the decision.  One of  those  witnesses  claimed  to  be  in  a  sexual
    relationship with the Appellant, albeit not as  a  monogamous  partner.
    The test the judge appears to apply at [39] is  whether  the  Appellant
    has shown evidence of a genuinely gay lifestyle however that is not the
    correct test, which is, applying the lower standard of  proof,  whether
    the Appellant's sexual orientation is gay.  In light of the  fact  that
    one of the witnesses asserted that he has had, and continues to have  a
    same-sex relationship with the Appellant, I  consider  the  judge  fell
    into error, given that evidence was unchallenged, in  failing  to  find
    that the Appellant is a gay man on that evidence alone.

16. I further find the judge fell into error at [42] in  his  finding  that
    identification of sexual orientation is not to be decided  on  evidence
    of sexual activity, but as a result of a rounded assessment of all  the
    evidence.  Whilst of course a finding on sexual orientation  should  be
    based on the evidence in the round,  the  judge  went  on  to  make  an
    adverse finding in part on the basis that the Appellant has  failed  to
    express his feelings as a gay man.  I find  that  is  not  a  necessary
    requirement in order for the Appellant to show that he is a gay man and
    is essentially an irrelevant consideration, particularly  in  light  of
    the other evidence that was before the judge.

17. In respect of [43] and the letter from NAZ, whilst of course  it  is  a
    matter for a judge as to what weight should  be  attached  to  material
    pieces of evidence, again the contents and veracity of this letter were
    not challenged by the Respondent and was accepted  by  the  judge.   On
    that basis I accept the submission by  Mr  Ahmed  that  the  judge  has
    failed to factor properly the contents of the letter from NAZ into  his
    holistic assessment of whether or not the Appellant is gay.   The  fact
    that the judge expected the Appellant in seeking  to  advance  a  claim
    based on his sexual orientation to engage with support groups does  not
    mean that no weight should be placed on  such  a  letter,  particularly
    given that the Appellant had been involved  with  NAZ  for  almost  two
    years at  the  date  of  writing;  he  had  regular  contact  with  the
    organisation; he has accessed a number of services,  including  one  to
    one support sessions, group sessions,  telephone  calls,  NAZ  outreach
    stalls at LGBT discos, and has regularly attended at a monthly  support
    group for South Asian gay and bisexual men.

18. For the reasons set out above, I find that the  judge's  assessment  of
    the Appellant's sexual orientation is flawed and unsustainable.

19. I have taken into account the fact that there were adverse  credibility
    findings identified by the Respondent in the refusal decision and  also
    that the Appellant has previously made an application for  leave  based
    on an intention to marry a woman.  I also take account of the fact that
    there was a delay in  applying  for  asylum  on  the  basis  of  sexual
    orientation, but I accept Mr Ahmed's submission in that  respect  based
    on the CJEU judgment in A, B and C.

20. Whilst it may be the case that the judge was entitled to reach  adverse
    findings in respect of the Appellant at [44], those are unspecified and
    unparticularised as to why the judge  was  upholding  the  Respondent's
    adverse credibility findings, and I do not find outweigh the errors  of
    approach in respect to the Appellant's sexual orientation.

21. For the reason set out above, I find material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Trevaskis.   I  set  aside  that
    decision and remit the appeal for a hearing de novo before a  different
    judge of the First-tier Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 29 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
