
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06306/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 December 2018                           |On 7 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                     N S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Capel of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Zambia.  She was born  on  13  August
         1970.

      2. She appealed against the respondent's decision dated 27 March  2018
         to refuse her asylum, humanitarian protection and on  human  rights
         grounds.

      3. Judge  Shore  (the  judge)  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 23 July 2018.  He did not find the appellant to be a
         credible witness, that she would not be at risk on return and  that
         the respondent's decision was proportionate.

      4. The grounds appeared to have been prepared by  the  appellant.  The
         grounds repeated the appellant's claim, that she is a  lesbian  and
         fears for her life in Zambia.

      5. Designated Judge  McCarthy  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  12
         November 2018.  Inter alia, he said the following:

         "4.  The original grounds of application have been amended  by  the
             appellant's  solicitors,  whom  she  instructed  after   being
             detained in September 2018.  The  grounds  allege  that  Judge
             Shore erred in her credibility assessment by  misunderstanding
             the law in Zambia, and  by  drawing  adverse  inferences  from
             issues without giving adequate reasons.

         5.   I find it is arguable that Judge  Shore  erred  at  [84.1]  by
             finding at [84.1] that homosexuality  was  not  proscribed  in
             Zambia until 2010 when the country information  shows  it  has
             been part of the criminal code  since  1964.   This  raises  a
             serious  concern  as  to  whether  Judge  Shore   placed   the
             appellant's accounts in their proper context.  Since  many  of
             this findings that the appellant is not credible focus on  not
             believing her account of not disclosing her sexual orientation
             to her family, it is arguable that this  error  may  undermine
             the entirety of the credibility assessment".

      6. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

      7. Ms Capel relied upon the grounds.  The judge had misunderstood  the
         evidence.   A  mistake  of  fact  on  the  part  of  the  appellant
         undermined her credibility in the eyes of the  judge.   Mr  Lindsay
         accepted the judge had erred  but  submitted  such  error  was  not
         material.

Conclusion on Error of Law

      8. The judge  commenced  his  credibility  findings  at  [84]  of  his
         decision.   The  judge  made  comprehensive   adverse   credibility
         findings based upon the appellant's claim that she was sure of  her
         sexuality at the age of 18 in 1988 but that given it was another 22
         years before homosexuality was made illegal in  Zambia,  the  judge
         found it unlikely that the  appellant  did  nothing  whatsoever  to
         express her sexuality to anyone in the 22 year period between  1998
         and 2010.  The judge said at [27] that homosexuality became illegal
         in Zambia in 2010.  The true situation is rather different  as  the
         country information indicates that homosexuality was  part  of  the
         Criminal  Code  since  1964.   That  is  significant  because   the
         foundation of the judge's adverse credibility findings was that  at
         a time when he wrongly understood homosexuality not to  be  illegal
         in Zambia, notwithstanding social and  religious  pressure  on  the
         appellant not to express her sexuality, she would  inevitably  have
         done so and the fact that she did not  do  so  lacked  credibility.
         See [84.1].

      9. There  was  information  in  the  appellant's  bundle,  inter  alia
         comprising a Human Rights Watch of July 2016.  At p31 of the bundle
         it said inter alia:

             "In 2005, Zambia amended its Penal Code, replacing  a  British
             colonial era law that had penalised same-sex conduct  with  up
             to fourteen years in prison with a new law that  provides  for
             fifteen years to life in prison for 'carnal knowledge  of  any
             person against the order of nature'".

     10. Such fundamental error has infected the rest of the judge's adverse
         credibility findings, thereby making them unsafe.

Notice of Decision

     11. The judge's decision contains material errors of law, is set  aside
         and will be re-made in the First-tier following a de novo  hearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 30 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
