
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06221/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th January 2018                         |On 23rd February 2018         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     FK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S Muquit, Counsel instructed by Connaughts
For the Respondent:    Mrs. N Wilcocks Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  As this  a
    protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction  is  made.  Unless
    and until a Tribunal or  Court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
    granted anonymity. No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies amongst others to all parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 2. The appellant is a Bangladeshi national who appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT") against a decision of the respondent dated  15th  July
    2017 refusing his claim for asylum.  His appeal was dismissed  for  the
    reasons set out in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  Judge
    Asjad promulgated on 4th September 2017.


 The decision of the FtT Judge


 3. A summary of the appellant's asylum claim is set out at paragraphs  [3]
    to [10] of the decision of the FtT Judge.  I do not repeat the  account
    of events relied upon by the appellant in  this  decision.   The  Judge
    heard evidence in support of the appeal from [SH] and [AL], as noted at
    paragraph [2] of the decision.


 4. The findings and conclusions of the Judge are to be found at paragraphs
    [16] to [27] of the decision.  The Judge accepts,  at  [17]  and  [20],
    that the appellant has discharged the burden that  rests  upon  him  to
    establish that he is gay. The Judge notes at paragraph  [21]  that  the
    issue therefore is whether the appellant would be at risk  upon  return
    to Bangladesh.


 5. The Judge refers, at [22], briefly to the objective  evidence,  and  in
    particular, to the test set out by Lord Hope in  his  judgement  in  HJ
    (Iran) -v- SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.  Clearly, such appeals involve what  is
    essentially an individual and fact-specific inquiry. Having found  that
    the appellant is gay, at paragraphs [24] to [27] of his  decision,  the
    Judge addresses the second stage of the step by step approach suggested
    by Lord Hope.


 6. At paragraph [24], the Judge records that it is not in issue that  same
    sex relationships are illegal  in  Bangladesh.   The  Judge  refers  to
    extracts from the respondent's  Country  Policy  and  Information  note
    ("COI policy note") that suggest  that  in  general,  LGBT  persons  in
    Bangladesh are not at real risk of prosecution under the law, and  that
    in general, the societal treatment of LGBT persons in Bangladesh,  even
    when taken cumulatively, does not reach the level of being  persecutory
    or otherwise inhuman or  degrading  treatment.   The  COI  policy  note
    emphasises that decision makers should consider each case on its facts,
    and that the onus will be on the person to demonstrate that they  would
    be at risk from the authorities or from non-state actors.


 7. At paragraph [25] of his decision, the Judge states:


         "It is the Appellant's case that he is at risk from his father.  He
         relies upon an affidavit to say that his father  has  disowned  him
         and brought shame to the family.  The  affidavit  contains    broad
         threats from 'family members and community'. The Appellant has  not
         reported the matter to the police as he claimed that there would be
         little point."


    The Judge then refers to an extract  from  the  COI  policy  note  that
    confirms that there  are  non-governmental  organisations   (NGOs)   in
    Bangladesh who advocate for LGBT rights  and  the  LGBT  community  and
    which may be able to assist the  person  to  avail  themselves  of  the
    protection of the state.


 8. At paragraph [26] the Judge concludes as follows:


         "I do not find that the Appellant has shown that in his  particular
         circumstances state protection is not available. The Appellant  has
         the option of moving to another part of Bangladesh where  he  would
         be able to re-integrate. He has friends in the UK who could  assist
         him until such time that he has settled  and  as  noted  there  are
         NGO's in Bangladesh who could also assist him..."


    The Judge goes on in that paragraph to refer to the  COI  policy  note,
    which suggests that it would not, in general, be unreasonable or unduly
    harsh for a gay man who is able to demonstrate a real risk in his  home
    area because of his particular circumstances,  to  relocate  internally
    within Bangladesh.  The COI policy note also suggests  that  Bangladesh
    is one of the world's most densely populated  countries,   If  an  LGBT
    person's family wishes to pursue and harm them in the place of internal
    relocation, their ability to do so will depend  on  the  reach  of  the
    family network, how persistent they are, and how influentiual.


 9. At paragraph [27] the Judge concludes as follows:


         "Internal relocation is a viable option for this Applicant.  He has
         studied in the UK and has gained valuable qualifications that would
         assist him in finding a job in Bangladesh.   He  is  aware  of  the
         culture and language and could adapt to living in a different  area
         as he has adapted to living in the UK - a country with a  different
         culture and language."


The appeal before me


10. The appellant contends that the decision of the FtT Judge  is  infected
    by a material error of law.  It is said that in the appellant's  bundle
    that was  before  the  FtT  Judge,  contained  a  number  of  documents
    including other background material, including an article from the  New
    York Times and from the BBC that provided evidence of a greater risk to
    homosexuals in Bangladesh.  It is said that the  Judge  considered  the
    COI policy note as if it were the only and  definitive  answer  to  the
    question of risk and internal relocation, and erred in law  in  failing
    to consider the other background material relied upon by the  appellant
    at all.  In his  assessment  of  whether  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
    protection for the appellant, it is said,  the  Judge  had  before  him
    evidence  of  recent  arrests  of  27  people  for   homosexuality   in
    Bangladesh, and the  Judge  needed  to  be  far  more  cautious  before
    accepting an assertion in  the  Home  Office  objective  evidence  that
    sufficiency of protection  may  be  available  via  LGBT  groups.   The
    appellant claims that the Judge's assessment of the  risk  upon  return
    was therefore inadequate.


11. Permission to appeal was granted on 10th  November  2017  2017  by  FtT
    Judge Birrell.  The matter comes before me  to  determine  whether  the
    decision of the FtT contains a material error of law,  and  if  so,  to
    remake the decision.


12. At the hearing before me, Mr Muquit submits that the  Judge  concluded,
    at  paragraph  [26]  of  his  decision,  that  the  appellant  has  not
    established that in  his  particular  circumstances,  state  protection
    would not be available to him.  He submits that the Judge reached  that
    conclusion on the basis of the extracts referred to from the COI policy
    note, but the Judge failed to  have  regard  to  all  of  the  evidence
    including an affidavit from the appellant's father that was to be found
    at page 85 of the appellant's bundle. Mr Muquit also referred me to the
    background material that is to be found at pages  130  to  148  of  the
    appellant's bundle.


13. I reject the claim made by Mr Muquit that the  Judge  did  not  have  a
    regard to the affidavit made by the appellant's father. In reaching his
    decision the judge plainly had regard to that evidence. It is  referred
    to at paragraphs [13] and [25] of the decision. The Judge  records,  at
    [13], that in the refusal letter, the respondent had noted:


         "The Appellant claimed that he told that his parents  that  he  was
         gay in April 2016, when they told him to return  to  Bangladesh  to
         get married. It was noted that it was his  father  who  financially
         supported his application to extend his stay in  the  UK  in  2016.
         This was at odds with the Appellant's claim that his father  wanted
         him to return to Bangladesh to get married at  the  same  time  the
         application was being made. It was noted that the Appellant made no
         mention that his father  threatened  to  kill  him  in  his  asylum
         interview. In his screening interview, the  Appellant  stated  that
         his friend told his parents that he  was  gay,  and  later  in  his
         asylum interview he contradicted himself by stating that he himself
         told his parents the news. The affidavit threatening  to  kill  the
         Appellant is written in English  and  the  document  is  headed  in
         Bengali. Little weight is attached to this document because of  the
         inconsistencies regarding the problems with his family..."


14. At paragraph [19] of the decision, the Judge states:


         "I  accept  that  there  was  some  inconsistency  about  how   the
         Appellant's family were told about his sexuality  and  whether  the
         Appellant told them first or his friend did. That inconsistency was
         noted in the reasons for refusal letter and indeed continued during
         the course  of  the  hearing.  As  it  stands  the  matter  remains
         unresolved...".


15. The affidavit in itself, is a curious document. The  document,  written
    in English  and  signed  by  the  appellant's  father  attests  to  the
    relationship   between   the   appellant   and   his   family   to   be
    "finished....because of his sexuality". The affidavit states that  "due
    to the above factors  my  family  members  and  the  community  of  the
    area.... have decided to kill  him  if  he  comes  back  to  Bangladesh
    because this is a wrong way from the preaching of Islam...".  It is not
    clear why, if as the appellant claims at paragraph [22] of his  witness
    statement dated 21st July 2017, his father had told him that he  is  no
    longer his son, and he is ashamed to be his father, and that if he came
    back to Bangladesh he would kill  him,  the  appellant's  father  would
    provide  an  affidavit  in  support  of  a  claim   for   international
    protection. In any event, there is nothing in that affidavit that  even
    begins to suggest that if the appellant were  to  relocate  internally,
    the family has the reach and influence to pursue the appellant  in  one
    of the worlds most densely populated countries.


16. In reaching his conclusions the Judge  refers  to  the  Affidavit  when
    considering whether the appellant is at risk upon return and can  avail
    himself of protection from  the  authorities.   The  Judge  states,  at
    paragraph [25]: and states:


         "It is the Appellant's case that he is at risk from his father.  He
         relies upon an affidavit to say that his father  has  disowned  him
         and brought shame  to  the  family.    The    affidavit    contains
         broad   threats   from   'family   members    and  community'.  The
         Appellant has not reported the matter to the police as  he  claimed
         that there would be little point...."


    The Judge plainly had in mind the affidavit from the appellant's father
    when considering whether the appellant is at risk upon return.


17. I accept that the Judge does not  expressly  refer  to  the  background
    material that is to be found in the appellant's bundle. In my judgement
    the failure to do so, does not betray an error of law in the  decision,
    and in any event, is immaterial.


18. The article published in the opinion pages of the New York Times  dated
    30 June 2017,  refers  to  the  murder  of  two  prominent  members  of
    Bangladesh's LGBT community, Xulhaz Mannan and Mahbub  Rabbi  Tonoy  on
    25th April 2016.  The article claims that Mr Mannan  was  murdered  "..
    because  he  had  fostered  a  powerful  vision  of  visibility  around
    Bangladesh's   marginalized   L.G.B.T.   communities   and    published
    Bangladesh's only L.G.B.T. magazine, Roopbaan.".  The article  confirms
    that one arrest has been made but no trial has begun. The article  goes
    on to state that with "an election approaching at the end of next year,
    the persecution of Bangladesh's L.G.B.T. community  is  likely  to  get
    worse. In late May 2017,  28  L.G.B.T.  men  were  arrested  when  they
    gathered for a party. A paramilitary force publicly identified them  as
    homosexual. Meanwhile, the ruling Awami League  has  started  to  align
    itself with homophobic, fundamentalist Hefazat-e-Islam....".   The  BBC
    news article relied upon by the appellant also concerns the death of Mr
    Xulhaz Mannan.  That article notes that  "..Since  February  last  year
    suspected militants have killed several secular or atheist writers  and
    members of religious  minority  groups..."  and  "..The  two  men  were
    murdered two days after a university teacher was  hacked  to  death  by
    suspected Islamist militants.  So-called  Islamic  State  (IS)  claimed
    responsibility - but the Bangladeshi government insists there is no  IS
    presence in the country.".   The BBC report  also  states  that  "..BBC
    Bengali Service editor Sabir Mustafa said staff at Roopbaan, a magazine
    and activist group for Gay, Bisexual and Transgender  (LGBT)  community
    that had not been condemned by the government and received some support
    from foreign embassies, had been careful to  protect  their  identities
    but had not believed their lives were at risk.".  The  Guardian  report
    that appears at page 140 of the appellant's bundle, again focusses upon
    the killing of Xulhaz Mannan.


19. The appellant also relied upon an Article from the Washington Post from
    19th May 2017 and the Independent, that appears at pages 143 to 148  of
    the appellant's bundle  concerning the arrest of  27  men.   There  are
    conflicting claims as  to  whether  the  men  were  arrested  for  drug
    offences or for 'homosexuality'.


20.  The deaths of Xulhaz Mannan and Mahbub Tonoy on 2th April 2016 are  in
    fact referred to in the COI report, at 6.1.6 to 6.1.8.  At  6.1.8,  the
    COI policy note states:


         "..Reuters reported on 18 May 2016 that 'Home Minister  Asaduzzaman
         Khan said no one involved in the killings [of  Xulhaz  and  Mahbub]
         would bespared...' But the Minister also urged  people  to  respect
         religious sensitivities, telling reporters "I request  everyone  to
         express views moderately. We have learned that Xulhaz was an editor
         of an LGBT magazine and used to work to protect the rights  of  gay
         people. It is not in line with our society."


21. The appellant here  does  not  have  any  particular  profile.   In  my
    judgement, the Judge of the FtT properly addressed the second stage  of
    the examination as to the situation upon return that was referred to by
    Lord Hope in HJ (Iran).  The Judge considered what  the  appellant  was
    likely to face upon return to Bangladesh.  The Judge  was  entitled  to
    consider the matters set out in the COI  policy  note  to  provide  the
    background.  Although the Judge did not refer to the articles  provided
    by the appellant in the  appellant's  bundle,  the  killings  that  are
    referred to in those articles are in fact referred to in the COI policy
    note.  The Judge properly noted, at [24], that , same sex relations are
    illegal in Bangladesh, but  went  on  to  consider,  in  light  of  the
    background  material,  whether  the  appellant  was  at  real  risk  of
    prosecution under the law. The question  for  the  Judge  was  how  the
    applicant, looked at individually, will conduct  himself  if  returned,
    and how others will react to what he does.  There  is  nothing  in  the
    applicant's individual case that begins to show that  he  would  be  at
    risk upon return.  In my judgement it was open to  the  Judge  to  find
    that the appellant has not established that  state  protection  is  not
    available to him.  Similarly, it was open to the  Judge  to  find  that
    internal relocation is a viable  option  for  this  appellant  for  the
    reasons given by the Judge.


22. Having carefully considered  the  decision  of  the  FtT  Judge,  I  am
    entirely satisfied that it  was  open  to  the  Judge  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal for the  reasons  set  out  in  the  decision.   The
    decision does not disclose any error of law and I dismiss the appeal.


Notice of Decision


18. The appeal is dismissed.


19. An anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date          12th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date          12th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

