
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/06693/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Friday 23 November 2018           |On Monday 3 December 2018            |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     H C
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Chowdhury, Counsel instructed by Stuart & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was not made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   However,
as the Appellant claims that he would be at risk in his home country  it  is
appropriate to make that direction.  Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                  DECISION

BACKGROUND

      1. By a decision promulgated on 11 September 2018, I found an error of
         law in  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  Bartlett
         promulgated on 18  June  2018  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
         against the Respondent's decision dated 3 July  2017  refusing  his
         protection and human rights claims.   I  therefore  set  aside  the
         First-tier Tribunal's decision and gave directions  to  permit  the
         filing of further evidence prior to re-making the decision in  this
         Tribunal.  My error of law decision is annexed hereto for  ease  of
         reference.

      2. Notwithstanding the setting  aside  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision, I preserved the factual findings made at [26] to [32]  of
         the decision to which there had been no challenge.  Those  read  as
         follows:

             "[26]     I did not find  the  appellant  to  be  an  entirely
             truthful witness.  The circumstances about the  initial  years
             of his relationship with Mr [J] and particularly on what basis
             Mr [J] wrote the letter dated May 2013 were unclear.  Further,
             I found his evidence about contact with and relationships with
             his family in Gambia to be particularly  unconvincing.   I  do
             not accept that he has had  no  contact  with  his  family  in
             Gambia since 2008.  The evidence he gave to the 2012  Tribunal
             was  that  his  mother  was  supportive  of  him  despite  her
             knowledge of his sexuality.  His aunt paid  for  and  arranged
             for his  travel  to  the  United  Kingdom  from  Gambia.   His
             stepbrother provided an affidavit in support of his appeal  in
             2012.  These are not the actions of a  homophobic  family  who
             would not help the appellant.

             [27]      I find that  the  appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and
             subsisting relationship with Mr [J].  The appellant's evidence
             about  their  lives  together  was   knowledgeable   and   his
             description of their relationship and his feelings had all the
             appearance of being  genuine  and  heartfelt.   I  accept  the
             appellant's explanation that he had no official  documentation
             because he has no identification documents and therefore he is
             excluded from opening a  bank  account,  holding  the  driving
             licence, being on a tenancy agreement and the like.   Further,
             Mr  [J]'s  evidence  about  their  lives  together  was   also
             consistent. Mrs [AC]  provided  further  supporting  evidence.
             She gave a coherent account of how she knew the appellant  and
             his partner.  The evidence of all 3 of them  about  when  they
             had met on  various  occasions  was  consistent.   She  talked
             knowledgeably about the Gambian community and openly about her
             thoughts and beliefs about homosexuality.   Mr  [FC]  provided
             further supporting evidence.  For of these  reasons  [sic],  I
             find that  the  appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with Mr  [J].   The  exact  date  on  which  this
             relationship became a proper or serious relationship was  hard
             for  the  appellant  and  Mr  [J]  to  identify.    In   these
             circumstances it is very hard for me  to  identify  when  that
             relationship started.  However, I am  satisfied  that  at  the
             latest they were in a serious and committed relationship  from
             early 2015.  I find that they have been living together  since
             2014.

             [28]      It is not disputed that Mr [J] is a Gambia  national
             who is in the United Kingdom  with  refugee  leave  which  was
             granted in July 2014 and is due to expire  in  July  2019.   I
             have not been provided with the full details of the  basis  on
             which he was granted leave.   However,  I  have  been  led  to
             believe that is because  he  was  a  homosexual  and  that  he
             suffered persecution in Gambia.  Mr [J] made reference to very
             difficult circumstances with his family in Gambia.

             [29]       I  have  carefully  considered  the   decision   in
             Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial  Effect)
             Sri Lanka * [2002] IAT 00702 and the 2012 Determination.   The
             2012 Determination very carefully considered and rejected, for
             a number of reasons set out therein, the  appellant's  account
             that he had been  detained  and  was  wanted  by  the  Gambian
             authorities.  The 2012 Determination made  findings  that  the
             appellant  was  homosexual,   that   he   had   a   homosexual
             relationship in Gambia, that his  teachers  and  some  of  his
             family members knew that he was homosexual  and  rejected  his
             claim as false that he  had  suffered  at  the  hands  of  the
             authorities in Gambia.  The test in HJ (Iran) was applied  and
             it  was  found  that  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk   of
             persecution from the state authorities but that the  appellant
             would, for reasons not linked to the risk of  persecution,  be
             discreet and  therefore  not  attract  the  attention  of  the
             authorities and not face a real risk of harm.

             [30]       In  summary  the  2012  determination   takes   the
             appellant's claim about risk of harm in Gambia at its highest,
             even on the footing it has been put before me today.

             [31]      Mr Mannan's submission relied on a  material  change
             in circumstances in that the appellant was now in a homosexual
             relationship in the United Kingdom.  I accept this is the case
             as set out above.  I accept that this is a  circumstance  that
             was not pertaining at the time of the 2012  Determination.   I
             consider that the 2012 Determination decided the issues before
             it on the facts existing at that time but  that  circumstances
             have  changed  in  respect  of  the  appellant's  relationship
             status.

             [32]      The evidence before me was that  the  appellant  did
             not publicise his relationship because it was private.  He was
             happy in his relationship and he did not need  to  go  on  gay
             dating websites.  I accept  this  evidence.   The  appellant's
             evidence was also that he was happy leading his life freely as
             a gay man in the United Kingdom.  I do not accept  that  being
             openly gay requires an individual to publicise  it  on  social
             media, to attend lots of demonstrations and to be vocal  about
             it.  I consider that being openly  gay  is  as  the  appellant
             described it, which is being free to  live  one's  life  as  a
             homosexual without having to conceal it.  He has  told  people
             in the United Kingdom that he is a  homosexual:  he  told  Mrs
             [AC] after they met for the 2nd time.  Mr [J]'s  evidence  was
             that they attended homosexual parades which is a public act in
             support of homosexuality.  Therefore, I do not accept that the
             appellant would  conceal  his  homosexuality  if  he  returned
             Gambia [sic] simply because of fear of social opprobrium.  The
             appellant's evidence is that the Gambian community is  hostile
             to him due to his sexuality in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  he
             still attends  Gambia  community  events.   I  find  that  any
             concealment  would  be  because  he  fears  persecution.   His
             evidence was that  he  believed  he  would  be  killed  if  he
             returned to Gambia.  Therefore, on the facts before me I  have
             come to a different conclusion in respect of this limb of  the
             HJ (Iran) test."

      3. I remind myself  that  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
         Appellant's protection and  human  rights  claim  is  made  in  the
         context of a decision refusing to revoke a deportation order signed
         against him for an offence of possessing a Class B drug with intent
         to supply for which offence he was convicted on 8 February 2010 and
         sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.

    Issues and Legal Framework

      4. In order to be recognised as a refugee an appellant must show  that
         he has a well-founded fear of persecution for one of  five  reasons
         set out in Article 1(A) of  the  1951  Refugee  Convention  ie  for
         reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a  particular
         social  group  or  political  opinion.   The  1951  Convention   is
         interpreted in European law through  Council  Directive  2004/84/EC
         ("the Qualification Directive").  The  Qualification  Directive  is
         incorporated in UK law through The Refugee or  Person  in  Need  of
         International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006  and  the
         Immigration Rules ("the Rules").   The Appellant's claim that he is
         an openly gay man at risk on return to Gambia engages  the  Refugee
         Convention on the basis that he is a member of a particular  social
         group.

      5. The burden of proof is on the Appellant to show that as at the date
         of  the  hearing  before  me  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
         believing that he  meets  the  requirements  of  the  Qualification
         Regulations or that he  is  entitled  to  be  granted  humanitarian
         protection in accordance with paragraph  339C  of  the  Rules.   In
         relation to Articles 2 and 3 ECHR, the Appellant must show that  he
         is at real risk of facing treatment  which  is  contrary  to  those
         articles.  Those rights are absolute.  No derogation from  them  is
         permitted.

      6. In relation to Article 8 ECHR,  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
         Appellant to show that he comes within the applicable Rules or that
         the  Respondent's  decision  is  disproportionate  when  considered
         outside the Immigration Rules.  The standard of proof is the normal
         civil standard.

      7. Since this is a deportation case, it is accepted that paragraph 398
         of the Rules apply.  Deportation  is  in  the  public  interest  as
         conducive to the public good.   The  Respondent  in  assessing  the
         claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies  and,  if
         it does not, the  public  interest  in  deportation  will  only  be
         outweighed  by  other  factors  where  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399  and
         399A.  In addition, when considering the public interest  question,
         I  am  required  to  have  regard  to  Section  117C   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section 117C").

      8.  Ms  Chowdhury  accepted  that  my  decision  in  relation  to  the
         Appellant's protection claim was likely to be determinative of  the
         appeal since, if I accept that he is at risk, he cannot be removed.
          Conversely, Article 8, as a qualified right requires a balance  to
         be made between the interference  with  the  Appellant's  right  to
         respect for his private and family life against the public interest
         which is that much higher in a deportation case.

    The Evidence

    Expert report of Dr Ebrima Ceesay

      9. The Appellant relies on the report of Dr  Ebrima  Ceesay  dated  20
         October 2018.  He is "a Gambian-born British  citizen,  independent
         researcher and multi-disciplinary scholar with a broad and  diverse
         professional background in social science research".  He  sets  out
         his experience in the report.  Although resident outside Gambia, he
         keeps  abreast  of  developments  via  professional  and   personal
         contacts in Gambia and online research.  I am  satisfied  that  his
         expertise is deserving of weight.

     10. Dr Ceesay recognises that there has been a change in the  political
         administration in Gambia which is capable of affecting the position
         towards homosexuals.  At [4] of the report, he records that the new
         Foreign Secretary, on  assuming  office,  declared  a  governmental
         intention to repeal anti-homosexual laws.   President  Barrow  also
         spoke out about homosexuality, declaring it not to be an  issue  in
         Gambia and expressing intention to support the repeal  of  anti-gay
         laws.  However, as Dr Ceesay goes on to observe, no action has been
         taken to repeal those laws.  As  a  result,  homosexuality  remains
         criminalised and there  is  no  protection  against  discrimination
         based on sexual orientation.

     11. Dr Ceesay asserts that  "[h]omophobia,  stigma  and  discrimination
         against homosexuals are common in the so-called  new  Gambia",  and
         that Muslim and  Christian  scholars  have  declared  homosexuality
         incompatible with the teachings of the Quran  and  the  Bible.   Dr
         Ceesay is of the view that "gays and lesbians in the  country  have
         continued to suffer discrimination and threats from both government
         officials and non-state actors." He provides an example of a public
         declaration by one Government Minister  in  2017  who  stated  that
         homosexuality would never be allowed in the Gambia.

     12. Dr Ceesay recognises that there have been public pronouncements  by
         President Barrow which suggest positive developments (he has  "been
         making all the right noises") but says that so far this is only lip
         service and the words are not matched by actions.

     13. In any event,  Dr  Ceesay  says  that  the  societal  position  for
         homosexuals has not improved.  He summarises at [8] and [9] of  his
         report as follows:

             "[8]      Homosexuality  is  still  frowned  upon  in  Gambian
             society and therefore, both gays and lesbians have  to  remain
             in the closet.  Sexual minorities in the 'new Gambia' if  they
             are found out, are  often  publicly  humiliated  and  harassed
             because religious scholars in the country in particular,  have
             succeeded in making the case that homosexuality  is  something
             'abnormal', 'unnatural' and imposed  from  abroad.   As  such,
             Gambians, in general,  have  had  negative  attitudes  towards
             homosexuals and these  hostilities  can,  at  times,  lead  to
             discriminatory acts and violence.

             [9] This therefore, leaves [HC] at greater risk of harassment,
             public humiliation and possibly being subjected to mob justice
             if he were to return to Gambia.  In light  of  the  fact  that
             [HC]'s homosexuality is now an open secret in  the  Gambia,  I
             would therefore, not rule out [HC] being subjected  to  jungle
             justice, so to speak, if he  were  forced  to  return  to  The
             Gambia".

         He concludes with the opinion that the risk  to  the  Appellant  on
         return is a real one and that he  will  be  subject  to  "degrading
         treatment" if returned.

    Other Background Material

     14. Mr Walker produced the latest background evidence published by  the
         Home Office entitled "Country Information and Guidance: The Gambia:
         Sexual orientation and gender identity".   That  was  published  in
         January 2016 and therefore prior to the change in  government.   It
         is however instructive as to the Respondent's views of the risk  at
         that time and the reasons for them.

     15. The Respondent's policy is summarised as follows:

             "[2.7.1]  Same-sex physical  relations  are  criminalised  and
             sanctions against LGBT persons were increased during 2014 with
             the introduction of the offence of 'aggravated  homosexuality'
             which  led  to  a  number  of  arrests  and  ill-treatment  of
             (perceived) LGBT persons, including incidents of beatings  and
             torture.  Homophobic rhetoric, including  calls  by  President
             Jammu and senior politicians for 'homosexuals' to  be  killed,
             and societal intolerance is widespread.

             [2.7.2]   While each  case  needs  to  be  considered  on  its
             individual  merits,  and  the  onus  is  on  the   person   to
             demonstrate that they are at real risk, the cumulative  impact
             of anti-LGBT legislation and widespread  societal  intolerance
             is likely to amount, in individual cases, to persecution."

             [2.7.3]   There is no effective state protection and  internal
             relocation is not likely to be an option."

         I note that the guidance has not been  withdrawn  from  publication
         notwithstanding the regime change in Gambia.

     16. I drew the attention of the parties  to  the  US  State  Department
         report for 2017 in relation to Gambia.  That reads as follows:

             "In 2014 then President Jammeh signed into law an amendment to
             the criminal code making "aggravated  homosexuality"  a  crime
             punishable by life imprisonment.  The bill defines "aggravated
             homosexuality" to include serial offenders or persons  with  a
             previous conviction for homosexual  activity,  persons  having
             same-sex relations with someone under the age of  18  or  with
             members of other vulnerable  groups,  or  a  person  with  HIV
             having same-sex relations.

             President Barrow dismissed homosexuality as a nonissue in  the
             country, citing more pressing priorities.   As  a  result  the
             government had not articulated its intention whether it  would
             attempt to reverse  or  change  the  aggravated  homosexuality
             bill.  The provisions of the bill were not enforced.

             There was strong societal discrimination against lesbian, gay,
             bisexual,  transgender,  and  intersex  (LGBTI)   individuals.
             There were no LGBTI organizations in the country."

    17. The Appellant has also produced two further articles  published  by
        the  International  Lesbian,  Gay,  Bisexual,  Trans  and  Intersex
        Association ("ILGA").  The first dated  February  2017  reports  on
        President Barrow's public statement that homosexuality  is  not  an
        issue in Gambia but comments that laws criminalising  homosexuality
        remain in place.  The second dated May 2017 sets out  the  relevant
        provisions of the criminal law which remain  in  place  and  render
        homosexual activity illegal.  That article  concludes  with  ILGA's
        opinion that "[i]t is also clear that The  Gambia  is  increasingly
        embracing Islamic law in its governance practices, which will  lead
        to further erasure of the rights of sexually diverse  people  in  a
        country where they are already vilified, suspected and targeted  in
        a climate of political unsteadiness."

    Submissions

     18. Ms Chowdhury relied on Mr Ceesay's report.  She  acknowledged  that
         his report did not comment specifically on the extent to which  the
         criminal laws are enforced against homosexuals in  the  Gambia  nor
         provide much detail about the likelihood of acts of violence  being
         perpetrated by non-State  agents  against  those  who  are  or  are
         perceived to be gay.  She submitted, however,  that  based  on  the
         Home Office's own guidance, a homosexual under the previous  regime
         would be likely to be granted refugee status and that the  evidence
         since did not show that much had changed in spite of the change  in
         regime.  In particular, the evidence did not  show  any  change  in
         societal attitudes.

     19. Mr Walker  recognised  that  Mr  Ceesay's  report  touches  on  the
         religious background to societal attitudes in Gambia and noted that
         both the Christian church and the Islamic religion in  the  country
         is opposed to homosexuality.  He also accepted that the Home Office
         guidance did indicate that, as at January 2016, an openly  gay  man
         returning to Gambia would be likely to be at  risk  on  return  and
         although that guidance pre-dated the change in government, in spite
         of the positive indications, there had, according to the  evidence,
         been little change particularly in societal attitudes.   Given  the
         laws criminalising homosexuality, he also recognised that an openly
         gay man could not seek the protection of  the  authorities  in  the
         event of being subjected to violence by non-State agents.

    Discussion and Conclusions

     20. In light of Mr Walker's  submission,  I  can  take  the  appeal  on
         protection grounds quite shortly.

     21. The Home Office guidance recognised in January 2016 that an  openly
         gay man would be likely to be entitled to refugee status due to the
         criminalisation of homosexuality in Gambia, coupled with intolerant
         views of the  government  and  societal  intolerance  described  as
         "widespread".  Although the regime has changed and  with  it  there
         have been positive indications from the new  President,  the  legal
         position has not changed.  Homosexuality  remains  criminalised  in
         spite of stated intentions to repeal those laws. Although there  is
         no evidence about whether those laws have been enforced  since  the
         change in government, that is only  one  aspect  which  has  to  be
         considered.  Religious groups, both  Christian  and  Islamic,  have
         spoken out against homosexuality.  There is no evidence to  suggest
         that societal attitudes have changed.  Dr Ceesay speaks of  a  risk
         of "mob justice" albeit only in terms of possibility.

     22. Taken as a whole, when the expert report of Dr Ceesay is read  with
         the other background evidence to which I was referred, the evidence
         does not suggest that there has been such a change in the  position
         on the ground in Gambia or  attitudes  in  that  country  that  the
         previous guidance published by the Home Office (and  not  withdrawn
         since the change in government) should be departed from.

     23. For those reasons, and taking into account Mr Walker's submissions,
         I am satisfied  that  the  Appellant  would  be  at  real  risk  of
         persecution or ill-treatment on return to Gambia.  Accordingly, his
         appeal succeeds on protection grounds.

     24. I do not need to go on to consider the Article 8  claim.   However,
         if I had needed to resolve the appeal on this basis, I  would  have
         dismissed it.  I have regard to paragraphs  399  and  399A  of  the
         Rules.  The Appellant was born in the Gambia in 1984.   He  arrived
         in the UK in 2008 and has had lawful leave  only  for  the  initial
         period as a visitor.   He cannot meet paragraph 399A.

     25. As to the relationship with Mr [J], that also was formed  when  the
         Appellant was in the UK unlawfully and for that  reason  alone,  he
         cannot meet paragraph 399.  The Respondent  has  also  taken  issue
         with whether Mr [J] has sufficient status to qualify as a "partner"
         for these purposes.  I  do  not  need  to  consider  either  issue,
         though, because, even if the Appellant had been here lawfully,  the
         evidence about the relationship is insufficient to satisfy the very
         high threshold of showing that it would be unduly harsh for Mr  [J]
         to remain in the  UK  without  the  Appellant  (see  Supreme  Court
         judgment in KO (Nigeria) and others v Secretary of  State  for  the
         Home Department [2018]  UKSC  53  in  particular  at  [23]  of  the
         judgment).  I of course accept that Mr [J] could not be expected to
         return to the Gambia with the Appellant.  He  is  recognised  as  a
         refugee in the UK.  However, although  the  relationship  has  been
         found to be a committed one since 2015 and that the  Appellant  and
         Mr [J] have lived together since 2014, the  relationship  is  quite
         short-lived and Mr [J]'s short  statement  does  not  suggest  that
         deportation of the Appellant would have any significant  impact  on
         him.  He says he would be "heart  broken"  and  that  he  has  been
         advised that he could not sponsor the Appellant's return  in  light
         of his criminal conviction but there is nothing to suggest that the
         impact goes beyond the normal consequences for  a  relationship  of
         deportation.  A similar test is evident in Section 117C  save  that
         the lawfulness of residence when the relationship is formed is  not
         taken into account (but whether the partner is British  or  settled
         still is).  Again, the evidence does  not  point  to  unduly  harsh
         consequences.

     26. When considering family and private life outside the Rules, Section
         117C  requires  me  to  consider  whether  there   are   compelling
         circumstances over and above the two exceptions (which are  broadly
         the same as paragraphs 399 and  399A).   In  this  case,  there  is
         insufficient  evidence  of  any   such   circumstances,   certainly
         insufficient to displace the high public interest  in  deportation.
         Had I not reached the  view  I  have  about  risk,  therefore,  the
         Appellant would not be able to succeed when the  interference  with
         his private and family life is balanced against  that  high  public
         interest in his deportation.

     27. However, for the reasons I have set out above, I  am  satisfied  on
         the evidence that the Appellant has  shown  that  he  has  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution on return to Gambia.   Accordingly,  he
         is entitled to succeed on protection grounds.



DECISION
I allow the appeal on protection grounds
Signed           [pic] Dated:  29 November 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/06693/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Friday 31 August 2018             |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     H C
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Mannan, Counsel instructed by Stuart & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was not made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   However,
as the Appellant claims that he would be at risk in his home country  it  is
appropriate to make that direction.  Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

BACKGROUND

      1. The Appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge J Bartlett promulgated  on  18  June  2018  ("the  Decision")
         dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision
         dated 3 July 2017 refusing his protection and human rights  claims.



      2. The Appellant is liable to deportation.  An earlier appeal  against
         the Respondent's decision to deport the Appellant was  allowed  but
         subsequently overturned on  the  Respondent's  appeal.   The  Upper
         Tribunal found that the Appellant would not face  a  real  risk  of
         serious harm in Gambia and that his  deportation  would  not  be  a
         disproportionate interference with his human rights.

      3. The Appellant is a national of Gambia who claims that he cannot  be
         deported to that country because he is a homosexual  and  will  for
         that reason be at risk on return.  I do not need  to  set  out  the
         chronology of the Appellant's case because  that  is  set  out  the
         Decision at some length at [2] of the Decision.   Similarly,  I  do
         not need to set out the background in relation to  the  deportation
         case or the relevance of the previous appeal decision  as  that  is
         set out at [19] of the Decision.

      4. Having taken into account the previous appeal findings,  the  Judge
         concluded at [26] to [32] of the Decision that the Appellant  is  a
         homosexual, that he is in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
         with Mr J who is a Gambian national with refugee status in  the  UK
         to July 2019 and that any  concealment  by  the  Appellant  of  his
         sexuality would be due to a  fear  of  persecution.   There  is  no
         challenge by the Respondent to those findings.

      5. However, the Judge went on to find that the Appellant would not  be
         at risk from the authorities as a homosexual in Gambia.  The  Judge
         also found that there was no evidence before her that the Appellant
         would  face  persecution  from  non-State  agents.   She  therefore
         dismissed the appeal.

      6. The main ground of appeal is that the Decision is perverse  because
         the Judge made findings which were not open to her on the evidence.
          There is a subsidiary ground relating  to  the  finding  that  the
         Appellant's deportation is in the public interest because he  is  a
         foreign criminal because it is said that he is at low-risk and  has
         not committed any offence since 2010.  That ground was  not  argued
         before me.

      7. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Andrew on 19 July 2018 in the following terms (so far as relevant):

             "... [2]  I am satisfied there is an arguable error of law  in
             this decision  in  that  following  the  Judge's  finding  the
             Appellant is a homosexual he went on to find he would  not  be
             at  risk  on  return  to  the  Gambia  despite   the   country
             information to the contrary."

      8. The appeal comes before me to determine whether there is a material
         error of law in the Decision  and  if  so  either  to  re-make  the
         decision or to remit to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

      9. The Judge's findings which  are  the  subject  of  the  Appellant's
         challenge are set out at [18] and [33] to [41] of the  Decision  as
         follows:

             "[18]     The appellant's bundle contains a substantial amount
             of objective evidence and I will not repeat it all here.   The
             respondent relied on a  press  article  dated  18  April  2018
             relating to the speech that President Barrow of Gambia gave to
             Chatham House.  This article included the following:

                  "On the issue of the draconian anti-gay laws passed by his
                  predecessor dictator Yahya Jammeh, President  Barrow  said
                  plans are afoot to amend  the  constitution  so  that  all
                  genders in the country are treated equally.

                  Homosexuality  is  not  an  issue  in   the   Gambia,   he
                  reiterated.  He said the promotion of fundamental  rights,
                  liberties and  freedoms  are  sacrosanct  as  far  as  his
                  government is concerned.   Mr  Barrow  said  the  upcoming
                  constitutional  changes  will  guarantee  freedom  of  the
                  press, speech, expression and dignity..."

             ...

             "[33]...I must also consider whether the appellant would be at
             risk of persecution in  Gambia.   Ms  Sreeramen's  submissions
             were that the situation in the Gambia as regards the treatment
             of homosexuals has changed since President Barrow took  office
             in January 2017.  This was effectively  a  regime  change.   I
             consider that the exile of President Jammeh and  the  election
             of President Barrow when combined with the statement  set  out
             by President Barrow in the article provided  to  me  dated  18
             April 2018 and earlier objective evidence  which  is  littered
             with quotes from President Jammeh  making  offensive  comments
             about homosexuals establishes that there  may  be  a  material
             change in the situation such that I should consider  the  risk
             at this time.

             [34]      I remind myself that the burden of proof lies on the
             appellant to establish that he is at risk of  persecution  and
             that this  is  the  lowest  standard.   The  majority  of  the
             objective  evidence  provided  by  the  appellant  about   the
             situation of homosexuals in the Gambia is dated 2014 which was
             around the time that the draconian anti-homosexual  laws  were
             introduced  in  the  Gambia.   I  accept  that  the  objective
             evidence at page 62 of the appellant's  bundle  is  dated  May
             2016 and refers to  the  criminalisation  of  homosexual  acts
             under the 2014 legislation.  However  there  is  no  objective
             evidence from a later date.  Further,  there  is  no  evidence
             that the anti-homosexual legislation has been  enforced  since
             President Jammeh has been exiled.

             [35]      Mr Mannan submitted that because the anti-homosexual
             legislation remained law the appellant faced a  real  risk  of
             persecution.  I  do  not  accept  this  submission.   In  many
             countries, included the United Kingdom there  are  laws  which
             remain on the statute book but which have  not  been  enforced
             and will not be enforced.  I do not  accept  that  their  mere
             existence is sufficient to establish a real risk of  harm.   I
             recognise that the anti-homosexual laws has been  enforced  in
             the past.  However I also recognise that President  Jammeh  is
             widely regarded as a dictator who ruled the Gambia for over 20
             years.  The expert report from [Mr C], again  no  relative  of
             the appellant, which was prepared for the  2012  Determination
             refers  to  the  repressive  acts  of  the  government   under
             President Jammeh, including restrictions on freedom of speech,
             targeting  of  political  opponents,  the  lack  of   judicial
             independence  and  scrutiny  and  widespread  abuse  of  human
             rights.  However I find that this report is  of  virtually  no
             assistance to me in 2018 because it provides no  consideration
             of what has happened since the removal of President Jammeh.

             [36]      The objective evidence at page 56 dated 21  November
             2014 sets out the following: "President Jammeh's  inflammatory
             public statements against LGBTI  people  have  been  put  into
             practice through  this  odious  law  and  the  witchhunt  that
             followed its secretive passage..."

             [37]      The objective evidence at page  59  and  60  of  the
             appellants  bundle  sets  out  the   following:   "Jammeh   is
             virulently homophobic, often  referring  to  LGBTI  people  as
             "vermin", "satanic", "a threat to population  growth",  "anti-
             God, anti-human and anti-civilisation".

             [38]      The objective evidence of page 79 of the appellant's
             bundle sets out the following: "President Yahya  Jammeh  said:
             "we will fight these vermin called  homosexuals  or  gays  the
             same way we are fighting malaria causing  mosquitoes,  if  not
             more aggressively."

             [39]      The objective evidence about 81 of  the  appellant's
             bundle set out the following: "President Yahya Jammeh said  in
             a public speech in the Wolof language, cited by Vice news. "If
             you are a man, I want to marry another man in this country and
             we catch you, no one will ever set eyes on you again,  and  no
             white person can do anything about it."

             [40]      I find that the objective  evidence  sets  out  that
             President Jammeh adopted a personal vitriolic approach against
             homosexuality.  I find that  President  Jammeh  has  now  been
             replaced by President Barrow and the objective  evidence  sets
             out that Mr Barrow has adopted a course of  action  trying  to
             end Gambia's isolation from the rest of the  world.   Further,
             the objective evidence provided by the respondent set out that
             "On the issue of the draconian anti-gay  laws  passed  by  his
             predecessor dictator Yahya Jammeh, President Barrow said plans
             are afoot to amend the constitution so that all genders in the
             country are treated equally."

             [41]      Therefore taking all of this evidence together I  am
             not satisfied that the appellant has discharged the burden  of
             proof to show that he is  at  risk  of  persecution  from  the
             Gambian authorities.  I note that Judge  Spencer  when  making
             his finding about risk of persecution in 2012 had the  benefit
             of an expert report, which was prepared for  the  purposes  of
             the tribunal to specifically deal with the risk of persecution
             at that time.  Regrettably, I do not have any  such  evidence.
             There is no evidence before me that the appellant  would  face
             persecution from any other actors in the Gambia.  Further, the
             2012  Determination  rejects  the  appellant's   claim   about
             persecution he claimed to have suffered in the  Gambia  before
             coming to the United Kingdom in 2008.  There is no reason  for
             me to interfere with those conclusions."

     10. Mr Mannan submitted that the speech made  by  President  Barrow  on
         which the Judge relied was only a statement of intent and  had  not
         been reflected in any actual change to the position for homosexuals
         in Gambia.  He argued that, in light  of  the  background  material
         which the Appellant produced, it was not open to the Judge to  find
         as she did that there would be no real risk on return.  He did  not
         accept that the  change  of  regime  made  any  difference  to  the
         reliance which could be placed on  that  material.   There  was  no
         consideration whether President Barrow's view was reflected by  the
         authorities as a whole and therefore whether any  change,  even  if
         the authorities would implement that change, would be  accepted  by
         those other organs.  Further, there was no indication  whether  the
         new  President's  views  would  make  any  difference  to  societal
         attitudes in Gambia.

     11. Mr Walker, having heard Mr Mannan's submissions, indicated that  he
         conceded there is  an  error  in  the  Decision.   He  accepted  in
         particular  that  there  was  a  potential  conflict  between   the
         conclusion at [41] of the Decision and the findings in relation  to
         the overall background material set out at  [34]  to  [40]  of  the
         Decision.

     12.  Following  discussions,  I  accepted  the  concession   made   and
         identified the error of law in the following way:

             "In light of the concession made, I accept there is a material
             error of law in  terms  of  the  Judge's  failure  to  provide
             adequate reasons for preferring the one  piece  of  background
             evidence on which the  Respondent  placed  reliance  over  the
             previous background evidence, particularly in the  context  of
             the attitude of society in the Gambia and the  wider  attitude
             of the authorities there (beyond the President's own  personal
             view)."

     13. For those reasons, I accept that the Decision discloses a  material
         error of law.  As there is no challenge  to  the  factual  findings
         made at [26] to [32] of the Decision, I  preserve  those  findings.
         As  such,  the  only  issue  for  redetermination  is  whether  the
         background evidence discloses a risk to a homosexual who wishes  to
         openly demonstrate his sexuality on return to the Gambia.

     14. Mr Mannan urged on me an immediate re-making of the Decision on the
         basis that he said that the background evidence disclosed that such
         a risk continues to exist.  I disagree.  The evidence on which  the
         Appellant relies is outdated, relating as it  does  to  the  period
         before President Barrow came to power.  Equally, as I have  already
         indicated, the Respondent relies  only  on  one  article  which  is
         narrow in its ambit.

     15. For those  reasons,  I  indicated  that  I  would  require  further
         evidence in order to re-make the decision.  It was not  clear  from
         discussions whether there is publicly available material  which  is
         more up-to-date in relation to this issue.  I therefore  considered
         it likely that the Appellant would  need  to  consider  whether  to
         commission a further expert report as he had done for his appeal in
         2012.  I have therefore given directions allowing  sufficient  time
         for the Appellant to obtain such a report if he chooses to do so.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law. I therefore set aside the First-tier  Tribunal  Decision  of
Judge J Bartlett promulgated on  18  June  2018.  However,  I  preserve  the
findings made at [26] to  [32]  of  that  decision.  I  make  the  following
directions for the re-making of the decision.

DIRECTIONS

      1. By 4pm on Wednesday 31 October 2018, the parties  shall  file  with
         the Tribunal and serve on the other party any further  evidence  on
         which they wish to rely.

      2. The appeal is to be re-listed for hearing on  the  first  available
         date after Monday 12 November 2018.  Time estimate is half  a  day.
         There is unlikely to be a need for further  oral  evidence  and  an
         interpreter is not required and  will  not  be  booked  unless  the
         Appellant's representatives inform the Tribunal at  least  fourteen
         days before the resumed hearing that the Appellant will  be  called
         to give oral evidence and that he requires an interpreter in  order
         to do so.

Signed           [pic] Dated:  6 September 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

