
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06898/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th April 2017                     |On 4th May 2017                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [W F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, HOPO
For the Respondent:    Mr Schwenk of Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson
& Canter


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Lloyd-Smith made following a hearing at  Manchester  on  30th  November
    2016.



Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Somalia born on [ ] 1992.  He  arrived  in
    the UK by air on 12th January 2016 and applied for asylum on  the  same
    day.

 3. The appellant said that he was of Bravanese origin from the Brava  Bida
    minority clan and was born and grew up in Somalia.  He claimed that  he
    worked in a grocery store and as a fisherman but had to leave his  home
    area because he was being pressured to start working  for  Al  Shabaab.
    The family moved to Mogadishu for six weeks and he  was  threatened  by
    members of the Al Shabaab there.  The  family  returned  to  Brava  and
    arrangements were made for the  appellant  to  leave  the  country  and
    travel to the UK.

 4. The judge did not believe the  appellant's  story  in  relation  to  Al
    Shabaab and did not accept  that  he  had  been  targeted  by  them  as
    claimed.  She dismissed the asylum appeal.

 5. The judge did however  allow  the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds, applying the country guidance case of MOJ and Ors  (Return  to
    Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442.

 6. She wrote as follows:

         "Headnote (xii) of MOJ sets  out  the  relevant  considerations  in
         making an assessment on risk.  From the evidence before me I accept
         that the appellant is an orphan,  his  mother  having  died  whilst
         fleeing with her children in July 2016.  Having rejected his  claim
         in relation to previously having fled to Mogadishu it  must  follow
         that I cannot be satisfied that he has any links there.   He  would
         have no access to funds from any source.  His two uncles,  both  of
         whom have status in the UK failed  to  attend  in  support  of  his
         appeal.  It seems apparent therefore given their lack  of  interest
         in even moral support  for  the  appellant  that  they  are  highly
         unlikely to provide him with any financial  support  if  forced  to
         return.  His younger siblings are  in  a  Kenyan  refugee  camp  so
         unable to offer any assistance.  In the circumstances  therefore  I
         find that there is a 'real risk of having  no  alternative  but  to
         live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a
         real possibility of having to live in  conditions  that  will  fall
         below  acceptable  humanitarian  standards'  (A  pg  412  paragraph
         (xii))."

The Grounds of Application

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had failed to resolve conflicts of fact on material  matters.
    The judge had accepted, on the claimant's oral account alone, that  his
    mother had died in July 2016 and his siblings were in a refugee camp in
    Kenya.  Having found his account of what had  happened  to  him  whilst
    living in Somalia to lack credibility, there  was  no  reason  why  the
    judge believed that the claimant's mother had  died  and  his  siblings
    were in Kenya and that he had no links to Somalia.  It was not  evident
    how the claimant became aware of his mother's death and  his  siblings'
    whereabouts; it  demonstrated  that  the  claimant  continued  to  have
    contact and links with family members since he arrived in the UK.

 8. The judge accepted on the claimant's oral evidence alone that he had no
    access to funds from any source.  Having found the  claimant's  account
    to lack credibility there was no reason to believe that  he  no  longer
    had access to funds and his own evidence was that he had entered the UK
    by flight in January 2016.  The judge noted  that  the  claimant's  two
    uncles had failed to attend in support of the claimant's appeal and had
    concluded that they had no interest in  supporting  him  which  was  an
    assumption.  She had failed to consider the fact that they may have had
    work commitments that day.

 9. Finally the judge had failed to take into account that the claimant had
    worked  as  a  shopkeeper  and  a  fisherman  which  demonstrated   his
    resourcefulness and his ability to support himself.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Gillespie  for  the  reasons
    stated in the grounds on 12th January 2017.

Submissions

11. Mr Bates relied on his grounds and submitted that the judge appeared to
    have accepted evidence at face value  in  relation  to  the  claimant's
    family whilst rejecting the core of his account.  He accepted  that  if
    the judge's conclusions were correct, and the  claimant  did  not  have
    family support in Mogadishu, then he would be entitled  to  succeed  on
    humanitarian grounds.  However the judge had found the claimant not  to
    be a witness of truth and he could have actually spent  far  longer  in
    Mogadishu than he had admitted to.  He asked that the adverse  findings
    in relation to the core of the claim  be  preserved  and  that  further
    evidence be taken, either in the Upper Tribunal or  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, in relation to the conditions which the claimant  would  face
    on return to Mogadishu.

12. Mr Schwenk submitted that the grounds amounted to a  mere  disagreement
    with the decision.  The judge was entitled  to  accept  the  claimant's
    oral evidence.  He doubted whether there was in fact  a  conflict  over
    material issues since it did not appear that there was a  challenge  to
    the evidence that the claimant's siblings were in Kenya  and  that  his
    mother had died.  He asked that the decision be preserved.

Findings and Conclusions

13. This determination is a  little  thin  and  it  would  have  been  less
    vulnerable to appeal if the Immigration Judge had given  more  detailed
    reasons  for  her  decision.   However  I  am  satisfied  that  it   is
    sustainable.

14. First, it is not right to categorise the claimant, as the grounds  seek
    to do, as someone whose  credibility  has  not  been  accepted  in  any
    respect.  Although his story of having been sought by  Al  Shabaab  was
    rejected both by the Secretary of State and by the  Immigration  Judge,
    it was accepted that he was of the ethnicity which he claimed. Moreover
    it does not seem to be disputed that the family lived in Brava.

15. Neither is it clear that the Secretary of State's representative sought
    to challenge the evidence at the hearing that the  claimant's  siblings
    were in Kenya and that his mother had died.  He gave evidence that  she
    had died in July 2016.  The claimant was asked how  he  had  found  out
    about her death and he explained that he had been given the news by his
    brothers.  His mother had had  high  blood  pressure  and  was  without
    medication. It appears that the Presenting Officer asked whether he had
    any documentary proof of her death, but so far as I can tell  from  the
    record of proceedings, no submissions were made  in  relation  to  that
    evidence.

16. Neither is there a reference in the determination to a challenge  being
    made to the evidence that the claimant's siblings are in a refugee camp
    in Kenya.  Given that they are also from a  minority  clan  it  is  not
    inherently unlikely that they should have also left Somalia.

17. It was open to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  the  claimant's  family
    situation was as  he  claimed  on  the  basis  of  the  oral  evidence,
    particularly when it would not appear that that evidence was challenged
    at the hearing.

18. So far as the funding of his trip is concerned, the claimant  explained
    that his mother had sold the family home.  Again, so far as I can  see,
    that was not challenged.

19. The judge explained why she had concluded that the  appellant's  uncles
    were unlikely to provide him with any financial support  if  forced  to
    return given their lack of involvement with him in the UK.

20. The final  ground  is  irrelevant.   Mr  Bates  accepted  that  if  the
    claimant's family circumstances were as  he  said  they  were,  he  was
    entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.

21. The grounds amount to a disagreement with the decision.

Notice of Decision

The original judge did not err in law.  Her decision stands.  The  challenge
by the Secretary of State is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 1 May 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
