
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06899/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 10 December 2019                  |On 19 December 2019l                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    [T N]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer, Counsel instructed by WTB Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision sent on 16 September 2019 Judge  Dearden  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of the appellant,  a  national
    of Vietnam, against a decision made by the respondent on  8  July  2019
    refusing his protection and human rights claim.  On 7  March  2019  the
    National Referral  Mechanism  concluded  he  was  a  victim  of  modern
    slavery.

2.   The judge  accepted  (as  had  the  respondent)  that  in  Vietnam  the
    appellant had been a street child who had  experienced  an  "unsettling
    and dreadful  upbringing"  (25(1));  had  been  trafficked  to  the  UK
    (25(2)); had been forced to work in a cannabis factory in the  UK;  had
    been responsible for alerting the  police  to  its  existence  when  he
    escaped (25(3)); had been  placed  with  foster  parents  (Mr  and  Mrs
    Pilkington) who had helped him in many ways, including in his education
    (25(4)); and that he suffers from Hepatitis B and C (25(5)).

3.   The judge noted that the appellant's home city was Hai Duong, which  is
    relatively near Hanoi.  Whilst not accepting that the appellant was  in
    debt to traffickers. Given that the judge  stated  that  the  appellant
    "quite understandably ...  does  not  know  whether  the  [appellant's]
    traffickers still exist there" (in his  home  area)  (my  emphasis),  I
    consider that he was effectively prepared to proceed for  the  purposes
    of the protection grounds of appeal on the  basis  of  whether  or  not
    there would be a viable  internal  relocation  alternative  (26(3)  and
    (4)).  I  note  this  because  at  26(8)  and  27  in  the  context  of
    considering paragraph 276ADE and Article 8 ECHR, the judge  appears  to
    conclude (to different effect) that the appellant had  not  established
    risk in the home area, "bearing in mind the length  of  time  since  he
    left".  As I explained to Mr Tan, I am not minded to  take  this  as  a
    point against the appellant's grounds (if I had taken the point, all of
    the appellant's grounds would have fallen away,  which  Mr  Tan  agreed
    would be curious, given the state of pleadings and lack  of  respondent
    response to date).  In the context of the protection grounds, the judge
    focussed  exclusively  on  whether  there  would  a   viable   internal
    relocation alternative in a large city many miles away such as  Saigon.



4.   The grounds of appeal are four-pronged, it  being  submitted  that  the
    judge erred in:

    (a)  failing to address the appellant's case on relocation;

    (b)  wrongly conflating issues of relocation with issues of protection;

    (c)  wrongly conflating vulnerability with naivete; and

    (d)  failing to particularise why objective  evidence  demonstrating  a
         lack of protection in Vietnam is to be disregarded.

5.   I am grateful  to  the  excellent  submissions  I  received  from  both
    representatives.  Mr Greer highlighted the Pathway Planning  Assessment
    made by Lancashire County Council which [page  40  of  the  appellant's
    bundle] listed a  number  of  risk  factors  which  included  that  the
    appellant had not lived independently, had low educational  attainment,
    physical ill-health and that there was "inability to keep himself  safe
    ... It is felt that [the appellant] remains  vulnerable  to  abuse  and
    exploitation".

6.   I am not persuaded that the judge erred in law.  As the author  of  the
    grounds and Mr Greer noted, grounds (a)  and  (b)  are  interconnected.
    Their main thrust is that the judge only dealt with the issue of safety
    or "the question of whether there exists a risk and/or  protection  for
    the appellant in Vietnam".  That  contention  is  belied  by  a  proper
    reading of the judge's decision.  As regards the safety limb, the judge
    found at 26(3), in what can only be a reference to internal relocation,
    that, contrary to the appellant's claim  "[t]here  is  no  evidence  to
    suggest that the traffickers [in his home  city]  have  access  to  any
    national database and I consequently find that the Appellant  would  be
    safe to a practical standard  ...".   The  appellant's  representatives
    have not advanced any arguments or  identified  any  evidence  to  cast
    doubt on that finding.

7.   As regards the "reasonableness" limb, contrary  to  the  contention  in
    grounds (a) and (b), the judge did plainly give separate  consideration
    to the issue  of  whether  it  was  reasonable  for  the  appellant  to
    relocate.  Having identified the need for each case to be considered on
    its merits (paragraph 26(7)), the judge  had  regard  to  a  number  of
    circumstances going both to the  appellant's  individual  circumstances
    and the general country conditions.  The judge noted that the appellant
    had no supportive family but that he  spoke  the  language  of  Vietnam
    (27(8)) and "could use his skills and maturity which he had acquired to
    regain employment there [in Saigon] assisted  by  a  relocation  grant"
    (27(8)).  Whilst it is true that the judge's identification of some  of
    the relevant circumstances is  contained  under  headings  relating  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules (paragraph 26(8)), it remains
    the case that he had these circumstances in  mind  when  assessing  his
    protection grounds of appeal as well. It is also clear that  the  judge
    understood  that  in  the  context  of   his   protection   claim   the
    reasonableness assessment was distinct from the  risk  assessment:  see
    for example his references in paragraph 26(7) and  27  to  whether  the
    appellant could "reasonably relocate".  The judge  also  considered  in
    the course of  the  same  assessment  the  general  country  situation,
    referring in paragraph 26(9) to the US State Department Report on Human
    Rights 2018 and the US Department of State Trafficking Report dated  20
    June 2019.  At 26(10) the judge referred to the treatment of the  issue
    of reasonableness in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5, noting  that  the  essential
    test of reasonableness was one of which  relocation  would  be  "unduly
    harsh".

8.    The  appellant's  ground  (c)  alleges  that  the   judge   "conflated
    vulnerability with naivete".  It was argued in this connection that the
    factors that place individuals at risk of trafficking and  exploitation
    are not limited to whether an individual has "wised  up".   The  ground
    pointed out that relevant factors must encompass  lack  of  family  and
    friendship networks, secure accommodation or income or work experience;
    and young age as a survivor of trafficking.  However,  I  am  satisfied
    that the judge did take such factors  into  account.   On  the  judge's
    analysis it was likely that the appellant  would  find  employment  and
    would also have the assistance of a grant from the Home  Office  if  he
    left voluntarily.  The judge noted  that  there  were  non-governmental
    organisations available to assist persons who return  to  Vietnam.   In
    paragraphs 26(7) and (8) the judge addresses, inter alia, accommodation
    and job training and education.  Thus  the  judge's  reference  to  the
    appellant now being "exceedingly  sceptical"  if  confronted  with  job
    offers (26(1)) and being able to use his "skills and maturity which  he
    has acquired" (26(8)) reflected a wide-ranging and balanced  assessment
    of the issue of the risk of re-trafficking. The  judge  considered  the
    appellant's health circumstances and concluded they were  not  serious.
    Clearly  the  judge  considered  that  the  appellant   had   benefited
    tremendously in his development as a young adult from the fostering  he
    had been receiving from Mr and Mrs Pilkington.

9.   Mr Greer highlighted the Pathway Planning  Assessment  from  Lancashire
    County Council.  I note first of all that the grounds themselves do not
    refer to it.   Considering it as relevant to the grounds  nevertheless,
    as far as can be ascertained, this report must have been based on facts
    as they stood in April 2018 at the very  latest  (the  date  he  ceased
    being in the Council's care) and the risk factors are primarily if  not
    exclusively addressed to the appellant's position in the UK.  The judge
    noted at paragraph 8 that he had taken  into  account  the  appellant's
    bundle containing this report.  I am satisfied that the judge  properly
    took account of it and properly focused on the  most  recent  evidence,
    post-dating April 2018, which  included  statements  from  Mr  and  Mrs
    Pilkington, who both considered the appellant was still vulnerable.

10.  As regards ground (d), I consider it  devoid  of  arguable  merit.   It
    effectively asserts that the judge should have found either that  there
    was  no  sufficiency  of  protection  in  general  in  Vietnam  or   no
    sufficiency of protection for victims  of  trafficking.   However,  the
    judge considered the background evidence with care (and did not  solely
    rely on earlier Tribunal country guidance) and it was  entirely  within
    the range of reasonable responses for the judge to  conclude  at  26(9)
    that:

         "The Availability of Protection

         Paragraph 39 of the Reasons for Refusal Letter deals  with  the  US
         Department of State Report on Human Rights 2018 and  in  particular
         the Ministry of Public  Security.   Paragraph  40  deals  with  the
         support and protection available  to  victims  of  trafficking  but
         Pages 10 and 11 of the Refusal Letter  deal  with  various  reports
         which have been studied before  drawing  the  conclusion  that  the
         Appellant has failed to establish there is a sustained and systemic
         failure of state protection on  the  part  of  the  authorities  in
         Vietnam.

         In an attempt to be brief in this Determination I will not  re-hash
         all the representations made in the  lengthy  Reasons  for  Refusal
         letter.

         Mr Holmes rightly draws to my attention  Page  155  of  his  bundle
         being the US Department of State Trafficking Report dated  20  June
         2019.  It is observed that the government decreased law enforcement
         efforts  and  the  number  of  trafficking  cases  identified   are
         declining instead of increasing.  However the number of trafficking
         offences identified is in my conclusion small in light  of  the  90
         million plus population of Vietnam.  The same report indicates that
         the  government  maintained  efforts  to  prevent  trafficking  and
         implemented  the  third  phase  of  the  2016  -  2020  Nationality
         Trafficking Action Plan.

         Whilst Mr Holmes identifies in the Respondent' own instructions  to
         its officers at Page 212 of the  Respondent's  bundle  that  whilst
         legislation exists and prosecutions occur, a lack  of  coordination
         across provincial agencies resulted in uneven  enforcement  of  the
         law.  But in the same section it  is  clear  that  trafficking  for
         sexual and labour exploitation is prohibited under the law and  the
         government  has  comprehensive  anti-trafficking  legislation   and
         prosecutes those involved in trafficking.

         Mr Holmes draws to my attention Page 227 of his bundle at Paragraph
         8.4.1 but I find that this applies to women who are at high risk of
         being re-trafficked.  It is said that there are no specialised long
         term support services for men who are  victims  of  trafficking  on
         return to Vietnam, but  concerns  over  retribution  in  the  local
         community are discouraging many victims from seeking or benefitting
         from protection services.  This does not really apply in  the  case
         of this Appellant simply because he was living in a restaurant  and
         in my conclusion could internally relocate as far away as Saigon".

11.  Mr Greer highlighted the fact  that  the  country  background  evidence
    before the judge noted that Vietnam's status had declined to the lowest
    Tier 2 level - namely that of "Watchlist" - and was characterised by  a
    decrease in government efforts to protect victims.  However, the  judge
    specifically made reference to and evaluated this decrease. In light of
    the contents of this  report  read  as  a  whole,  which  continued  to
    classify Vietnam as a Tier 2 country, not a Tier 3 one,  he  was  quite
    entitled to conclude that it  did  not  demonstrate  either  a  general
    insufficiency  of  protection  in  Vietnam  or  an   insufficiency   of
    government protection for victims of trafficking upon  their  return  -
    see  in  particular  page  157  of  this  report  under   the   heading
    "Prevention".  Mr Greer  complains  that  the  judge  "did  not  engage
    thoroughly  with  the  background  evidence",  but  the  references  to
    thoroughness indicate a mere disagreement with the judge's assessment.

12.  Like Judge Dearden, I recognise that the result of this  decision  will
    be upsetting both to the appellant  and  Mr  and  Mrs  Pilkington,  the
    latter who have done (and are still doing) a great deal to  assist  the
    appellant.  However, I can only interfere with the decision  of  a  FtT
    Judge if satisfied there is a material error of law.  I cannot  discern
    any such error. The  judge  approached  the  evidence  objectively  and
    reached conclusions that were entirely open to him on the evidence.

13.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law.  His decision to dismiss the appeal is upheld.

14.  An anonymity direction is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: [pic]              Date: 16 December 2019

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
