
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/06825/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6th October 2017                        |On 17th October 2017             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                               Mr Tahir Nimaty
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shand promulgated on 20th February  2017  in  which  she
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal on asylum  grounds,  on  human  rights
    grounds and under the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant has now  sought
    to appeal against that decision for the  reasons  set  out  within  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  Those are a matter  of  record  and  therefore  not
    repeated in their entirety here in the circumstances where there is now
    an agreed consensus between the parties regarding the appeal itself.

 2. However, in summary, within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued that the
    judge erred in carrying out the public interest centric assessment  and
    only engaged with the  facts  in  favour  of  the  public  interest  in
    conducting the balancing  exercise  when  considering  the  Appellant's
    right to a family and private life in the UK.   It  is  further  argued
    that the judge erred in treating the Appellant's immigration status  as
    precarious and that the judge further erred in treating the Appellant's
    illegal entry into the UK as a factor relevant to the precariousness of
    his status.  It is further argued within the Grounds of Appeal that the
    judge erred by taking into account that but for the Respondent's policy
    in relation to accompanying minors the Appellant would  be  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.

 3. Permission to appeal in  this  case  has  been  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Brunnen on 16th June 2017 in which  he  noted  that  the
    grounds  sought  permission  to  appeal  solely  in  respect   of   the
    Appellant's Article 8 claim outside of the Immigration Rules.  He found
    that it was not arguable that the status of the Appellant in this  case
    was anything other than precarious and that the judge had not erred  in
    paragraph 72 of her decision by treating the Appellant's illegal  entry
    to the UK as being a factor  relevant  to  the  precariousness  of  his
    status as paragraph 72, he found, was not concerned with precariousness
    but with the strength of the public interest in immigration control.

 4. Judge Brunnen found that it was arguable that the judge erred in taking
    into account that but  for  the  Respondent's  policy  in  relation  to
    unaccompanied minors the Appellant would be in the UK  unlawfully,  but
    found that it was immaterial to the outcome.

 5. However, Judge Brunnen did grant permission to appeal and found that it
    was arguable that  the  judge  failed  to  give  consideration  to  the
    positive factors advanced by the Appellant in favour of leave to remain
    being granted, such as his partner's nationality being British and  her
    background and her pregnancy and the Appellant's family connections  in
    the UK and found that it was arguable that the judge  failed  to  weigh
    such factors in the balance with the public interest factors  that  she
    identified.

 6. I am grateful to the submissions of both parties, Mr Sellwood on behalf
    of the Appellant and Mr Tufan on behalf of the Secretary of State.  The
    parties come before the Upper Tribunal with  an  agreed  position.   Mr
    Tufan concedes that the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shand
    does contain a material  error  of  law  in  that  although  the  judge
    mentioned the  fact  that  the  Appellant's  partner  was  pregnant  at
    paragraphs 22 and 53 of the decision, she seemingly has not taken  into
    account the fact that the Appellant's partner was a British  woman  who
    was pregnant and who was being asked potentially to go  to  Afghanistan
    with  her  partner,  when  conducting  the  balancing   exercise   when
    considering proportionality for the purposes of Article 8.  He conceded
    that that is a material error.

 7. Mr Tufan further tells me that  since  the  date  of  the  decision,  a
    further child has been born to the Appellant and his  partner  who  was
    born on 31st July 2017 and I was shown a copy of the birth  certificate
    of the child in that regard.  Mr Tufan  says  that  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this case where the Appellant  is  in  a  relationship
    with a British woman and has a British citizen child, in  circumstances
    where the partner has not been to Afghanistan, and taking into  account
    all the circumstances in this case, he says that in light  of  the  new
    circumstances it is conceded by the Secretary of State that in remaking
    the decision the appeal should be allowed  Article  8  grounds  on  the
    basis of the Appellant's family life under the ECHR.

 8. In light of those concessions I find that the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shand does contain material errors  of  law  and  I  set
    aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Shand  to  the  limited
    extent that she was dealing with the human  rights  claim.   There  has
    been no challenge made to the findings of Judge Shand in respect of the
    asylum claim, the claim for humanitarian protection or under Articles 2
    and 3 of the ECHR, the only challenge being made was in respect of  the
    human rights claim under Article 8. Therefore I maintain  the  findings
    of Judge Shand in respect of the asylum claim, humanitarian  protection
    claim and the claims under Articles 2 and 3 but  I  do  set  aside  her
    decision in respect of Article 8 and in light  of  the  concession  now
    made by the Secretary of State that the appeal  should  be  allowed  on
    Article 8 grounds on the basis of the Appellant's  right  to  a  family
    life.  I do find that the decision taken  is  disproportionate  to  the
    public end sought to be achieved,  as  conceded  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, and I allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shand  does  contain  material
errors of law and is set aside to the limited extent  of  the  consideration
of the Article 8 claim under the ECHR.   The  findings  in  respect  of  the
asylum, humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 claims are  maintained.


 I remake the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal on Article 8  grounds
on the basis of his family life, the decision being  unlawful  and  contrary
to the Appellant's rights pursuant to Article 8 of the ECHR.

I make no order in respect of anonymity, no such order  having  been  sought
before the First-tier Tribunal and no such order having been  sought  before
me.


Signed                                  Dated 6th October 2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal  any  fee  paid  by  the  Appellant  should  be
refunded to him in its entirety.


Signed                                  Dated 6th October 2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty

