
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/06727/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields (Kings Court)    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 April 2019                        |On 08 May 2019                      |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                     H G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE )
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer

I make an order prohibiting the disclosure of any matter of document that
might lead to the identity of the appellant or her child becoming known to
the public pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
Rules 2008. Any breach of this order may lead to contempt proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In his decision dated 11  July  2018,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cox
    dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision dated 17 May 2018 on grounds under the Refugee Convention, the
    Qualification  Directive  and  with  reference  to  the  Human   Rights
    Convention.  The appellant is a  national  of  Ethiopia,  who  in  2017
    arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely and  claimed  asylum.   The
    judge set out the appellant's case as follows in his decision:

         "7.  The Appellant was born in Kunni, Ethiopia.  She  is  from  the
             Amharic ethnicity.  In 2010  local  Oromo  people  killed  the
             Appellant's father because of his ethnicity.  The  Appellant's
             mother died of natural causes in 2016.  The Appellant  has  no
             siblings.

         8.   In the Appellant's  home  village,  the  local  population  is
             predominately from the  Oromo  ethnic  group  and  they  would
             harass the Appellant and other ethnic Amhara.

         9.   In March 2011 the Appellant stated to support  Ginbot7.   When
             the Appellant's uncle learned  of  the  Appellant's  political
             views he inspired her to support the movement.  He had been  a
             member of Ginbot7 for about two years.

         10.  The Appellant started attending secret meetings.  Five  people
             would attend the meeting, including the Appellant's uncle, who
             decided the time and location of the meeting.   The  Appellant
             went three times.  She contributed 30Birr  per  month  and  in
             April 2011 distributed leaflets.

         11.  In June 2011, the Appellant was going to a  meeting,  and,  as
             she approached, she could see from a distance her cell members
             in handcuffs.  They were being dragged into a police  vehicle.
             She went into hiding at a friend's house.  Later that day  the
             authorities  went  to  the  family  home  and  threatened  the
             Appellant's  mother.   They  asked   about   the   Appellant's
             whereabouts and gave her a warrant.   The  following  day  the
             authorities arrested  and  detained  the  Appellant's  mother.
             They tortured her.  After a few  days,  the  released  her  on
             bail.

         12.  The Appellant's mother arranged for  the  Appellant  to  leave
             Ethiopia.  After ten days in hiding,  the  Appellant  flew  to
             London with an agent, who had arranged a  false  passport  for
             her.  She worked in Lebanon for about a year and then went  to
             Greece, via Syria and Turkey.  The Appellant claimed asylum in
             Greece and she was fingerprinted.  The authorities issued  her
             with a permit that she had to renew every three  months.   She
             stayed in Greece for about 4 years and 4 months  and  suffered
             racial discrimination.

         13.  In January 2017 the Appellant flew to  France  with  an  agent
             using a false passport.  She stayed  in  France  for  about  8
             months and then travelled to Belgium, where she stayed  for  2
             months.

         14.  On 16 November 2017, the agent got the Appellant onto the back
             of a lorry and she arrived in the UK later that day.

         15.  In December 2017, the Appellant applied to  join  Ginbot7  and
             the application  was  successful.   She  officially  became  a
             member on 14 May 2018.

         16.  On 16 December 2017 the Appellant attended a  Ginbot7  meeting
             in London.  Following the Respondent's decision, she  attended
             a further meeting on 16 June 2018.  In addition, the Appellant
             attended a demonstration on 7 February 2018.

         17.  The Appellant fears that  if  she  returns  to  Ethiopia,  the
             Ethiopian authorities will kill her because of  her  political
             opinion."

 2. The judge gave detailed reasons for his  conclusions  on  the  evidence
    between paras [23] and [38] and, in particular, explained  at  [37]  in
    relation to pre-arrival events as follows:

         "37. When looking at the evidence in the round, I  have  given  the
             Appellant credit for aspects of  her  claim.   Nonetheless,  I
             find that she has failed to discharge  the  burden  of  proof.
             The Appellant has not  satisfied  me  that  she  has  given  a
             truthful account of experiences in  Ethiopia.   In  particular
             the Appellant has not satisfied me that she was involved  with
             Ginbot7 in Ethiopia or that the  authorities  had  an  adverse
             interest in her, when she left  Ethiopia.   In  addition,  the
             Appellant  has  not  satisfied  me  that  she  left   Ethiopia
             unlawfully.  It is my view, that the Appellant manufactured  a
             claim for asylum in order to stay in the UK."

 3. The judge accepted that the appellant had been  politically  active  in
    the United Kingdom and he formed the view that the background  material
    demonstrate that the  Ethiopian  authorities  are  likely  to  take  an
    adverse interest in anyone they suspect of  supporting  Ginbot  7  (see
    [44]).  He thereafter considered the evidence  of  the  appellant's  UK
    based activities and concluded at [51] and [52]:

         "51. On the totality of the evidence, I  find  that  the  Ethiopian
             government  relies  on  informers   or   spies   to   identify
             individuals  attending  a   demonstration.    As   such,   the
             Appellant's attendance at one demonstration is not  reasonably
             likely to have come to the adverse attention of the  Ethiopian
             authorities.

         52.  On the  other  hand,  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  Ethiopian
             authorities keep a close eye on Ginbot7 activities in the  UK.
             They  will  monitor  electronic  communication  and  rely   on
             spies/informers to identify active participants.  However,  at
             present  the  Appellant's  involvement  in  the  UK  has  been
             extremely  low  level.   Having  carefully  reviewed  all  the
             evidence, I find that the Appellant has not demonstrated  that
             the Ethiopian authorities are reasonably  likely  to  have  an
             adverse interest in her."

 1. The grounds of challenge refer to the Country  Policy  and  Information
    Note regarding the risks  faced  by  Ginbot  7  members  and  that  the
    appellant, having been outside Ethiopia for seven years  would  attract
    adverse attention attributable to her  membership and activities.   The
    appellant had shown there was a  real  risk  of  persecution  when  the
    correct standard of proof was applied.  Reference is also made  to  the
    Qualification  Directive,  in  particular  reg.  6(1)(f)  as   to   the
    definition of political opinion and reg. 6(2) (whether or not a  person
    actually possesses the relevant characteristic).  It is argued that the
    regulations had not been applied correctly.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on a renewed application to the  Upper
    Tribunal  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman.    In   granting
    permission, she explained at [3]:

         "3.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  accepted  at  [26]  that  the
             Appellant  is  a  member  of  Ginbot7  and  had   attended   a
             demonstration and two meetings in the UK.  However, he went on
             to make an adverse  finding  as  to  the  credibility  of  the
             Appellant's account of the raid by the  Ethiopian  authorities
             on a Ginbot7 meeting in Ethiopia at  [34].   Bearing  in  mind
             that  the  Appellant  was  no  longer   represented   in   her
             application for permission to appeal, it is arguable that  the
             reasons provided by the Judge for finding the Appellant  would
             not be at risk on return, either on account of her  membership
             of Ginbot7 in Ethiopia or in the UK are insufficient."

 5. The appellant was unrepresented  at  the  hearing  before  me  when  an
    Amharic court interpreter was provided. She recognised the  grounds  of
    challenge which she explained had been prepared by  Justice  First  who
    did not however represent appellants at hearings. She had most recently
    seen them about a week ago. The appellant confirmed that she understood
    the issues to be decided at the hearing  and  confirmed  that  the  FtT
    decision had been translated for her.  She had not  seen  the  rule  24
    response which formed the basis of Ms Petterson's submissions and I  am
    grateful to the interpreter for translating the document. The appellant
    indicated that she was ready to  proceed  without  representation  and,
    having regard to the issues in this case, I decided that it was just to
    do so.

 6. After I had explained to the appellant the  essence  of  the  challenge
    (the judge had applied the wrong standard of proof), she  responded  in
    terms that she had been asked too many questions  at  the  hearing  and
    recalled there had been some twenty.  Four or five questions  had  been
    asked by the judge and the rest by the Home Office Presenting  Officer.
    The appellant asserted that she had told the truth.  The way  in  which
    she had left the country did not permit her to bring  in  documentation
    by way of corroboration.  She referred also to a tribal war  continuing
    in the country and the risks faced by changing an address or  going  to
    another area.  She finally referred to her  child  who  had  been  born
    twenty days earlier.  The father is Timsae Mamo Feyisa.  The  appellant
    explained that he had a residence  permit  and  that  he  was  "just  a
    partner".  He is of Ethiopian origin.

 7. Ms Petterson relied on the Rule 24 response and, with reference to  the
    questioning of the appellant, observed  she  had  been  represented  by
    counsel at the hearing.

 8. I reach the following conclusions.  At [5] the judge  directed  himself
    as to the burden and standard of proof and correctly stated in  respect
    of the latter that it was to the lower standard.  There is  nothing  in
    my reading of his careful decision to indicate that a  higher  standard
    was applied.  There is no indication that  he  overlooked  any  of  the
    evidence which, as confirmed in paragraph [37]  he  considered  in  the
    round.  As noted above, the reference by the appellant to the number of
    questions she was asked does not appear excessive and, as  observed  by
    Ms Petterson, the appellant was represented by Miss Hashmi of  counsel,
    who made no submissions as to procedural fairness at the  hearing,  nor
    subsequently.

 9. I am unable to accept the observation by Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chapman regarding the adequacy of reasons.  The judge's findings as  to
    facts and credibility are set out between paragraphs [23] and [52].  In
    my judgment he gave sustainable reasons for rejecting  the  appellant's
    account of  claimed  difficulties  before  leaving  Ethiopia  and  gave
    sustainable reasons why he did not consider the appellant's  sur  place
    activities would place her at risk.  This  included  reference  to  the
    Country Information Policy Note, the 2014 Amnesty Report.

10. In relation to the appellant's claimed profile in Ethiopia,  the  judge
    noted that there had been a clear inconsistency between the appellant's
    account given during the hearing and her responses recorded in the  SIR
    of which he gave examples.  He attributed the change by  the  appellant
    in her account to a realisation that if she had left Ethiopia  lawfully
    this would contradict her claim  that  the  authorities  had  issued  a
    warrant for her arrest.  He considered  this  a  weighty  factor  which
    damaged the appellant's credibility generally.  In relation to the raid
    on the cell meeting the judge gave sustainable reasons ([33] and  [34])
    why this aspect of  the  account  was  not  plausible.   These  factors
    together with the absence of any political activities in Greece and her
    delay in  not  joining  the  party  until  December  2017  led  to  the
    conclusion set out above in [37].

11. The only aspect that is questionable is  the  indication  that  he  had
    regard to BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011]
    UKUT 36.  He does not explain why.  Nevertheless,  I  do  not  consider
    that this apparent  error  renders  his  decision  unsafe  or  that  it
    requires to be set aside.

12. It is correct that the  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  (CPIN)
    Ethiopia: Opposition to the government, October 2017 provides at 2.3.12
    (as noted by the judge at [27] of his decision):

         "Anyone who is a member or perceived to be a member of one  of  the
         three opposition groups designated as terrorist organisations  (the
         OLF, ONLF or Ginbot 7/AGUDM) - or other ethnic-based violent groups
         -  may  be  subject  to  surveillance;   harassment;   arrest   and
         imprisonment, where they are at  risk  of  incommunicado  detention
         torture and other abuses, or even extra-judicial killing. This  may
         also extend to supporters of these organisations or those  who  the
         government suspects of being supporters. The  government  has  used
         perceived or actual support of the OLF, or their objectives,  as  a
         means of suppressing political  opposition  (see  armed  opposition
         groups)."

13. 2.3.18 of the same Note states:

         "Decision makers must determine if someone is likely to come to the
         authorities' attention because of activities  or  association  that
         would be likely to give rise to suspicion that  they  are  involved
         with or support the OLF,  ONLF  or  AGUDM,  or  other  ethnic-based
         designated group. The onus is on the  person  to  demonstrate  this
         based on their profile and past experiences, including any  arrests
         and political  activities,  and  that  they  would  be  subject  to
         treatment amounting to persecution or serious harm."

14. It is clear to me that the fact someone is a supporter of Ginbot  7  is
    not in itself sufficient to establish that instead it is  necessary  to
    decide whether the activities or associations would give rise to  risk.
    The Home Office Guidance also relies on Upper Tribunal country guidance
    in MB (OLF and MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT  00030  stating  in
    another sub-paragraph that since then "the country  situation  has  not
    significantly changed".  It is not accepted  in  the  country  guidance
    that low-level supporters of opposition groups of any kind would be  at
    risk.

15. I do not know whether the judge in fact intended to refer to the  above
    country guidance rather than BA which has no relevance.  If he had  had
    regard to the correct country guidance it is inevitable that  he  would
    have come to the same conclusion on the evidence and reached  the  same
    findings made in respect of any risk faced by the appellant in relation
    to her UK-based activities.

16. By way of conclusion therefore I am  satisfied  that,  apart  from  the
    error  I  have  identified,  the  judge  gave  adequate   reasons   for
    disbelieving the appellant in relation to her Ethiopia-based activities
    and that he came to a sustainable conclusion on risk with reference  to
    events in the United Kingdom.  Any error in referring  to  BA  was  not
    material and there was no other factor in my judgment that requires the
    decision to be set aside.

Notice of Decision

17. This appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                  Date 2 May 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson



