
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06127/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 April 2018                             |On 10 May 2018                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                    [S p]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Rai, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  the  Syrian  Arab  Republic  who  made
    application for  international  protection.  It  was  refused  and  she
    appealed and following a hearing, and in a decision promulgated  on  12
    December 2017, Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Moore  dismissed  her
    appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

 2. In refusing the Appellant's application the  Respondent  accepted  that
    the Appellant is a Syrian national  but  also  rejected,  referring  to
    Abdullah v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 42 the Appellant's claim that she  held
    no other nationalities having found that she is a dual national of both
    Syria and Armenia.

 3. At paragraph 29 of his decision the Judge found that the Appellant  was
    not a credible witness but,  irrespective  of  that,  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer accepted that the Appellant could not be returned to
    Syria based on Country Guidance. The appeal therefore turned on whether
    the Appellant had status in an alternative country, namely Armenia, and
    could be returned there. This is dealt with at paragraph 30  onward  of
    the Judge's decision. She found that the Appellant had  not  discharged
    the burden of proving that she is not an Armenian national.

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    on 12 January 2018. However, a renewed application was granted by Upper
    Tribunal Judge Dr H H Storey on 19 February 2018. His  reasons  for  so
    granting were: -

         "It was the position of the respondent, accepted by the judge, that
         the appellant was of  Syrian  nationality  but  also  had  Armenian
         nationality. It is arguable that  para  33  discloses  an  arguable
         error of law in that the judge appears to consider that because the
         appellant might be able to apply for Armenian  citizenship  on  the
         basis that she meets the necessary criteria based on residence, she
         can be treated as a national of Armenia. However, as  a  matter  of
         international law, if a person does not have  nationality  ex  lege
         but  is  required  to  apply  and   demonstrate   compliance   with
         requirements,  that  person  is  not  presently  a  national.   The
         respondent does not appear to have requested the appellant to  take
         steps to obtain Armenian nationality prior to reaching  a  decision
         refusing her claim.

         The above does not necessarily exclude  that  the  appellant  might
         have Armenian nationality ex lege by another route on the basis  of
         descent from her father, but I am not  able  to  establish  whether
         that is so from the papers before me. The parties are  directed  to
         produce to the Upper Tribunal (FAO Dr Storey), within 28 days  from
         the  date  this  decision  is  sent,  evidence  relating   to   the
         nationality law of Armenia".

 5. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 6. Consequent upon the grant of permission to appeal produced to me was  a
    "legal opinion" prepared by Rusam Makhmudyan PHD,  Associate  Professor
    at the YSU Chair of the Constitutional  Law,  Member  of  the  National
    Assembly of RA, Deputy Chairman of NA Standing Committee on  State  and
    Legal Affairs and  Human  Protection.  This  opinion  deals  with  four
    questions which were posed to the opinion writer. The questions are: -

          1. On what basis do the Armenians get citizenship in the Republic
             of Armenia?

          2. Which are the grounds of getting citizenship  and  citizenship
             recognition by the Republic of Armenia law?

          3. Whether having an Armenian surname means a person  can  get  a
             citizenship in the Republic of Armenia?

          4. Does the foreigner living in the Republic of Armenia  have  to
             have any status of residence?

 7. Mr Rai particularly relied on Ground A in making his submissions to me.
    He  argued  that  the  Judge  had  made  an  unsupported  finding  when
    concluding that the Appellant is entitled to Armenian  nationality  and
    that this amounted to a  material  error  of  law.  The  issue  of  the
    Appellant's entitlement to Armenian nationality is determinative of the
    Appellant's claim as the Respondent is satisfied that the Appellant  is
    a citizen of Syria and cannot be returned there but finds that she  can
    be returned to Armenia as  she  is  entitled  to  Armenian  nationality
    because  of  being  in  that  country  for  a  three-year  period.  The
    Respondent     relies     upon     background      material      within
    www.mfa.am/en/citizenship. The grounds further contend that  the  Judge
    "seems to think" that the  Appellant  can  override  the  criteria  for
    Armenian  nationality  and  has  come  to  a  finding  on  what  is   a
    determinative issue within  this  appeal  which  is  not  supported  by
    evidence. The grounds then criticise the Judge's  credibility  findings
    which it is suggested are both irrational  and  arbitrary.  The  second
    ground of appeal (Ground B) asserts  that  the  Judge  has  misdirected
    herself in law  and/or  makes  unclear  findings  in  relation  to  the
    different standards of proof that have been applied.

 8. Mr Rai said that paragraph 30 of the Judge's decision amounted  to  the
    key issue in the appeal.  For  the  avoidance  of  doubt  paragraph  30
    states: -

         "The issue is therefore whether she has status  in  an  alternative
         country, namely Armenia, and can be returned there.  The  Appellant
         bears the burden of proving the material facts  of  her  claim  for
         asylum and humanitarian protection. Further she stated on her  visa
         application to this country that she is an Armenian  national  (and
         that her father is an Armenian national).  In  these  circumstances
         the burden of proof in respect of her contention that she is not in
         fact an Armenian national and therefore cannot  return  to  Armenia
         must fall  on  her.  Further,  since  the  issue  of  her  Armenian
         nationality is relevant to her ability to return to Armenia, rather
         than her risk of persecution, the standard of proof is the standard
         of the balance of probabilities rather than the lower  'real  risk'
         or  'reasonable  degree  of  likelihood'  test.  See  Abdullah   at
         paragraphs 16 and 23 and RM (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for
         the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 541 at paragraphs 34-36".

 9. Mr Rai went on to highlight the  content  of  the  "legal  opinion"  on
    acquiring the citizenship of the Republic  of  Armenia  and  emphasised
    that for a person who is Armenian by origin to acquire the  citizenship
    of the Republic of Armenia two conditions must  be  met  simultaneously
    namely "the  person  who  is  Armenian  by  origin  should  permanently
    residing (sic) in  the  Republic  of  Armenia"  and  "should  not  have
    citizenship of another country". Further that regardless of whether the
    person  is  Armenian  by  origin  or  not  the  legislation  prescribes
    requirements for the  acquisition  of  citizenship  which  include  the
    attaining of 18 years of age, permanently residing in the  Republic  of
    Armenia for the last three years, expressing him or herself in Armenian
    and is familiar with the constitution of the Republic of Armenia.

10. Mr  Avery  emphasised  that  the  Judge  had  adequately  reasoned  her
    conclusions having found at paragraph  31  of  her  decision  that  the
    Appellant had failed to discharge the burden of proof that she  is  not
    an Armenian national. He submitted that  the  grant  of  permission  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Storey was "misconceived", that the origin of  the
    "legal opinion" is unclear and in any event,  it  was  not  before  the
    Judge who decided the appeal in the First-tier.

11. The Judge  dealt  with  the  key  issue  of  the  Appellant's  Armenian
    nationality at paragraph 30 onward in her decision. She found that  the
    Appellant had not discharged the burden of proving that she is  not  an
    Armenian national. Also,  that  her  visa  application  to  the  United
    Kingdom stated that she was not only an Armenian national but that  her
    father was likewise and Armenian national. The Judge  took  account  of
    the  Appellant's  explanation  that  her  visa  application  had   been
    completed by someone else but found that no reason had  been  suggested
    as to why the agent would invent these two pieces of  information.  The
    Judge also found implausible the Appellant's evidence as to why she  no
    longer had possession of her Armenian  passport  (namely  that  it  was
    taken from her by somebody connected to her agent "outside  Northfields
    underground Station"). The Judge went on  to  find  that  she  was  not
    satisfied that having  lived  in  Armenia  for  over  three  years  the
    Appellant did not meet the necessary criteria for Armenian  citizenship
    according to the objective information set out in the refusal.

12. All this must be set  into  the  context  of  the  adverse  credibility
    findings in relation to the Appellant's claim including the  period  of
    residence in Armenia and, as I say, the loss of the  travel  documents.
    In short, the Appellant had been recognised by the Armenian authorities
    as an Armenian national and it was open to the Judge to find  that  she
    therefore had dual nationality.

13. The grant of permission to appeal gives rise to some difficulty. Mr Rai
    heavily relied upon the "legal opinion" put before me  consequent  upon
    that grant. It is important to emphasise that  this  document  was  not
    before the Judge at the First-tier hearing. Therefore, the Judge cannot
    be criticised for the absence of any finding in relation to  either  it
    or its content.

14. There are clear findings as to why the Judge finds the Appellant  holds
    Armenian citizenship which are adequately reasoned  and  they  are  not
    solely based on potential ability  to  make  application  for  Armenian
    citizenship. The findings were open to be made that the Appellant is  a
    citizen both of Syria and Armenia. They are not based on  irrationality
    but on objective material that was before the Judge.  Contrary  to  the
    grounds there is no irrationality at all within the Judge's credibility
    findings.  Throughout Judge Moore has applied the  correct  burden  and
    standard of proof.

15. For these reasons the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    did not involve the making of an error on a point of law.



Decision

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 2 May 2018.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard








