

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/06703/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                       |                                    |
|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 10 November 2017                   |On: 28 November 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                           MOHAMMED ALI SHAHAJADA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Z Malik of Counsel
For the respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellant, a national  of  Bangladesh  born  on  20  September  1987,
   appeals to the Upper Tribunal against  the  decision  of  the  respondent
   dated 15 June  2016  refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
   protection  in  the  United  Kingdom.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davey
   dismissed the appellant's appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  12  June
   2017.


2. Permission to appeal was at first refused by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Landis on 6 July 2017 but subsequently granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
   Gleeson in a decision dated 15 September 2017 stating that it is arguable
   that the Judge did not  take  into  account  the  significant  amount  of
   country evidence which is  not  analysed  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
   decision as to the risk to a former Chatra Shibir  (CS)  student  leader,
   which  has  been  accepted  by  the  respondent,  given  the  change   of
   circumstances in Bangladesh and the Awami League's hostility to Jamiat-e-
   Islami.


3. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  his  decision  made  the  following
   findings, which I summarise. The appellant claims  that  if  returned  to
   Bangladesh, he would face mistreatment due to his political opinions as a
   result of his activity working with the CS the student wing of the Jamiat-
   e Islami. The appellant claimed that in his role working as a sub  branch
   of CS  he  would  face  adverse  attention  from  the  Awami  League,  in
   particularly their student wing Chatra League (CL). He claims that  there
   were three incidents which arose before he  left  Bangladesh  which  give
   rise to his fear of ill-treatment on return in that country.


4. The appellant claims that he left Bangladesh in 2010 because he found  it
   difficult to study in Bangladesh and because of the political  atmosphere
   at the time. The appellant hoped that by the end of  his  studies,  there
   would have been a change of government and that the Awami League would no
   longer be in power. The Awami League however took power in about February
   2009 for a five-year term and in disputed elections, they were re-elected
   for a second term on 5 January 2014.


5. The respondent accepted that the appellant is a Bangladeshi national  who
   had been politically involved with the CS the party in Bangladesh. It was
   not accepted however that the appellant had  received  threats  from  the
   Awami League. It was also accepted by the respondent that  the  appellant
   had  continued  his  political  activities  in  the  UK  essentially   in
   opposition to the Awami League, although it does not appear  specifically
   on behalf of the CS.


6. The appellant's claimed problems with the Awami League  were  before  the
   appellant left Bangladesh and said to  have  taken  place  in  2009.  The
   appellant claimed that he had  been  working  towards  having  a  cricket
   tournament which the Awami League or CL prevented. Further the  appellant
   claimed to have been threatened by two CL members who told him  to  leave
   Bangladesh in about July 2009. He further claims that he and others  were
   involved in distributing leaflets  in  support  of  CS  members  involved
   themselves in a fracas. This occurred sometime after his exams  in  2009.
   The appellant claimed that he was not physically ill treated himself, but
   CL were vigorous in their opposition to CS.


7. The appellant disputes his reply to question 38 of his asylum  interview,
   where he was asked whether he had any evidence of any threats from the CL
   to him, to which he replied, "I personally did not get any  threats  from
   the Chatra League, but my other members did".  The  appellant  says  that
   this answer he gave is not correct and that threats were made to him.


8. The appellant confirmed that he has not been  arrested  or  detained  and
   apart from making a reference to the issue in his  asylum  interview,  he
   relied upon a false claim by way of an FIR or an arrest warrant which  he
   claims had been filed against him. He said that his parents had been told
   about this from people in his organisation.  However,  the  police  never
   interviewed his parents or made enquiries from them as to the appellant's
   whereabouts or notified anyone as to the nature of the  allegations.  The
   appellant says he thinks that the police did not attend his home  because
   "others" would have known of  his  absence  from  Bangladesh.  Therefore,
   there was no purpose served in the police asking about  his  whereabouts.
   This explanation does not actually square with the claim that the  police
   acting for and at the behest of the Awami League would take no action  or
   make appropriate enquiries about the appellant. Nor does it  avoid,  even
   if it was a false claim, the matter  proceeding  on  that  basis  in  his
   absence.


9. There is no documentation to  support  the  claim  of  police  activities
   investigating the  appellant  and  nothing  to  show  that  there  is  an
   outstanding warrant for his arrest nor any  process  through  the  courts
   engaged against  him.  It  has  been  put  for  the  appellant  that  his
   credibility is supported by his lack  of  explicit  reliance  upon  these
   claimed threats because of the  absence  of  evidence  of  support.  This
   argument cannot be given significant weight in assessing credibility  for
   the reasons set out above. The appellant claims he would be  at  risk  on
   return because of his political activities in the past, as well as whilst
   in the UK, evidencing his continued political opinion interests.


10. The Secretary of State accepts that the appellant has had  a  continuing
   interest in his political activities in the United Kingdom. The issue  is
   whether there is a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  because  of  his
   political activities and opinions on return to Bangladesh at the hands of
   the authorities, such that he cannot have recourse to domestic protection
   nor whether internal relocation a reasonable option. The appellant claims
   in the alternative to be in need of humanitarian protection and  in  this
   respect, he also claims similarly that there is no protection against the
   authorities and that wherever he is in Bangladesh, he would not  be  able
   to safely relocate.


11. The standard of proof is a reasonable likelihood of risk on return.  The
   appellant claims that the reason he did not claim asylum when he came  to
   the United Kingdom was because he was studying. He  only  claimed  asylum
   once it became clear to him that  there  was  no  change  likely  in  the
   government because the Awami League succeeded in contested  elections  in
   January 2014.


12. The appellant's activities in the United Kingdom have been to  attend  a
   demonstration to protest against the Awami League. The  appellant  claims
   to have used Facebook and posted pictures on his face book. The appellant
   further believes that there is video footage taken of a demonstration  in
   which one Mr Ali was the object  of  the  demonstrator's  complaints  and
   there was a counter-demonstration by  Awami  League  supporters  and  the
   appellant believed  that  he  would  be  identified  by  the  Bangladeshi
   authorities.


13.  The  supporting  document  which  the  appellant  provides   have   not
   identified that a false FIR has been filed against him.  At  its  highest
   this is something he had heard from his parents.  There  is  no  evidence
   from his parents or lawyers on their behalf concerning these matters  and
   indeed there is no evidence  at  all  from  them  about  the  appellant's
   presence in the United Kingdom or any fears they have  arising  from  his
   past political activities or future political intentions.


14. The letters from CS essentially confirmed the appellant's activities  in
   Bangladesh which the Secretary of State accepted had taken place but  did
   not  identify  further  any  specific  and  continuing  risk  faced.  The
   appellant has been in contact with his parents through the telephone  and
   Skype or email but there is nothing from them about the issues raised  in
   Bangladesh to justify the appellant's concerns.


15. The Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.


   The grounds of appeal


16.  The  appellant  and  his  grounds  of  appeal   makes   the   following
   submissions, which I summarise.  The  Judge  was  wrong  to  dismiss  the
   appellant's claim for asylum based on his risk on  return  to  Bangladesh
   due to his genuine political opinion and  belief.  The  Judge  failed  to
   adequately consider the country guidance evidence regarding the situation
   in Bangladesh and/or failed to provide  adequate  reasons  engaging  with
   this material. The Judge was wrong to conclude that the  appellant  would
   not be at real risk of persecution as he did not have  a  "profile"  such
   that he would be of interest to the Bangladeshi authorities.


17. The  Judge  was  wrong  to  make  findings  without  adequate  reasoning
   regarding relevant country evidence. The  first  is  that  the  appellant
   would not need to conceal his political views  if  he  were  returned  to
   Bangladesh to avoid persecution in Bangladesh, or that  even  if  he  did
   express  his  political  views  and  engaged  in  political  activity  in
   Bangladesh he would not be at real risk  of  persecution  and/or  serious
   harm. Second that the appellant's profile was such that  he  was  not  at
   real risk of persecution or serious  harm  on  return.  Third,  that  the
   Bangladeshi authorities would not be aware of the appellant's  anti-Awami
   League activities in the United Kingdom and fourth that the CS or Jamat-e-
   islami "does not support the claim of risks to" the appellant. Lastly the
   Judge was  wrong  to  find  that  the  appellant  and  his  claim  lacked
   credibility in any respect.


18. One important argument advanced before the Judge of  the  First-tier  in
   support of the appellant's appeal was that in light  of  the  appellant's
   political views ("which the respondent did not appear to dispute") he was
   at real risk on return to Bangladesh. Applying RT (Zimbabwe)  and  others
   with the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 38, which
   held that those who would conceal their  political  views  on  return  to
   avoid persecution were entitled to asylum.


19. The Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  making  limited  adverse
   credibility findings in paragraph 21-25 and highlighted that there was no
   evidence that  the  Bangladeshi  authorities  had  become  aware  of  the
   appellant's anti-Awami League activities conducted widely in  the  United
   Kingdom at paragraph 19. The Judge ultimately found that the  appellant's
   past activities do not raise his profile to be of continuing interest  or
   indeed of any real interest to the Bangladeshi  authorities,  other  than
   his participation in 2003 and 2009 activities and that  Bangladesh  is  a
   democratic  multi-party  state  and  the  appellant  would  be  able   to
   participate in political life and he would have no need  to  conceal  his
   political opinions.


20. The Tribunal was referred to the country evidence contained  within  the
   appellant's bundle  filed  before  the  first-tier  Tribunal.  The  Judge
   received detailed submissions on that material, but it was not considered
   adequately or at all in the decision. What this country evidence shows is
   that the situation  for  political  opponents  to  the  Awami  League  in
   Bangladesh is dire. The general evidence in this regard was fortified  by
   the evidence adduced by the appellant of those in a similar situation  to
   him who have been persecuted. In light of this evidence, it is submitted,
   at least to the applicable lower standard of proof, that if the appellant
   sought to openly criticise the Awami League or to support CS or  Jamat-e-
   Islami in Bangladesh, he would be at risk of physical violence, arbitrary
   arrests, fabricated persecutions and discrimination at the hands  of  the
   Bangladeshi authorities.


21. Given this country evidence and given the fact that  the  Judge  appears
   to have accepted as did the respondent that the appellant was  a  genuine
   political opponent closely associated  with  large  political  opposition
   groups  in  Bangladesh  and  given  the  uncontested  evidence  that  the
   appellant would continue vigorous overt political activity in Bangladesh,
   the Judge had no basis for concluding at paragraph  28  of  the  decision
   that the appellant could express himself  without  well-founded  fear  of
   persecution. Indeed, the Judge does not explain how  he  can  reach  that
   conclusion given that it clearly runs against the weight of  the  country
   evidence placed before him.


22. At paragraph 26 the Judge refers to the appellant's profile as a  result
   of his past activities. There was  and  is  no  evidence  that  political
   opponents willing to express their positions views in Bangladesh are only
   liable to a risk of  harm  or  persecution  if  they  have  a  particular
   "profile", let alone what the indicators for a "profile" are.


23.  The  February  2015  COI  enjoins  decision  makers  to  consider   the
   particular circumstances a person claiming to be at  risk  in  Bangladesh
   because of their political views, but there is no  sufficient  evidential
   foundation for the view that one's history of political activities has to
   indicate a particular type of profile before the Bangladeshi state  would
   be interested in a political opponent, and indeed  the  country  evidence
   adduced by the appellant in this case strongly indicated  that  this  was
   not a prerequisite for a well-founded fear of persecution  for  political
   opinion to arise.


24. The Judge's view that there is nothing to indicate from the  Bangladeshi
   authorities' activities that they have seen anything of  the  appellant's
   activities in the United Kingdom misses the point  and  does  not  engage
   with relevant country guidance. The objective information indicated  that
   the Bangladeshi  authorities  may  monitor  electronic  communication,  a
   matter not engaged with by the Judge and it is not  necessary  to  adduce
   positive  evidence  that  the  Bangladeshi  authorities  had   seen   the
   appellant's  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom.  In  any   event   the
   appellant's  previous  political  activity  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
   primarily relevant because the appellant gave uncontested  evidence  that
   he could continue similar activities in Bangladesh and if he were  to  do
   so there is a real risk that this would come  to  the  attention  of  the
   Bangladeshi State.


25. The Judge's focus on a "profile"  based  on  past  activity  betrays  an
   error of approach. In RT, the decision makes clear  that  the  tribunal's
   focus should be forward-looking. It  should  consider  whether  political
   expression in the country  of  return  would  generate  a  real  risk  of
   persecution on return, which could only  be  avoided  by  suppression  of
   genuine political views. Although the judge does address the question and
   RT issues generally  his  analysis  is,  with  respect,  superficial  and
   inadequate for the reasons given.


26. The Judge at paragraph 25 of the  decision  said  that  the  appellant's
   political associates and members of the CS  and  Jamaat-e-Islami  do  not
   support the appellant's claim to be at risk. These letters  certainly  do
   not suggest that the appellant would not be at risk on return and do tend
   to support the appellant's claim,  as  does  the  fact  that  those  with
   similar  histories  and  political  views  to  the  appellant  have  been
   persecuted in Bangladesh and the decision does not engage with this.


27. The Judge has significantly  underestimated  the  dangers  of  political
   opponents to the Awami League in Bangladesh, which appears  primarily  to
   be the result of inadequate  or  incomplete  assessment  of  the  country
   guidance evidence placed before the Judge and his  belief  or  assumption
   that  Bangladesh  tolerates  overt  political  opposition  which  is  not
   supported by and in fact runs contrary to the background evidence.


28. In this regard it is noted that there is no  relevant  country  guidance
   case dealing with  the  issues  which  arise  in  this  appeal,  and  the
   respondent's country information is dated. However, there was  clear  and
   sufficient evidence before the judge which  established  the  appellant's
   claim to asylum.

Findings on whether there is an error of law

29. I have given anxious scrutiny to the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Davey and have considered the grounds of appeal and the submissions
   of the parties at the error of law hearing.

30. The main complaint made against the Judge is  that  he  did  not  engage
   with the background evidence in respect of risks to  political  opponents
   of the Awami League who are currently  in  power  in  Bangladesh.  It  is
   argued that substantial background evidence was  provided  to  the  Judge
   which was not considered as there is very little mention  of  it  in  the
   decision. The  second  main  complaint  against  the  Judge  is  that  he
   materially erred when  he  said  that  the  appellant  does  not  have  a
   particular "profile" which would put him at  risk  with  the  Bangladeshi
   authorities without stating what the nature of the profile should be.  It
   was also argued that the Judge  did  not  give  proper  consideration  to
   whether the appellant's political activities in the United Kingdom  would
   have come to the attention of the Bangladeshi authorities and put him  at
   risk.

31. The Judge accepted,  as  did  the  respondent  that  the  appellant  had
   participated in political activities in  Bangladesh  and  in  the  United
   Kingdom. The Judge found that the appellant could  return  to  Bangladesh
   and continue with his politics as it is a multiparty State and  that  the
   appellant would not need to conceal  his  political  opinions  and  could
   participate in political life openly in that country, as he had  done  in
   the past.

32. The background evidence is that  political  activity  in  Bangladesh  is
   fraught with violence from some factions and this is the way politics  is
   done in Bangladesh. This shows that  the  Judge  took  into  account  the
   background evidence when the Judge found that the  Bangladeshi  political
   life is from time to time particularly violent which is just  the  nature
   of the way politics is conducted in that country and in this respect,  it
   is hard to distinguish between the student wings of political parties, in
   terms of their willingness to use extreme actions. The Judge stated  that
   nevertheless it is at its  highest  a  general  risk  that  is  faced  in
   Bangladesh and certainly not one particular to the appellant.  The  Judge
   found that the appellant does not have a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
   serious harm as a result of his past activities in Bangladesh or for  his
   sur plus political activities in the United Kingdom.


33.  Background evidence states that "almost  every  major  political  party
   has a student wing... The Bangladesh Chattra  Dhal  (BCD)  is  affiliated
   with the Bangladesh  Nationalist  Party  (BNP),  the  Bangladesh  Chattra
   League (BCL) is connected to the ruling Awami League (AL),  and  the  ICS
   [Islami Chhatra Shibir] is associated with JI. These groups  function  in
   connivance with their affiliated parties and when their  parties  are  in
   government, armed "student" groups become  unchallenged  perpetrators  of
   human rights abuses, reportedly under  the  patronage  of  their  party's
   politicians. The involvement of  these  armed  groups  in  the  political
   process is one of the major causes of political violence  in  Bangladesh.
   Political parties have routinely pledged, but  failed,  to  disarm  them.
   Fighting  between  rival  student  wings  featured  heavily  during   the
   political impasse in 2013 between the AL and BNP. Future disputes between
   the two major parties are very likely to include fighting between student
   wings."

34. The evidence before the Judge was that the Awami  League  was  currently
   are in power in Bangladesh and have been since 2009. The appellant was  a
   member of the CS from 2003 onwards rising through  the  ranks  to  become
   president  of  a  sub-branch  in  2005  and  finance  secretary  of  that
   organisation until he left the country in 2010 for further studies in the
   United Kingdom.


35. The Judge after properly evaluating the evidence was  entitled  to  find
   that the appellant  had  not  provided  credible  evidence  that  he  was
   persecuted in Bangladesh before he came to the United Kingdom due to  his
   political activity with the student branch, CS. The  appellant's  claimed
   political activities which resulted in  the  claimed  negative  political
   "atmosphere", which is the reason that he left Bangladesh,  was  that  on
   one occasion had been working towards having a cricket  tournament  which
   the Awami  League  and  CL  prevented.  He  also  claimed  to  have  been
   threatened by two CL members who told him to leave  Bangladesh  in  about
   July 2009. He  further  claims  that  he  and  others  were  involved  in
   distributing leaflets in support of CS members who involved themselves in
   a fracas. The appellant claimed that he was not  physically  ill  treated
   himself, but CL were vigorous in their opposition to CS.


36. The evidence before the Judge was that the appellant  was  a  member  of
   the CS from 2003 onwards rising through the ranks to become president  of
   a sub-branch in 2005 and finance secretary of that organisation until  he
   left the country in 2010 for further studies in the United  Kingdom.  The
   Judge found that the appellant managed to participate in  political  life
   in Bangladesh for all this time. The Judge found that the  appellant  did
   not come to the adverse attention of the authorities  for  his  political
   activities whilst in Bangladesh which was a conclusion available  to  him
   on the evidence.


37. The Judge noted in his decision that the  appellant  tried  to  distance
   himself from his earlier evidence at question 38 of his asylum  interview
   when he had stated, "I personally did not get any threats from the Chatra
   League, but my other members did". The Judge was entitled not to find the
   appellant's  evidence  was  inconsistent  as  to  whether  he  had   been
   threatened in Bangladesh which went to the credibility of his claim  that
   he was threatened.


38. The Judge also noted that appellant  confirmed  that  he  has  not  been
   arrested or detained and apart from making a reference to  the  issue  in
   his asylum interview, he relied upon a false claim by way of an FIR or an
   arrest warrant which he claims had been filed against him. He  said  that
   his parents had been told about this from  people  in  his  organisation.
   However, the Judge noted that police never  interviewed  his  parents  or
   made enquiries from them as to the appellant's  whereabouts  or  notified
   anyone as to the nature of the allegations. The appellant says he  thinks
   that the police did not attend his home because "others" would have known
   of his absence from Bangladesh. Therefore, the Judge was entitled to find
   no purpose would  have  been  served  in  the  police  asking  about  his
   whereabouts. The Judge was also entitled to find  that  this  explanation
   does not actually square with  the  appellant's  claim  that  the  police
   acting for and at the behest of the Awami League would take no action  or
   make appropriate enquiries about the appellant. He also stated that,  nor
   does it avoid, even if it was a false claim,  the  matter  proceeding  on
   that basis in the appellant's absence. There is no irrationality in these
   findings on the evidence.


39. The Judge also relied on  the  lack  of  documentation  to  support  the
   appellant's claim of police activities investigating  the  appellant  and
   nothing to show that there is an outstanding warrant for his  arrest  nor
   any process through the courts engaged against him. The Judge  also  said
   that there is nothing explicitly from the jamaat-e-Islami concerning  the
   appellant's participation in local politics or in the United Kingdom.


40. I find that the Judge was entitled to  find  that  past  persecution  in
   Bangladesh had not been established by the appellant.  The  Judge  stated
   that the appellant would not be at risk on return  because  of  his  past
   political activities  in  Bangladesh  which  is  an  indicium  of  future
   persecution.


41. The Judge found that the appellant's  credibility  was  damaged  by  his
   immigration history. This was that the appellant  was  granted  leave  to
   remain until 30 May 2015. On 30 July 2013 his curtailment was  considered
   but not pursued. On 9 January 2015 his curtailment was considered but not
   pursued. The appellant was aware therefore that  his  immigration  status
   was precarious, but he still did not claim asylum  but  instead  made  an
   application on the bases of his family and private life in this  country.
   No credible explanation was given to the Judge for why the appellant  did
   not claim asylum though he knew that  the  Awami  League  had  come  into
   power. The appellant did not claim asylum until 16  December  2015  after
   his judicial review application of 7 October 2015 and his appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal was dismissed on 21 December 2015.


42. The Judge was entitled to find that the appellant's  delay  in  claiming
   asylum of almost 5 years went to the appellant's credibility and  to  the
   credibility of his claim that he  fears  persecution  on  his  return  to
   Bangladesh. The Judge was entitled also to find that if the appellant was
   in genuine need of International protection he would have claimed  asylum
   much earlier and not waited until all his application to remain  in  this
   country in respect of his  private  and  family  life  appeals  had  been
   dismissed and removal being imminent.


43. The Judge  found  that  the  appellant  can  return  to  Bangladesh  and
   continue with his political activities as he has done in the past without
   adverse attention from the authorities.  This  is  a  perfectly  rational
   conclusion reached on  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  in  fact  did
   participate in politics in Bangladesh for the CS until  he  came  to  the
   United Kingdom.

44. In respect  of  the  appellant's  political  activities  in  the  United
   Kingdom, the Judge found that the appellant supports an  organisation  in
   the United Kingdom called "Save  Bangladesh"  which  does  not  exist  in
   Bangladesh. There no error of law material or otherwise in his reasoning,
   that the appellant who did not attract the attention of  the  authorities
   for his political activities  with  the  CS  for  a  long  time  when  in
   Bangladesh would attract their attention due to his  activities  with  an
   organisation which is not a political party in the United Kingdom.  There
   is no perversity in this reasoning.


45. The Judge noted that the appellant did  not  have  the  "profile"  which
   would bring him to the attention of the authorities. This  is  consistent
   with the Country Information Report  which  states  that  "membership  or
   support of groups opposed to the current government does  not  of  itself
   give rise to a well-founded fear of persecution in  Bangladesh.  Decision
   makers must assess claims made on the basis of  the  person's  actual  or
   perceived involvement in political opposition to the  current  government
   on the facts of the case, taking account of the nature of the applicant's
   claimed political activity or profile; and; the extent to which they  may
   have come to the adverse attention of the authorities and the reasons for
   that; the level and nature of actual or perceived  political  involvement
   as well as their previous experiences in Bangladesh".


46. The evidence before the Judge of the  appellant's  political  activities
   in Bangladesh was that on one occasion the appellant organised a  cricket
   match which was stopped by the Awami League. Another  activity  was  that
   the appellant distributed  leaflets  for  the  student  body.  The  Judge
   concluded that  because  the  appellant  had  not  come  to  the  adverse
   attention of the authorities while conducting his  political  activities,
   the authorities did not consider his  involvement  to  be  of  particular
   consequence for it to come to their attention. The Judge was entitled  to
   say that it is now not open for the appellant to say that he will not  be
   able to express his political opinion openly on his return to  Bangladesh
   when he was able to do so before he left Bangladesh.


47. The  Judge  referred  to  the  background  evidence  which  stated  that
   Bangladeshi  is  a  parliamentary  democracy  which  appears  in  the  US
   Department of  State  Report  in  the  country  report  on  Human  Rights
   Practices for 2013. The report stated that "while  political  affiliation
   was sometimes a factor  in  the  armed  and  persecution  of  members  of
   opposition parties, the government did not persecute  individuals  solely
   for political reasons". Therefore, the Judge did consider the  background
   evidence even if he has not specifically referenced it in his decision.


48. It is argued  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the  appellant  will
   robustly and fearlessly continue with his  political  activities  on  his
   return to Bangladesh and that this would put him at risk  and  cited  the
   case of. RT (Zimbabwe), which held that those  who  would  conceal  their
   political views on return to avoid persecution were entitled to asylum.


49. In RT Zimbabwe the question was put to thus.  "Is  it  an  answer  to  a
   refugee claim by an  individual  who  has  no  political  views  and  who
   therefore does not support the persecutory regime in his home country  to
   say that he would lie and feign loyalty to that regime in order to  avoid
   the persecutory ill-treatment to which he would otherwise  be  subjected?
   This is the question of general importance that arises in  these  appeals
   which are a sequel to the decision of this court in HJ (Iran) v Secretary
   of State for the Home Department [2011] 1 AC 596. In that case,  it  was
   held that a gay man was entitled to live freely and openly in  accordance
   with his sexual identity under the Refugee Convention ("the  Convention")
   and it was no answer to the claim for asylum that he  would  conceal  his
   sexual identity in order to avoid the persecution that would follow if he
   did not do so.


50. The Convention affords no  less  protection  to  the  right  to  express
   political opinion openly than it does to the right to live  openly  as  a
   homosexual. The Convention reasons reflect  characteristics  or  statuses
   which either the individual cannot change or cannot be expected to change
   because they are so closely linked to his identity or are  an  expression
   of fundamental rights. The HJ (Iran) principle applies to any person  who
   has political beliefs and is obliged to conceal them in  order  to  avoid
   the persecution that he would suffer if he were to reveal them


51. The Judge found that  the  appellant  in  this  case,  had  been  openly
   politically active in Bangladesh for a  considerable  time  and  had  not
   being obliged to conceal his political opinions and  activities  and  had
   pursued them robustly and fearlessly. He found that this was without  any
   adverse consequences and the appellant did not flee his  country  because
   of adverse attention from the authorities. He came to  this  country  for
   studies because he did not like the atmosphere in Bangladesh and had said
   that he was not able to study. Implicit in the Judge's reasoning was that
   it is therefore not open for the appellant to  now  say  that  he  cannot
   return to  Bangladesh  to  continue  political  activities  when  he  had
   conducted them in the past and since 2003.


52. The appellant was last in Bangladesh in 2010 and on his return, he  will
   no longer be a student. Therefore, he will not be part of  student  rival
   groups which background evidence states is the major cause  of  political
   violence in Bangladesh. The Judge found that there is no case  registered
   against the appellant while he was in the CS as a student  and  therefore
   his activities in the past will not bring him to  the  attention  of  the
   authorities because  they  did  not  while  he  was  in  Bangladesh.  The
   appellant would not have to forfeit a fundamental right that he would  be
   entitled to, to avoid persecution which is to  participate  in  political
   activity in Bangladesh.


53. The  appellant  is  not  expected  to  be  discreet  on  his  return  to
   Bangladesh and is able to continue his political  activities  as  he  has
   done in the past and which it was found by the Judge did  not  result  in
   any adverse consequences for him and there is no material error of law in
   that conclusion.


54. I find that the position of the appellant is not analogous to that of  a
   homosexual who is obliged to live a "discreet" life in order to avoid the
   persecution that he would suffer if he revealed his sexual orientation or
   that the appellant would have to hide his  political  opinion  or  indeed
   pledge allegiance to a party he does not belong to.


55. The Judge found that the appellant will not be persecuted purely on  the
   ground that he belongs to the CS as that in itself  will  not  bring  the
   appellant to the adverse attention of the authorities the same way it had
   not done so in the past. The Judge found  that  culture  of  politics  in
   Bangladesh  is  inevitably  one  of  violence  and   therefore   everyone
   participates in politics can be at risk and it is not a threat particular
   to the appellant. In other words, the appellant has not been targeted  in
   the past in Bangladesh due to his politics and political views. There  is
   no perversity to this conclusion.


56. The background information is  that  membership  or  support  of  groups
   opposed to the government does not in itself give rise to a  well-founded
   fear of persecution in Bangladesh. The appellant who openly  opposed  the
   Awami League and was the  CS  financial  secretary  did  in  fact  openly
   expresses views for his party and it was  found  by  the  Judge  that  he
   suffered no adverse consequences due to his political views  and  conduct
   other than the usual student group rivalries.

57. I find it is an error not to  consider  the  background  information.  I
   accept that the Judge did  not  reference  all  the  background  evidence
   provided by the appellant in his decision but that is not to say  he  did
   not consider  the  background  evidence.  The  Judge  does  not  need  to
   reference every  piece  of  evidence  that  he  has  considered.  I  have
   considered the decision in the round against the background evidence  and
   find that there is no material error in the Judge's conclusion  that  the
   appellant would not be at risk on his return to Bangladesh either due  to
   his activities in Bangladesh or his activities in the United  Kingdom.  I
   find that there is no material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  and  I
   understand the reasoning and the conclusions that the Judge reached based
   on the evidence before him.


58. I therefore find that  although  there  is  no  material  error  in  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and a  differently  constituted
   Tribunal would not come to a different conclusion on consideration of all
   the evidence in this appeal.

59. I conclude that there is no material error in the decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal and the decision stands.


DECISION

Appeal dismissed

Signed                                                                    by
   Dated this 25th day of November 2017
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
..........................................
Ms S Chana









