
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/06808/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 August 2017                         |On 7 September 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     BA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               TEH SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Alban of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the appellant who claims asylum.   This  order
    prohibits the disclosure  directly  or  indirectly  (including  by  the
    parties) of the identity of the appellant.  Any disclosure  and  breach
    of this order may amount to a contempt  of  court.   This  order  shall
    remain in force unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal or court.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran of Kurdish ethnicity.  His  date  of
    birth has been assessed as 10 June 1998.  He entered the United Kingdom
    on 27 August 2014, aged 16, and claimed asylum on 17 October 2014.   An
    asylum interview took place on 12 January 2015.  On 13  February  2015,
    the Secretary of State  refused  the  appellant's  claims  for  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.  However,  because
    of his age, the appellant  was  granted  discretionary  leave  until  9
    February 2015.

 3. The  appellant's  (then)  solicitors  made  further  submissions  on  8
    February 2016.  On 14 June 2016, the Secretary of State  again  refused
    the appellant's claims.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed against the decision of  14  June  2016  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant's claim is that he is wanted by the
    Iranian authorities and that he has witnessed an 'incident'  whilst  in
    Iran when three men visited a shop in June 2015 and, it was  said,  had
    killed three security officers.  The judge (Judge Frazer) did not  find
    the appellant to be credible and dismissed his appeal.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hodgkinson) on
    10 May 2017.  On 31 May 2017, the Secretary of State filed  a  rule  24
    notice seeking to uphold the decision.

The Grounds of Appeal

 6. Ms Alban, who represented the appellant, sought permission to amend the
    grounds of appeal upon which permission was granted.  She  relied  upon
    the grounds as set out in her skeleton argument.  She reminded me  that
    the appellant had not been legally represented before the judge; he had
    a McKenzie friend (a social worker) who had also assisted the appellant
    in drafting the grounds of appeal upon which permission was granted.

 7. Although it is somewhat unusual to permit the amendment of the  grounds
    at this late stage, there is a discretion to do so under  rule  5(3)(c)
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698  as
    amended) applying the overriding objective set out in rule 2 of dealing
    with a case "fairly and justly".  I bear in mind that the appellant was
    not previously legally represented and some of the amended grounds  are
    no more than an elaboration of the original points raised.  Mr Diwnycz,
    who represented the Secretary of State, did  not  actively  oppose  the
    application and was in a position to make submissions  in  relation  to
    them.  In the  circumstances,  applying  the  overriding  objective,  I
    exercised my discretion to allow the amendment.  As I  have  indicated,
    in  any  event,  dealing  with  the  grounds  de  bene  esse,  I  heard
    submissions from both representatives in respect of those grounds.

The Submissions

 8. First, Ms Alban submitted that the judge had been wrong to discount the
    evidence before her from the McKenzie friend (social  worker)  who  had
    real concerns about the appellant's  mental  health.   Also,  Ms  Alban
    submitted that as a consequence, the judge had failed to factor in  the
    appellant's mental health problems when assessing discrepancies in  his
    evidence.

 9. Secondly, Ms Alban submitted that the judge had been wrong to take into
    account, in assessing the  appellant's  credibility  that  he  had  not
    previously mentioned or obtained a letter which he said his father  had
    received from the authorities asking him (the appellant) to  surrender.
    Ms Alban relied upon the Strasbourg Court's decision  in  JK  v  Sweden
    (Application No 59166/12) at [92] that: "the lack of direct documentary
    evidence thus cannot be decisive per se".

10. Thirdly, Ms Alban submitted that the judge  had  wrongly  identified  a
    discrepancy in the  appellant's  evidence  when  he  had  said  in  his
    interview that, when he heard the shooting outside the shop,  he  "went
    to look outside" as being inconsistent with his evidence at the hearing
    that he had not gone outside but rather had seen the  incident  through
    the glass window of  the  shop.   Ms  Alban  submitted  that  what  the
    appellant  had  said  at  interview  was  ambiguous;  it  was   equally
    consistent with what the appellant said in his oral  evidence  that  he
    had looked outside through the window.

11. Fourthly, the  judge  had  been  wrong  to  discredit  the  appellant's
    evidence as implausible in para 31 when  the  judge  had  stated  that,
    because of the brutal state machinery in Iran such as the  Etelaat,  it
    was "incredible that Etelaat officers who were intent  on  apprehending
    someone in connection with the murder of  police  officers  would  have
    taken a father's word that he did not know the whereabouts of  his  son
    at face value".  Ms Alban drew my attention to, and  relied  upon,  the
    well-known passage in the judgment of Neuberger LJ (as he then was)  in
    HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 at [29] on the dangers of  relying  upon
    plausibility as a reason for disbelieving an individual.

12. Fifthly, Ms Alban submitted that the judge erred in law in  failing  to
    consider the appellant's claim outside the Rules under Art 8  when  she
    stated  that  she  did  not  consider  there   were   "any   compelling
    circumstances" to warrant consideration of his  claim  based  upon  his
    private life outside the Rules.  Ms Alban relied upon his attachment to
    his foster family and his education and mental health problems.

13. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Diwnycz relied upon the rule 24 notice.
     In addition, Mr Diwnycz candidly accepted that given what was said  by
    the social  worker,  a  professional  representative  would  likely  be
    seeking a medical report on the appellant's  mental  health.   He  also
    accepted that there  was  some  merit  in  the  argument  that  it  was
    unreasonable to expect the appellant to provide  the  letter  from  his
    father.  Overall, however, Mr Diwnycz submitted that the judge had been
    entitled to reach her  adverse  finding  and  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds.

14. In respect of Art 8, he contended that the judge's approach in para  34
    was just sufficient not to amount to an error of law.

Discussion

15. There are a number of matters raised in  the  grounds  and  Ms  Alban's
    submissions which lead me to conclude that the judge's decision  cannot
    stand.

16. First, I accept the submission that the judge was wrong to  identify  a
    necessary inconsistency in the appellant's evidence  in  his  interview
    and oral evidence.  It is clear from his interview  that  he  said:  "I
    heard  shooting.   I  went   to   look   outside".    Without   further
    clarification, and there was none at the interview, that  statement  is
    equally consistent with his having looked through  the  window  to  see
    what was happening outside as it is with (as  the  judge  assumed)  him
    saying that he went outside to see what had happened.

17. Secondly, however, and most significantly, is the judge's  approach  to
    the appellant's claimed mental health difficulties.  It is  clear  that
    before the judge the social worker,  acting  as  his  McKenzie  friend,
    raised concerns based upon her professional experience.  The  appellant
    was plainly a potentially  vulnerable  witness  and  should  have  been
    treated as such.  The judge went to some length, it is true, to satisfy
    herself that the  logistics  of  the  hearing  were  conducive  to  any
    vulnerability by the appellant.  Also, at para 7 of her  determination,
    she said this:

         "As the Appellant was only just  eighteen  I  queried  whether  any
         adjustments should be  made  to  the  hearing.   Mrs.  Morgan,  the
         Appellant's current social  worker,  indicated  that  it  would  be
         sufficient for the Appellant to be allowed to have  breaks  in  his
         evidence if he required them.  I allowed this.   I  also  permitted
         Mrs. Morgan to act as a McKenzie Friend insofar as she was able  to
         assist him to make submissions in  closing.   The  Appellant,  Mrs.
         Morgan and Ms. Rawlings made oral submissions in closing".

18. However, what was being  said  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  by  his
    McKenzie friend, was that there were concerns about his  mental  health
    and memory which were relevant both to the conduct of the  hearing  but
    also in the assessment of his evidence given  previously  in  interview
    and orally before the judge.  In relation to that, the judge dealt with
    it  at  the  end  of  the  concluding  substantive  paragraph  of   her
    determination.  At para 34, the judge said this:

         "On his behalf his social workers have drawn my attention to  their
         concerns about his mental health  and  memory.   I  do  place  some
         weight on their professional observations and  I  have  read  their
         case notes which record that they have observed that  he  has  been
         distressed in the lead up to  the  hearing.   However,  I  have  no
         medical evidence from a qualified physician concerning  his  mental
         health and any possible causes thereof.  Without such evidence I am
         unable to reach any firm conclusions about his mental health or any
         other vulnerabilities that he may have.  I noted that he  was  able
         to respond well to questions in cross-examination".

19. Whilst it is, of course, true that the evidence from the social  worker
    was not that of a  health  professional,  nevertheless  it  is  readily
    apparent that social workers have considerable  experience  in  dealing
    with young or vulnerable people.  Whilst what the  social  worker  said
    did not establish that the appellant had mental  health  problems  that
    evidence did raise a 'red flag' which might require,  as  a  matter  of
    fairness, investigation.

20. The importance of dealing fairly with children  and  vulnerable  people
    has recently been considered, and positively reaffirmed, in  the  Court
    of Appeal's decision in AM (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  and  Lord  Chancellor
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1123.  At [27], the Senior President of Tribunals  (Sir
    Ernest Rider)  identified the obligation of a Tribunal and the  parties
    as follows:

         "It is accordingly  beyond  argument  that  the  Tribunal  and  the
         parties are required so far as is practicable  to  ensure  that  an
         appellant is able to participate fully in the proceedings and  that
         there is a flexibility and a wide  range  of  specialist  expertise
         which the Tribunal can utilise to  deal  with  a  case  fairly  and
         justly".

21. The Court of Appeal was not only concerned with  the  procedure  to  be
    adopted at a hearing but also in respect of the assessment of  a  young
    person or vulnerable person's evidence.

22. Whilst in the ordinary course of events where an individual is  legally
    represented,  issues  relating   to   an   individual's   vulnerability
    (including mental health issues) are likely to be at the  forefront  of
    that legal representative's mind and drawn to the Tribunal's attention.
     The judge can, in such circumstances, adjust both  the  procedure  and
    also consider whether further evidence,  such  as  evidence  concerning
    mental health, is required applying the overriding objective  of  being
    "fair  and  just".   As  the  Senior  President  points   out   in   AM
    (Afghanistan), these are matters which can appropriately be dealt  with
    in case management hearings and may engender a less favourable response
    from a judge if the legal representative waits  until  the  substantive
    hearing and  seeks  an  adjournment,  for  example  to  adduce  further
    evidence (see [28]-[29]).

23. Here, however, the obligation of the parties to "co-operate"  with  the
    Tribunal, has less practical impact where the appellant is not  legally
    represented.  The onus that might be placed upon a legal representative
    to prepare in advance of a hearing his or her client's case,  including
    supporting medical evidence such  as  that  relating  to  the  client's
    mental health, has less of a bearing.

24. Yet, the professional view of an experienced  social  worker  was  that
    there were issues relating  to  the  appellant's  mental  health.   The
    appellant's credibility  was  in  issue  and  the  judge  analysed  his
    evidence disbelieving him, in part, on the basis of inconsistencies  in
    his evidence.  Whilst the judge did not have the benefit of  the  Court
    of Appeal's judgment in AM (Afghanistan), its  strictures  should  have
    led the judge to consider whether an opportunity should be given to the
    appellant to seek medical evidence concerning his mental  health.   She
    did not do so and that, in itself, was in my judgment, a material error
    of law.  Further, one of the reasons given by the judge for, not having
    regard to what was said by the social worker, was  that  the  appellant
    was "able to respond well" to questions in cross-examination.  The fact
    that he answered coherently -  which  is  perhaps  what  the  judge  is
    identifying - did not mean that his recollection could be  expected  to
    be  consistent.   Nor  did  it  necessarily  mean  that,   because   of
    vulnerabilities such as mental health problems, it must be  taken  that
    he had disclosed throughout his account each and every specific  detail
    such as mentioning the letter from his father and that he had  run  out
    of the back door.

25. It is not necessary for me to reach a conclusion on the remainder of Ms
    Alban's submissions.  Suffice it to say, for the reasons I have  given,
    I am satisfied that the judge erred in law and that her decision cannot
    stand.

26. In my judgment, since sustainable factual findings must  be  made,  the
    decision in respect  of  Art  8  must  be  re-made  also.  The  Judge's
    reasoning is brief.  It would not be just to allow the Art  8  decision
    to stand alone in those circumstances.

Decision

27. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside
    and must be re-made.

28. The proper disposal of this appeal is, having regard to para 7.2 of the
    Senior President's Practice Statement, to remit it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the decision to be re-made de novo before  a  judge  other
    than Judge Frazer.

29. On remittal, the First-tier Tribunal, in advance of any listed  hearing
    date, may wish to consider a case management review on the  basis  that
    the appellant's now legal  representatives,  Fountain  Solicitors,  may
    wish to obtain evidence relating to the appellant's  mental  health  in
    advance of the hearing.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            6 September 2017


