

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/06598/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                   |          Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 April 2017                   |          On 31 May 2017                |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before


                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between


                                     MJ
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Latta and Co, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:       Mr Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The claim for protection


   1. The appellant's claim is that he is an Iranian Kurd born in March
      1992.He follows the Sunni branch of Islam. He is from a small village
      outside the city of Sardast. He lived with his parents and sister. She
      married and moved to Tehran. He worked as a labourer and was not
      married. He had around seven year's education. He had no interest in
      politics.


   2. His father was a member of the left-wing Kurdish nationalist party,
      the Komala. He was part of it military force, the Peshmerga. His
      father had been absent for a week when villagers brought his body back
      to the family home and he was buried that day. This was around June
      2015.

   3. One month later the appellant was approached by the Iranian
      intelligence service, the Ettela'at. They told him their members had
      killed his father and they wanted him to be an informant. They
      revisited and he told them he had no information to give. Initially
      they were friendly towards him and then started to become threatening.
      They told him to meet them again in 10 to 12 days time. In November
      2015 he moved to north Iran where he had a friend. His mother
      telephoned him stating she had received a letter from Ettela'at
      telling him not to return to the village or he would be killed. His
      mother moved to Teheran to her daughter's. He left Iran at the end of
      November 2015 and with the help of an agent travelled to Turkey and
      then Greece, Slovenia, Austria, Germany and France. He stayed just
      over a week at the last two countries.

   The refusal

   4. The respondent did not accept the claim was true. It was accepted he
      was an Iranian Kurd. It was not considered credible he would know so
      little about his father's death .The claimed behaviour of Ettela'at
      was not considered credible. The respondent viewed the appellant as
      someone who was of no interest to the authorities.


   5. Reliance was placed upon the country guidance decision of SB ( risk on
      return- illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UK AIT 00053 in concluding that
      he would not face any real risk on return for leaving the country
      illegally. In considering his credibility section 8 of the Asylum and
      Immigration (Treatment of Claimants)Act 2004 was relied upon in that
      he had travelled through various European countries considered to be
      safe and had not claimed there.


The First tier Tribunal

   6.  The grounds of appeal acknowledge that the appellant's credibility
      was the determinative issue. It was contended that the appellant had
      been consistent. He was at risk because of his association with the
      Komala party through his father. Iranian Kurds associated with any
      dissident groups were at risk from the Iranian authorities. The
      account was consistent with the background information. There was no
      need for the appellant to provide corroborative evidence .It was not
      right to speculate on the motives of Ettela'at or why they acted as
      they did. As the threat was from the State sufficiency of protection
      and internal relocation did not arise.


   7. His appeal was heard in Glasgow in October 2016 before First-tier
      Judge Lea and was dismissed. Ms Todd represented the appellant then as
      she does now.

   8. The judge heard from the appellant and at paragraphs 13 to 15 set out
      the claim. The judge recorded that the appellant had been on holiday
      and was on his way home when he received a telephone call about his
      father being killed. By the time he arrived his father's body had
      already been brought to the village and buried the same day. From
      speaking to people he learnt that his father's comrades in the Komala
      had brought back his body. He said no one was really sure as to what
      had happened beyond the fact his father had been killed. He refers to
      his father as having a high rank within the Komala party and that this
      was why they targeted the appellant. The threatening letter was
      referred to and it was in the family home but it was too dangerous for
      anyone to retrieve it in order to support the appellant's claim. He
      said he did not claim asylum en route because he had no opportunity to
      do so.

   9. The judge then set out the respondent's view which considered the
      claim was implausible and lacked credibility. His failure to claim in
      safe countries damaged his credibility.

  10. The judge did not accept he was wanted by the Iranian authorities as
      claimed. He would not face a risk for having left illegally. The judge
      said he had failed to explain why there was so little information
      about his father's death given that he was from a small village or why
      party members did not explain.

  11. The judge found his evidence about his mother inconsistent. The
      appellant had said his mother was old and would not know anything and
      that his why the authorities did not target her. However, he also said
      his mother did not want to tell him about the party in case he became
      involved and suggested she knew more about his father's activities
      than he did.

  12. The judge did not consider it credible that the Ettela'at could have
      visited him on several occasions without villagers noticing this.
      Whilst he had described Ettela'at as powerful on his claim he was able
      to refuse to co-operate on a number of occasions without harm.

  13.  His evidence about a letter from them was considered to lack
      credibility. In his asylum interview he said the letter told him to
      leave or else he would be killed. This was then corrected by his legal
      representatives to the effect that the letter simply said he would be
      killed. However, in his oral evidence he said the letter told him
      attend at a certain time and place. Then he changed this to it being
      just a general threat. His evidence suggested the letter was at the
      family home but it was too risky to go to the house together. The
      judge considered it implausible that no family member could return to
      the house, particularly as the appellant did not know whether
      Ettela'at had been back looking for him.

  14. The judge acknowledged there was no need for corroborative evidence
      but referred to the absence of a death certificate or evidence of any
      report of his father's death. The country information had referred to
      the Komala organisation having a television channel and websites. The
      judge also referred to the appellant's failure to claim protection
      through the various countries he passed and found his explanation that
      he had no interpreter and had been beaten up as unlikely.

The Upper Tribunal.

  15. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge failed to engage with the background material or to give
      adequate reasons for the findings made. Reference was made to the
      judge's comment about the appellant being from a small village and
      questioning why there was no information about his father's death. The
      grounds contended the size of the village was irrelevant and the
      country evidence indicated that Ettela'at is responsible for the
      unlawful killing of Kurdish activists. Similarly, a death certificate
      would not be forthcoming because the authorities would not want to
      leave a paper trail. Regarding the letter reference was made to the
      country evidence confirming that the authorities monitor homes and
      correspondence. The appellant's evidence was that he did not maintain
      regular contact with his family because of this and they were afraid
      to return to the home.


  16. Ms Todd relied upon the grounds on which permission was granted. The
      success of the appeal turned upon the appellant's credibility. She
      argued that the judge did not engage with the country evidence on the
      treatment of Kurds and those involved with Kurdish movements.

  17.   In response, Mr Mullen made the point there was nothing to indicate
      comment on the country evidence would have led to many different
      conclusion. The issue was the truth of the claim. He submitted the
      claim was not credible. The appellant was from small rural area and
      news about his father's death should have travelled quickly. Instead,
      on the appellant's account he had no real information as to what had
      happened. The other points taken by the judge against the appellant
      had not been challenged. Regarding the absence of a death certificate,
      the background information did refer to underreporting. In any event,
      a certificate would have shown the cause of death and not the
      circumstances. The appellant claimed there was relevant documentation
      which he had not brought with him when he left the country.

  18. Both representatives agreed that if an error of law was found the
      matter should be remitted back to the First tier Tribunal for
      rehearing.

  19. The respondent had made a response under rule 24 opposing the appeal.
      It was contended that the adverse credibility findings made by the
      judge were based on an accumulation of points. In this regard
      reference was made to the Court of Appeal decision of Y-v- SSHD [2006]
      EWCA Civ 1223.

  20. I have considered the decision in the round. The question is not
      whether I would have decided matters differently but whether a
      material error of law has been demonstrated. All parties agree that
      the appellant's credibility was determinative of the appeal. The
      respondent had taken number of points in the refusal letter which the
      judge took into account. It is correct that the general background on
      Iran indicates intolerance by the authorities of Kurdish separatist
      organisations. Ettela'at has committed unlawful killings. It engages
      in surveillance activities. There is force in Mr Mullen's point that
      the background information on a country helps put matters in context
      but it does not follow that an individual claim is true. Ultimately
      the truth of the claim must be assessed by the judge.

  21. The judge makes a number of points. The appellant said his father was
      engaged with the Komala party and was part of its military force. He
      later suggests that his father held a significant role. The judge
      pointed out an inconsistency in the claim in relation to the
      appellant's mother. On the one hand the appellant had indicated the
      Ettela'at had not bothered with her because she was elderly and did
      not know anything. The judge then commented on the appellant's
      evidence which suggested in fact she knew more about his father's
      activities than he did and was trying to protect him as he grew up. It
      is obvious she could be used as a lever against him. Her apparent
      immunity was a legitimate factor to comment upon.

  22. There is an absence of detail from the appellant about what happened
      to his father. The point about the appellant coming from a small
      village is that villagers generally have an awareness of everything
      that is going on locally. On the appellant's account his father was
      brought back by colleagues in the Komala party. It was legitimate to
      comment on the lack of detail in the circumstance.

  23. It was open to the judge to comment that even if his father was not
      killed locally some information could have been relayed to villagers
      at the time of the burial. The refusal letter indicates the Komala
      party has a TV channel and a website. The judge commented that if the
      appellant's father were killed while serving for them this could have
      featured. The judge correctly pointed out that there is no requirement
      for corroborative evidence in a claim for protection. However, it is
      legitimate comment on the evidence presented and the absence of
      evidence which should have been available to support a claim. The same
      appertains in relation to the absence of a death certificate or the
      production of the claimed threatening letter.

  24. I do not find it established that the judge ignored relevant country
      information. Rather the judge's approach indicates an awareness of the
      position of Kurds in Iran and the activities of the Ettela'at in
      evaluating the truth of the claim.

  25. The judge drew an adverse finding from the fact the appellant
      travelled through several safe countries and did not claim protection.
      It is clear that the judge weighed up these various factors in
      evaluating the appellant's credibility. I find no material error of
      law in the judge's approach.

Decision.

No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-tier
Judge Lee. That decision, dismissing the appellant's appeal, shall stand.



 Deputy Judge Farrelly

28th May 2017

