
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06927/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 January 2019               |On 16 January 2019              |
|                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    F. N.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Soltani, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Lebanon, travelled to the UK legally  on  6
    December 2015.  He  claimed  asylum  on  30  December  2015,  and  that
    protection claim was refused on 22 June 2016. His  appeal  against  the
    decision to refuse him protection status was  then  heard  and  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules by decision of First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Head-Rapson, promulgated on 7 August 2017.

 2. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    by decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce of 3 October 2018, albeit not
    on the grounds of his application, but on the Robinson obvious question
    of what (if any) convention ground the appeal had  been  allowed  upon,
    and the true basis upon which the Judge  had  purported  to  allow  the
    appeal.

 3. The Appellant was also  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal by decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Lever of  30  October
    2018. The complaint was that if the  Judge  had  dismissed  the  asylum
    appeal, she should have gone on to consider the Article  3,  Article  8
    and humanitarian protection grounds of appeal.

 4. Neither party has applied under Rule 15(2A) for further evidence to  be
    admitted in the remaking of the decision. Thus the matter comes  before
    me.

Error of law?

 5. When the matter was called on for hearing the parties were agreed  that
    the decision discloses a material error of law, and by  consent  I  was
    invited to set aside the decision, and remake  it.  By  consent  I  was
    invited to dismiss the asylum and humanitarian  protection  grounds  of
    appeal, and to allow the Article 3 appeal.

 6. I am satisfied that it is appropriate to do so in these  circumstances,
    pursuant to Rule 39 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008. The parties are content that the Judge's findings of fact fail to
    disclose any engagement of the Refugee Convention. The Respondent  does
    not have permission to appeal the Judge's  finding  of  fact  that  the
    Lebanese state is unable to provide sufficiency of  protection  to  the
    Appellant. As Mr Diwnycz accepts, the time for offering a challenge  to
    Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce's refusal of permission on  that  ground  is
    well past. No attempt has been made to challenge the Judge's finding of
    fact that the Appellant had told the truth  about  his  experiences  in
    Lebanon, and that he faced a real risk of harm from a non  state  agent
    should  he  return  there,  as  a  result  of  reporting  the  criminal
    activities of that individual to the authorities.




    DECISION

    By  Consent;  the  Decision  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  which  was
    promulgated on 7 August 2017 did involve the making of an error of  law
    that requires the decision to be set aside and remade.

    The appeal is dismissed on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.

    The appeal is allowed on Article 3 grounds


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 4 January 2019



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.







Signed





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 4 January 2019

