
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/06459/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25 September 2017                  |On 27 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                           mr ahmed mohammed salih
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Solicitor, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Iraq,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  Judge  Hussain  sent  on  14
    February 2017  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent made on 7 June 2016 to refuse  to  grant  him  international
    protection.

2.   I am grateful to the parties for their succinct submissions.

3.   It is relevant to note before addressing the judge's reasoning that  in
    the respondent's refusal decision of June 2016 it was accepted that the
    appellant faced a real risk of serious harm in his home area of Al-Douz
    (near Tikrit) in Salah Al-Din.  That was in line  with  the  conclusion
    reached by the Upper Tribunal in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT
    544.  The judge decided to depart from that position because in  August
    2016 the respondent had issued updated Country Information and Guidance
    on Iraq which stated  that  in  general  civilians  were  now  able  to
    relocate to Kirkuk and Salah Al-Din.

4.   The grounds contend that the judge erred by failing to  apply  AA.   As
    amplified by Mr Howard this was said to constitute an error because the
    evidence relied on by the judge did not establish durable change.  I am
    not persuaded this ground is made out.  First, a judge is only  obliged
    by Tribunal Practice Directions  and  case  law  to  follow  a  country
    guidance case if there is no fresh evidence.  Plainly there  was  fresh
    evidence before the judge.  Second, what the judge had  to  assess  was
    whether the appellant's home area was safe for him in terms of  whether
    he could return there without facing a real risk of serious harm  (i.e.
    whether the area was "safe").  On the evidence before the judge,  there
    was sufficient evidential basis for him to conclude it was safe because
    the assessment of the UT in AA that Salah Al-Din was unsafe  was  based
    on it being a "contested area", whereas on the new evidence it  was  no
    longer contested, ISIS had been driven out and was under the control of
    the Peshmerga and Turkmen militia.   Third,  although  the  judge  only
    cited  one  item  of  fresh  evidence,  the  Home   Office   CIG   Iraq
    Return/Internal Relocation Report,  that  was  based  on  a  number  of
    sources of information, and  it  reflected,  for  example,  the  latest
    position as set out in UNAMI reports.  Because it was a source  drawing
    in turn of multiple sources, including sources on the ground  in  Iraq,
    it also sufficed to be characterised as "cogent evidence" in the  sense
    identified by the Court of Appeal in SG (Iraq) [2015] EWCA Civ 940.  Mr
    Howard made reference in his submissions to there being  evidence  that
    ISIS had not been entirely driven  out  of  this  area  and  that  ISIS
    pockets remained.  However, he cited no  sources  in  support  of  this
    contention and even assuming that was the case, there  was  nothing  in
    the evidence before the judge to suggest that such  pockets  threatened
    the control now exercised by the liberating forces.  The same  is  true
    of Kirkuk which was the area the judge for most of the time assumed the
    appellant's home area to be; the CIG identified both Salah  Al-Din  and
    Kirkuk as now generally safe.

5.   The grounds also raised a challenge to the judge's adverse  credibility
    findings but it is confined to the tenuous assertion that  the  judge's
    reasons  at  [10]-  [15]  was  inadequate   without   any   elaboration
    whatsoever.  In those paragraphs the judge gave a number of reasons for
    concluding that the appellant had not given a credible account  of  his
    family home being burnt down, his brother being killed by Turkmen  Shia
    militia and his father having disappeared.

6.   The grounds  also  take  issue  with  the  judge's  findings  that  the
    appellant would in any event be able to relocate safely and  reasonably
    to the IKR, but that was avowedly a finding "in the alternative" ([20])
    and in the absence of any viable challenge to  the  judge's  assessment
    that the appellant could safely return to his home  area,  this  ground
    has no traction.

7.   Mr Howard submitted that the judge also  erred  in  failing  to  follow
    parts of the country guidance in  AA  that  were  separate  from  those
    relating to the issue of whether his home area was  a  contested  area.
    He pointed to paragraph 15  of  AA.   Paragraph  15,  however,  is  not
    concerned with risk arising from mere return to Iraq  via  Baghdad  but
    with relocation to Baghdad for  persons  whose  home  area  is  unsafe.
    Further AA  did  not  find  that  Baghdad  was  generally  unsafe:  see
    paragraphs 8 and 9 below.

8.   The grounds challenge that the judge erred by not applying the  country
    guidance of BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG  [2017]  UKUT  00018  (IAC)
    [119].  However, the grounds here quite carelessly  omit  to  refer  to
    paragraph (i) of the head note of BA which states that:

         "(i) The level of violence in Baghdad City remains significant, but
             the current evidence  does  not  justify  departing  from  the
             conclusion in [AA]."

9.   Nor is there any reference to the statement in (iv) of  the  same  head
    note that "... the evidence does not show a real risk to a returnee  in
    Baghdad [on the ground of being  a  returnee  from  the  West]  alone".
    Whilst (vii) refers to the generally inability of  the  authorities  in
    Baghdad to protect "Sunni complainants", the appellant  was  neither  a
    Sunni nor someone who had faced serious harm in Baghdad.

10.  Mr Howard conceded at the outset that the  appellant  could  derive  no
    benefit from the the Court of Appeal "correction" of certain points  of
    the  country  guidance  in  AA  relating  to  documentation  since  the
    appellant had in fact all the necessary documentation to enable him  to
    enter Iraq and to access food ration and health  and  other  facilities
    see [22].

11.  I see nothing in the further written ground, not pursued by  Mr  Howard
    that the judge erred in concluding that the  appellant  had  not  shown
    there would be very significant  obstacles  to  (re)  integration  into
    Iraq.  The appellant's appeal was restricted to  protection  and  human
    rights grounds and did not  turn  on  paragraph  276ADE(i)(iv)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In any event, on the judge's findings of  fact  the
    appellant had clearly failed to show there would be such obstacle.

Notice of Decision

For the above reasons the First-tier Tribunal judge did not  materially  err
in law and his decision must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 8 October 2017
                 [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

