

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/06561/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2 May 2018                          |On 9 May 2018                       |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                     A T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:             Mr M Moksud of Immigration International
Advice
For the Respondent:          Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. To preserve the anonymity direction deemed necessary  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.

2.  This is an appeal by the Appellant against the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Wedderspoon promulgated on 15 November 2017, which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.




Background


3. The Appellant was born on 1 July 1968 and is a national  of  Algeria.  On
23 June 2017 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's  protection
claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  Wedderspoon  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  11  December
2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew gave permission to appeal stating

      I am satisfied there are arguable errors of law in  this  decision  in
      that the Judge gave inadequate reasons for finding the  appellant  was
      not credible in his claims. Further, he did  not  consider  article  8
      despite this being a ground of appeal and refered to, albeit  briefly,
      in the skeleton argument.

The Hearing

5. Mrs Aboni told me that having considered the decision and  the  grant  of
permission to appeal she would have  difficulty  resisting  the  appeal.  Mr
Moksud moved the grounds of appeal and asked me to set  the  decision  aside
and remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  of  new  because
of the inadequacy of fact finding, and because the article  8  ECHR  grounds
of appeal have not been considered.

Analysis

6. I am grateful to Mrs Aboni for her pragmatic  approach  to  this  appeal.
The Judge's findings are contained between [21] and [24]  of  the  decision.
In those short paragraphs the Judge says that  she  is  not  satisfied  with
aspects of the appellant's claim  that  there  are  inconsistencies  in  the
evidence.

7. The Judge does not explain why she is not satisfied with aspects  of  the
appellant's evidence. The Judge does not carry out any  meaningful  analysis
of  the  evidence  nor  does  she  adequately  explain   where   she   finds
inconsistency.

8. Before the First-tier, the appellant adopted the  terms  of  his  witness
statement. Paragraphs 9 and 10 of his witness statement drive at  article  8
ECHR grounds of appeal. No consideration is given to article 8 ECHR  grounds
of appeal in the Judge's decision.

9.     In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT  00641  (IAC),  it
was held that (i) It was axiomatic that a  determination  disclosed  clearly
the reasons for a  tribunal's  decision.  (ii)  If  a  tribunal  found  oral
evidence to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or  a  document  to  be
worth no weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the  determination
and for such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare  statement  that  a
witness was not believed or that a  document  was  afforded  no  weight  was
unlikely to satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

10.  As the decision is tainted by material errors of  law  I  must  set  it
aside. I am asked to remit this case to the First -tier. I consider  whether
or not I can substitute my own decision,  but  find  that  I  cannot  do  so
because of the extent of the fact-finding exercise necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

11. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

12. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

13. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Manchester  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge R Wedderspoon.



Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

15. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 15  November  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 8 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

