
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06428/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 17th October 2018                            |On 23rd October 2018       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     AY
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms M Patel, instructed by Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Malik promulgated 2.7.18, dismissing on all grounds  his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 2.5.18, to
    refuse his claim for international protection.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio granted permission to appeal on 7.8.18.



Error of Law

 3. For the reasons set out below, I found no material error of law in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to require it
    to be set aside.

 4. The judge found the core factual basis of the appellant's case to  have
    been fabricated and that he was and is not of any adverse  interest  to
    the Houthi, their  supporters,  or  to  the  Yemeni  authorities.  That
    finding has not been appealed.

 5. The grounds centre on the Article 15(c) risk of indiscriminate violence
    and the judge's finding that the appellant can return  or  relocate  to
    Aden in the south of Yemen.

 6. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Adio found it arguable that the
    judge had failed to consider all the relevant  background  evidence  in
    deciding that it was reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate  to
    Aden.

 7. The crucial findings in this regard are at [26] of the decision. It  is
    clear that the judge has considered the Home Office CPIN and  noted  at
    the outset that the respondent accepted that in many  cases  relocation
    to Aden, which is  considered  to  be  relatively  safe,  will  not  be
    feasible.

 8. The general situation within Yemen is of  an  internal  armed  conflict
    between the UAE-backed Houthi occupying the north of  the  country  and
    the alliance of Southern-separatists and the internationally recognised
    government, backed by Saudi Arabia. The  situation  has  been  somewhat
    fluid.

 9. There has  been  no  appeal  against  the  judge's  findings  that  the
    appellant was born in Aden, lived there from birth in 1963 to 1970  and
    returned to live there again between 1980 and 1985. He  also  undertook
    his military service there. The judge also rejected the claim that  the
    appellant's family are in Taiz and found no reason why they  could  not
    join him in Aden, if they are not already there. It was  also  open  to
    the judge to find that the appellant's brother is in  Aden,  which  has
    not been appealed. The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    vulnerable individual but a healthy, well-educated man who  has  worked
    both in Yemen and Bulgaria and has a  wife,  four  children  and  seven
    siblings in Yemen to whom he could return to. In the circumstances, the
    judge concluded that it would not be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh  to
    expect him to relocate to Aden on return.

10. This conclusion was based on the judge's  finding  at  [26]  that  Aden
    remains under the control of the Saudi-backed government, which was the
    position of the respondent stated at [44] of the refusal  decision  and
    cited by the judge at [26] of the tribunal's decision.

11. The grounds complain that the judge  failed  to  consider  the  country
    background information in the appellant's supplementary bundle,  namely
    reports from the Guardian newspaper and the BBC that  in  January  2018
    Yemeni separatists surrounded the Presidential Palace  with  government
    senior figures inside. However, this information in  two  news  reports
    was in my view inadequate to justify the judge departing from the  Home
    Office country background information. They presented a 'snap-shot'  of
    events at one particular time some 6 months prior to the appeal hearing
    and no evidence was presented to show that  by  reason  of  the  events
    described this appellant would be at risk or that the situation had not
    been resolved. Such news reports are  in  reality  poor  evidence  that
    there was an article 15(c) risk. As Mr Bates also pointed  out  in  his
    submissions, the actions arose from a dispute in the  alliance  between
    the Southern-separatists and the Saudi-backed official  government  and
    targeted  government  figures.  There  was  nothing  to  suggest   that
    civilians in Aden were targeted or at risk of indiscriminate  violence.
    I ignore for this purpose Mr Bates attempt to give  evidence  that  the
    dispute described in the two reports was resolved within 48 hours.

12. Another report relied on from 2016 claimed that northern  Yemenis  were
    being deported from Aden in a form of ethnic cleansing. However,  I  am
    not satisfied that on the unchallenged findings of  the  tribunal  that
    this has any relevance to the appellant, whom the judge  concluded  was
    from Aden, even if he had lived elsewhere including Sanaa.

13. It is also complained that the judge failed to consider 2.3.15  of  the
    Home Office policy set out in the appellant's bundle.  However,  it  is
    precisely that passage which the judge must  be  referring  to  at  the
    outset of [26]. Further, whilst the background information states  that
    return may be feasible but full individual circumstances as to where  a
    person originates from and where they will return to (2.4.4), in  other
    words a case by case assessment. However,  that  is  exactly  what  the
    judge  did  so,  setting  out  the  relevant  findings  and  noting  in
    particular the unappealed finding  that  the  appellant's  brother  has
    remained living in Aden and that the appellant's family will be able to
    join him there. On all the circumstances, I find  that  the  judge  has
    made an adequate assessment  and  reached  a  conclusion  open  to  the
    tribunal on the unappealed findings made. No up to  date  evidence  was
    presented to me to demonstrate that there is an article 15(c)  risk  in
    Aden. The core of the appellant's case was rejected as a fabrication.

14. In the circumstances, I find the assertions in the grounds are not made
    out. Even though the judge made no specific reference  to  the  January
    2018 news articles, I am satisfied that there  was  no  material  error
    that could have affected the outcome of the appeal.

Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

                       I do not set aside the decision.

                       The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  stands  and
                    the appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I continue the anonymity order.


Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


