
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/06247/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                   | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 April 2018                         | On 27 April 2018                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    A O A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Brakaj, Iris Law
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Head-Rapson promulgated on 28 November  2017,
    allowing the respondent's appeal on humanitarian protection and Article
    8 grounds.

 2. The respondent is a citizen of  Iraq  of  Kurdish  ethnicity  and  from
    Kirkuk.  He was born on 1 March 1984 and  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    clandestinely, and claiming asylum on 21 August 2001.  Although refused
    asylum, he was granted exceptional leave to remain until 2005  and  was
    later granted indefinite leave to remain on 3 January 2006.

 3.  As detailed in the refusal letter of 21 June 2017 the respondent has a
    number of criminal convictions including  assaults  for  actual  bodily
    harm (8 February 2007) possessing drugs, driving whilst uninsured,  the
    most  serious  offence  being  a  conviction  on  2   July   2010   for
    wounding/inflicting grievous bodily harm for which he was sentenced  to
    twelve months' imprisonment.   As  a  result  of  that  conviction  the
    respondent signed a deportation  order  against  the  respondent.   His
    appeal against that decision was allowed on 30 September  2011  to  the
    extent of being remitted back to the Home Office for  the  respondent's
    duties pursuant to Section  55  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2009  to  be
    considered.

 4. The Secretary of State maintained that decision and on  10  April  2014
    signed a new deportation order against  the  respondent.   He  appealed
    against that decision but the appeal was dismissed on  7  August  2014.
    The appeal against that decision was unsuccessful as were  applications
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against that decision.

 5. Following further submissions submitted on a number of dates between 28
    July 2015 and 15 February 2017,  including  the  information  that  the
    respondent was in a relationship with his now wife  and  the  birth  to
    them of two children the Secretary of  State  considered  that  it  was
    appropriate to make a fresh decision in which she  concluded  that  the
    respondent did not have a well-founded fear of persecution and that  as
    the security situation had changed in Kirkuk he would be able to return
    there and although not from Baghdad, would not be  expected  to  return
    there other than for the purpose of his route of  return  to  his  home
    area.  It was also noted following AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]
    UKUT 00554 that he would be able  to  relocate  to  the  Iraqi  Kurdish
    Region should he choose to do so.  It was considered he would  be  able
    to resettle in the IKR if he so desired.

 6. The Secretary of State considered that Article 15(c) did not  apply  in
    this case first  because  the  area  around  Kirkuk  was  no  longer  a
    contested area in which the threshold of 15(c) was met;  [24]  that  he
    would be able to obtain a CSID if required and that in any event he was
    excluded from humanitarian protection by operation of paragraph 339B of
    the Immigration Rules as he had been convicted of a  serious  crime  in
    the United Kingdom.

 7. In considering the respondent's right pursuant to Article  8,  although
    it was accepted that he had three children who were  British  citizens,
    the oldest born in 2005 the result of a previous  relationship  it  was
    not accepted that he had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
    with her given the lack of contact and it was not accepted [50] that it
    would be unduly harsh for his two children with whom  he  does  have  a
    relationship to live in Iraq given that his wife had said that she will
    go there with him and the children were he to be deported.  It was  not
    accepted either that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  children  to
    remain in the United Kingdom with their  mother  even  were  he  to  be
    deported [51].

 8. Although accepting that the respondent has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his partner, as she had  stated  that  she  would  be
    prepared to accompany him to Iraq it was not considered that  it  would
    be unduly harsh to expect her to do so therefore  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules were not met.  The Secretary  of  State  was  not
    satisfied that there  were  very  compelling  circumstances  such  that
    although he had not met the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  it
    would nonetheless be a breach of Article 8 to remove him to Iraq.

 9. On appeal, Judge Head-Rapson found:-

      i) Although the respondent has no documentation, that is, no passport,
         Iraqi Civil Status Identity Document [38] and the attempt to obtain
         these on return to Iraq to have recourse to food and basic services
         and to obtain the  CSID  card  he  would  need  to  return  to  own
         governorate which had been under the control of ISIS and  therefore
         any documentation he would now have; in  the  light  of  AA  (Iraq)
         [2017] EWCA Civ 944 that he could not return to his home area  [45]
         and it was not reasonable for him to relocate via  Baghdad  to  the
         Kurdish area given that he  would  be  at  great  risk  during  the
         journey;




     ii) that in assessing the possibility of relocation by reference to  AA
         and BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18 that  on  return
         to IKR he would have no support, assistance or sponsorship [47] and
         in light of the Home Office CPIN, it would  not  be  reasonable  to
         expect him to undertake the journey and that [49] his lack of  CSID
         documentation places him at risk on return;




    iii) that Article 8 would be breached if the respondent was expected  to
         return to Iraq [85], the consequences for  his  children  and  wife
         being unjustifiably harsh [86] as they do not have  the  option  of
         accompanying  him  to  Iraq:  and  having  noticed  [70]  that  the
         respondent's wife would not  go  to  Iraq  because  she  has  grave
         concerns about her safety on return would not expose their children
         to such risk, noting [71] the respondent does not qualify for leave
         under the Immigration Rules.

10. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred:-

      i) With respect to the CSID card, as the respondent  was  from  Kirkuk
         and return would be to the IKR,  he  would  not  have  required  an
         expired current  passport  and  therefore  his  entrance  would  be
         precleared as confirmed in AA (Iraq) (Court of  Appeal),  it  being
         for the respondent, were he to require a CSID card, to  demonstrate
         that he had exhausted all possible avenues before  finally  finding
         that none is available;




     ii) that the lack of economic opportunities was not  sufficient  for  a
         grant of protection under Article 3 humanitarian protection,  being
         for the respondent to prove  he  is  destitute,  the  judge  having
         failed to consider the facility to return scheme  in  his  findings
         despite this being referred to in the decision letter;



    iii) the return was proposed to Kirkuk which is not  a  contested  area,
         while there are currently no direct flights to the IKR,  there  are
         currently no restrictions on internal flights from Baghdad.




     iv) that the judge's approach to Article 8 was entirely flawed, failing
         to appreciate that this was a deportation revocation and making  no
         reference to the factors set out in the Section 117C  of  the  2002
         Act or whether the respondent's deportation was an  unduly outcomes
         for a child or partner.

11. On 19 December 2017 Designated Judge Shaerf granted permission,  noting
    that it was arguable that  the  judge  gave  insufficient  reasons  for
    concluding that the respondent could not be so if he  returned  to  the
    IKR or could not obtain a CSID card in Baghdad bearing in mind that  he
    had previously held one; and, that it was arguable that the  judge  had
    failed to have proper regard to the weight to be attached to the public
    interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.

12. The respondent replied pursuant to Rule  24  of  the  Procedural  Rules
    stating:-

      i) that the Secretary of State's grounds were flawed in  that  as  the
         respondent had originated from Kirkuk which is not within the  IKR,
         return would not be there and would in fact be to Baghdad;




     ii) that in any event the security situation in Kirkuk had declined for
         Kurdish nationals, the grounds being contradictory in stating  that
         it was not proposed to remove to Bagdad then stated there  were  no
         returns to the IKR then state the removal was a technical issue.




    iii) that the judge had given adequate reasons with respect  to  Article
         8.

13. Mr Diwncyz accepted that there was an error in  the  challenge  to  the
    findings on the CSID card in  that  Kirkuk  was  not  in  the  IKR  and
    accepted that there was no challenge to the finding  of  fact  at  [38]
    that the respondent would need to return to his own governorate to  get
    a CSID.  He accepted that there was in effect  no  challenge  to  these
    findings given that the grounds were drafted on  the  presumption  that
    the respondent would be returned to the IKR.   There  is  no  challenge
    either to the judge's finding  at  40  to  44  that  a  CSID  would  be
    necessary and that she would [44] follow the guidance set  out  by  the
    Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq).  There is, I find no real engagement with
    the findings reached by  the  judge  on  those  issues,  or  basis  for
    concluding that they were unsustainable or otherwise made in error.

14. In respect of the ground that a lack  of  economic  opportunity  was  a
    sufficient grant of protection, it being for the respondent to prove he
    would be destitute, it is unclear  what  in  the  judge's  decision  is
    challenged.  Given the sustainable finding that he could not  obtain  a
    CSID and the guidance given by AA (Iraq), it is unclear how, given  the
    unchallenged findings  at  [47]  that  the  respondent  would  have  no
    support,  assistance  or  sponsorship  to  secure  employment  and  the
    evidence that Iraqis, like the respondent, who do  not  originate  from
    the IKR are being asked to travel onwards, it  was  open,  given  these
    facts as found to conclude that  the  respondent  would  be  destitute.
    Whilst I accept that the judge did not, as the grounds  identify,  take
    into account the facilitated return scheme referred to in  the  refusal
    letter at [95] the sum is unclear whereas the basis on which discretion
    would be exercised to give him the money, it being  stressed  that  "he
    may be eligible".  Further, it is not clear  that  this  paragraph  was
    cited either in submissions or in the refusal  letter  as  being  funds
    which could or should be taken into account in assessing the  viability
    of return (note to self check in AA and BA on this point).

15. With respect to the challenge and the basis that  return  is  currently
    proposed to Kirkuk that there therefore would not  be  a  return  to  a
    contested area, in the submission on  Amin  v  SSHD  [2017]  EWHC  2417
    (Admin).  That is a decision of Sir Ross Cranston sitting as a judge of
    the High Court in a challenge to a decision by the Secretary  of  State
    that the submission did not  amount  to  a  fresh  claim.   It  is,  in
    essence, a submission that the judge should not, as she  chose  to  do,
    follow country guidance.  It is simply not arguable on the basis  of  a
    case which does not appear to have been cited to  the  judge  that  she
    should have departed from the country guidance, contrary to established
    law and guidance.  It is clear that she had regard to that guidance  at
    [36] but, for the reasons set out at 39 to 44 concluded  that  she  was
    not  prepared  to  depart  from  the  guidance  in  AA   and   in   the
    circumstances, it cannot be argued that this amounts  to  an  error  of
    law.  Further, this ground is also infected by the same error  that  it
    is believed that Kirkuk is located within the IKR.  Thus,  observations
    about internal flights are not relevant.

16. Accordingly, in the circumstances, I am satisfied that the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal that the applicant's Article 3 rights should be
    breached by his return to Iraq are sustainable.

17. In the circumstances, it is unnecessary for me to consider whether  the
    Secretary of State's challenge to the findings in respect of Article  8
    are made out as they are not material to the outcome of the appeal.

18. I do, however, note that the judge's decision records that  the  appeal
    is allowed on humanitarian protection  grounds.   That  is  clearly  an
    error  and  must  be  corrected  given  that,  owing  to  his  criminal
    convictions,  the  respondent  is   not   eligible   for   humanitarian
    protection.


Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it, save for amending the basis  on  which
    the appeal was allowed.

 2. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  allowed  on  article  3
    grounds but dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 25 April 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
