

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07315/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal    |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |promulgated                    |
|on 8 February 2018                         |On 13 February 2018            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     BSK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Fisher instructed by Maalik & Co Solicitors.

For the Respondent:    Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This appeal involves a  family  of  Afghan  Sikhs  originally  from
        Jalalabad. On 27 September 2017 the Upper Tribunal found the First-
        tier Tribunal had made an error of law material to the decision  to
        dismiss the appeal as a result of which the matter was listed for a
        Resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 8 February 2018.


     2. Directions were given for the provision of evidence  to  be  relied
        upon which the appellant complied with. The  appellant's  documents
        include a further expert country report. Miss  Fisher  also  places
        reliance upon the country guidance case relating  to  the  risk  to
        Afghan Sikhs of TG and others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan
        CG [2015] UKUT 00595 (IAC).

     3. In light of the evidence provided  that  shows  that  even  if  the
        appellant's parents were still in Afghanistan they will now  be  in
        their 80's and not likely to be working or able to provide a viable
        form of adequate support for this family unit, the fact  the  point
        of return will be to Kabul in relation to which  it  had  not  been
        established the appellants have any realistic source of  income  or
        support or prospects of being able to earn a living in  that  city,
        on the facts, leading to destitution, in  light  of  the  continued
        deterioration in the country situation since the publication of TG,
        and in light of the fact the younger of the  appellant's  two  sons
        would either be denied the opportunity to pursue  an  education  or
        have to be educated in mainstream schooling in  which  case  he  is
        liable to  be  subjected  to  treatment  sufficient  to  amount  to
        persecution on the basis of his  religious  identity  and/or  which
        will cross the high threshold of article 3 in any event,  Mr  Mills
        conceded that on this occasion the Secretary of State accepted that
        the appellant was entitled to succeed with the appeal.


Decision

     4. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.




   Anonymity.


     5. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 8 February 2018

