
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: PA/07300/2019


                            the immigration Acts


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 8 January 2020                   |On 24 January 2020                   |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


                                   Between

                                Mr Nurul [I]
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Uddin, of Cranbrook Legal.
For the respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Presenting Officer.



                           Decision and Directions


 1. The appeal appeals against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Grimmett (hereafter  the  "judge")  who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated 16 October 2019 following a hearing on 19  September  2019,
    dismissed his appeal against a decision of the respondent  of  17  July
    2019 which refused his further representations concerning  his  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights claims.

 2. The appellant claimed that he was a national  of  Burma/Myanmar  and  a
    Rohingya Muslim. He arrived in the United Kingdom  in  March  2014  and
    claimed asylum on 9 June 2016.  His  asylum  claim  was  refused  on  4
    February 2018. His appeal against that decision was dismissed by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Courtney in a  determination  promulgated  9
    April 2018 following a hearing on 19 March 2018. Judge Courtney did not
    accept that the appellant was of Rohingyan ethnicity or a  national  of
    Myanmar.

 3. The appellant made further representations on 11 June 2019  which  were
    considered under para 353 of the Immigration Rules and which  were  the
    subject of the decision appealed against in the instant appeal.

 4. The further representations included letters from Mr Khanus Miah  dated
    3 June 2019, Mr Dolil Miah dated 1 May 2019 and Mr Syed  Nazmul  Islam.
    There was also a "Refugee Family Book" (hereafter the  "Refugee  Family
    Book") said to have been issued to the  appellant's  family  when  they
    were living in a refugee camp called Mahishkum  in  Garjania  Union  in
    Bangladesh and a photograph with accompanying envelopes.

 5. The appellant had submitted to  the  respondent  the  original  of  the
    Refugee Family  Book.  It  was  a  booklet  and  a  complete  document.
    Unfortunately, the original of this  book  was  not  submitted  to  the
    judge. This was compounded by the fact  that  the  respondent's  bundle
    contained only some of the pages from the Refugee Family Book.

 6. The judge was not satisfied that the appellant was  a  Rohingya  Muslim
    from Burma. She gave her reasons at para 11-15 of her  decision,  which
    read:

         "11. The new evidence of the appellant which  was  not  before  the
             first Judge is what is said to be a copy of the Refugee Family
             book, a photograph, witness statements from 2  friends  and  a
             declaration from the Chairman of Garjania  Union  Paryshad  in
             Bangladesh. Mr Dolil Miah, the appellant's cousin, said in his
             witness statement that the appellant had  asked  him  to  make
             enquiries about his family book. Mr Miah said that he  visited
             some (unnamed) camps without success  but  discovered  a  camp
             called Mahishkum in Garjania Union had been washed away. After
             making enquiries of those  who  used  to  live  there  he  was
             advised to speak to the Chairman of  the  Garjania  Union  who
             made enquiries and found the appellant's family had left  some
             belongings  behind  including  an  expired  family  book   and
             photographs. The chairman would only hand them  to  a  lawyer,
             which he did, and the documents were then passed to Mr Miah.

         12.  Although the book is referred to as a Refugee Family  Book  it
             bears only one name "Ismael" described as the head  of  family
             and an "MCR" number. There is nothing to connect that book  to
             the appellant save that his father's name  is  Ismail,  a  not
             uncommon name. In his interview before his first appeal [Judge
             Courtney] noted the appellant had said (paragraph  15  of  the
             decision) that the appellant's father  had  a  refugee  family
             book which was white with the camp's name on it. The  document
             he has produced does not name the camp.

         13.  The two following pages do not appear to be part of the Family
             Book, as is suggested in the index, but are a  Bangladesh  Red
             Crescent Food Distribution Card which has 05 at its  head  but
             no MCR number and no name of the head of  the  family,  and  a
             "non food distribution form" with no name or MCR number on it.
             I can attach little weight to  these  documents  as  they  are
             incomplete.

         14.  Mr K Miah's evidence is based upon what the appellant has told
             him and on the documents. Mr D Miah said that he was  able  to
             obtain the family book from Bangladesh but there was  no  book
             only an incomplete front page and the cards referred to above.
             The appellant's own evidence was that the camp he was  in  was
             washed away in floods when he was a child yet  he  now  claims
             the book remained and was located many years later. I was  not
             satisfied the  appellant  told  the  truth  in  light  of  the
             previous decision, the lack of any evidence before me  of  his
             nationality and the  defects  in  the  documents  referred  to
             above.

         15.  The appellant was criticised in the first decision for failing
             to produce expert evidence of the language he speaks  to  show
             it is the dialect of a Burmese Rohingya Muslim but  has  still
             provided no evidence to show he speaks the dialect of those in
             the camps."

 7.  It  was  accepted  at  the  hearing  before  me  that  the  judge  had
    misapprehended the evidence when she said at para 11  of  her  decision
    that Mr Dolil Miah was the appellant's cousin. In fact,  the  appellant
    was friends with Mr K Miah who asked his cousin, Mr  D  Miah,  to  make
    enquiries about the appellant's family and  background  in  Bangladesh.
    However, it was also accepted that this misapprehension of the evidence
    was not material.

 8. It can be seen, more importantly, that the judge attached weight to the
    fact  that  the  copy  of  the  Refugee  Family  Book  before  her  was
    incomplete. Furthermore, if the respondent had  produced  the  original
    Refugee Family Book to the judge, she would have noted as follows:

         i)   It is not the case, as she stated in  the  first  sentence  of
         para 12 of her decision, that the book  only  mentioned  one  name,
         "Ismael". Other names were listed on a page  entitled  "Members  of
         family" which included the appellant's name and his year of birth.

         ii)  Accordingly, contrary to the second sentence of para 12 of her
         decision, there was something  to  connect  the  appellant  to  the
         Refugee Family Book.

         iii) Contrary to the last  sentence  of  para  12  of  the  judge's
         decision, the name of the camp was stated on the second page of the
         Refugee Family Book.

         iv)  Contrary to the first sentence of para 13 of her decision, the
         "Bangladesh Red Crescent  Food  Distribution  Card"  and  the  page
         following it (entitled: "Non-Food  Item  Distribution  Card")  were
         part of the Refugee Family Book.

         v)   At para 13 of her decision, the judge noted that some pages of
         the Refugee Family Book had an MCR number and some did not. In this
         regard, if she had had the Refugee  Family  Book,  she  would  have
         noted that this was  a  feature  of  the  entire  book.  They  were
         nevertheless part of one and the same book. Accordingly, if she had
         had the original of the Refugee Family Book itself before her,  she
         might have accorded less weight to the fact that some pages had  an
         MCR number and some did not.

         vi)  Accordingly, for the reasons given above, the judge  erred  in
         her assessment of the Refugee Family Book, through no fault of  her
         own.

         vii) The judge's assessment, at para 14 of her decision,  of  Mr  D
         Miah's evidence concerning how he was  able  to  obtain  the  book,
         relied upon her earlier observations about the defects  in  Refugee
         Family Book. She therefore also erred  in  her  assessment  of  the
         credibility of the evidence of Mr D Miah.

 9. At the hearing before me, Mr Lindsay accepted that, through no fault of
    her own, the judge had erred in law in each of the ways described above
    and that, taken cumulatively, the errors were  material.  He  therefore
    agreed that the judge's decision should be set aside and  the  decision
    on the appellant's appeal be re-made on the merits on all issues.

10. I agree. I am satisfied, for the reasons given above, that, through  no
    fault of her own, the judge materially erred in law in  her  assessment
    of the credibility of the appellant's evidence that he  is  a  Rohingya
    Muslim from Burma. I set aside her decision in its entirety.

11. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   (the   "Practice
    Statements") recognises that it may  not  be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
             tier Tribunal."

12. The appellant has not had a  fair  hearing  as  a  consequence  of  the
    respondent's failure to submit the Refugee Family Book  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Accordingly, in my judgment, this case falls within para
    7.2 (a).



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision is set aside. This case is remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for the decision on the appellant's appeal to be re-
made on the merits on all issues by a judge other than Judge of  the  First-
tier Tribunal Grimmett.



[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 20 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
