

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07683/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & reasons promulgated       |
|On 23 August 2017                     |On 31 August 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                MR SAMAN SAMI

                        (Anonymity DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Bahia (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a  decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Juss, hereinafter "the  Judge")  whereupon
   he dismissed his appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  of  12
   July 2016 refusing to grant international protection.

2. Put simply, the claimant is an Iraqi national who says he is from  Mosul.
   He is of Kurdish ethnicity. He  claims  that  he  would  be  at  risk  of
   persecution or serious harm if returned to Iraq because of  his  father's
   previous involvement with the Ba'ath Party. However, he  was  disbelieved
   by the Secretary of State so his claim was refused.

3. There was an oral  hearing  of  the  appeal  on  16  February  2017.  The
   claimant  gave  evidence  at  that  hearing  and   both   parties   where
   represented. The Judge, at paragraph 2 of his written decision, noted  in
   brief the Secretary of State's credibility concerns. From paragraphs 9 to
   11 he summarised the submissions made to him by the two  representatives.
   He then explained why  he  was  finding  that  the  claimant  was  to  be
   disbelieved and why, in any event, he would be able to take advantage  of
   an internal flight alternative if he was at risk in his  home  area.  The
   Judge said this;

            "14. First, the appellant  lacks  complete  credibility  in  his
account about his                 father's involvement with the Baath  [sic]
by reason of which he himself has            come to be placed in  risk,  to
an extent that the risk in   consequence to the                appellant,  I
find,  is  wholly  implausible   as   suggested.   Second,   the   appellant
has  attempted  to  shore  up  his  claim   by   reference   to   additional
      documentation today, such as his father's death  certificate  and  his
mother's         attestation of it. I find that the appellant has failed  to
make out the case that            his father is dead. Third,  the  appellant
can find safety in  any  event  because          his  family  has  moved  to
Kawrasoor where father's uncle lives. Finally  and  in           any  event,
the prospect of other  internal  relocation  exists  in  this  case,  and  I
do not accept that the appellant would be unable to relocate to  Baghdad.  I
do          not accept that they will be found out there and harmed."

4. Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
   The salient part of the grant reads as follows.

      "It is arguable that the Judge has erred in law and  has  misdirected
    himself      by failing to  give  adequate  reasons  for  (a)  why  the
    appellant  lacked    complete    credibility  in  his  account  of  his
    father's involvement in the Ba'ath Party and   how he has  come  to  be
    placed at risk; (b) in relation to his father's  death      certificate
    and his mother's attestation of it; (c) how the  appellant  could  find
    safety because his family has moved to Kawrasoor where his uncle lives;
    (d)    how the appellant could internally relocate. The case of  Shizad
    (sufficiency       of reasons, set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)  is
    referred to for its terms."


5.    Permission having been granted,  the  appeal  was  listed  before  the
Upper Tribunal (before me) so that  consideration  could  be  given  to  the
question of whether or not the Judge had erred  in  law.  Representation  at
that  hearing  was  as  indicated  as  above  and  I  am  grateful  to  each
representative. In the event the hearing was a short one because Mrs  Aboni,
quite properly and appropriately in my  view,  acknowledged  the  Judge  had
failed to provide adequate reasons for his decision. In those  circumstances
both representatives urged me to set aside the decision in its entirety  and
to remit to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  complete  rehearing  on  all
matters.


6.    I have decided to do as I  am  urged.  Paragraph  14  of  the  Judge's
decision effectively contains conclusions without there being any  reasoning
to underpin those conclusions. There is, on my reading,  no  such  reasoning
elsewhere in the Judge's written decision. Accordingly it  cannot  stand.  I
have decided to remit because that does seem to  me  to  be  appropriate  in
circumstances where nothing can be preserved and where there  is  likely  to
be a need for further evidence and significant fact-finding.


7.    Not wishing to tie the hands of the First-tier Tribunal I have  issued
only brief directions concerning how the  decision  is  to  be  re-made  and
which, I anticipate,  will be supplemented if appropriate in due course.


Directions

1.    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal as set out in written  reasons
dated 18 February 2017 having been set aside in its  entirety,  there  shall
be a complete rehearing of this appeal.

2.    That rehearing shall take place  before  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal other than Judge Juss.

3.    The rehearing shall take place at the Birmingham  hearing  centre  and
the claimant shall be provided with a Kurdish Sorani speaking interpreter.

4.     These directions may be supplemented or varied at  any  time  by  any
salaried Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and is set aside.
The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  complete  rehearing
in accordance with the directions set out above.


None having been sought or previously made, no anonymity direction is made.


            Signed

                                  M R Hemingway
                                  Judge of the Upper Tribunal

            Dated                                    31 August 2017



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Since no fee is paid or payable I make no fee award.



        Signed

                                  M R Hemingway
                                  Judge of the Upper Tribunal

            Dated                                     31 August 2017

