

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/07486/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons         |
|                                         |Promulgated                |
|On 20 January 2020                       |On 30 January 2020         |
|                                         |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                              MALIK/MALICK FAYE
                          (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, of Counsel, instructed by Camden
                    Community Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley on  11  December  2019  in
          respect of the determination  of  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge  Woodcraft,  promulgated  on  28  August  2019  following  a
          hearing at Hatton Cross on 20 August 2019.


       2. The appellant is a Gambian national born on  1  January  1992  who
          arrived here on 1 December 2016, using  falsified  documents,  and
          claimed asylum. He appeals the decision of  the  respondent  dated
          18 July 2017 to refuse to grant him protection.


       3. The appellant claims to have been a member of the police force  in
          Gambia where he worked as  a  constable  in  the  serious  crimes'
          unit. He maintains that he was involved in  the  investigation  of
          the Gamcotrap case which related to the  misuse  of  international
          funds provided by a Spanish NGO. Having  concluded  there  was  no
          evidence to prosecute,  the  appellant  and  other  officers  were
          detained by the NIA  and  a  senior  officer  was  dismissed.  The
          appellant claims to have been held for three days and  beaten.  He
          then returned to his duties. A  further  incident  arose  in  July
          2016 when he  was  involved  in  the  investigation  of  a  former
          assembly member, accused of tax evasion and fraud. Again,  it  was
          found there was no evidence to prosecute and again  the  appellant
          and others were detained. After 24 hours, during  which  time  the
          appellant claims to  have  been  tortured,  he  was  released  and
          resumed his duties. In August 2016, he was sent to Tunisia  on  an
          official trip. On his return he was ordered to report to the  NIA.
          Fearing for his safety, he fled Gambia  in  early  September  2016
          and made his way to the UK via Senegal, Malaysia, back to  Senegal
          and Tunisia.  He claims that his wife was detained for three  days
          after his departure. She was released  on  bail  but  admitted  to
          hospital some months later in February  2017  where  she  died  of
          injuries said to have been sustained when she was in custody.  The
          appellant's children remain in Gambia. The appellant  claims  also
          that he has converted from  Islam  to  Christianity  and  that  he
          fears persecution because of his new faith.


       4. The judge heard the evidence and  assessed  the  claim.  He  found
          that the application had been  fabricated  and,  accordingly,  the
          appeal was dismissed.


       5. The grounds for permission to appeal  essentially  complain  about
          the judge's credibility findings, arguing that he "approached  the
          evidence...with a view to finding fault  with  it  as  opposed  to
          considering it in the  round".  It  is  maintained  that  the  Red
          Crescent letter (AB:149) was rejected as  having  an  "impossible"
          date, but the date was  not  specified,  and  no  explanation  was
          provided for what the judge meant. It is argued  that  this  shows
          bias. It is maintained that the judge  dismissed  all  the  police
          documents because they contained "errors" but that  some  of  them
          did not in fact contain any. It is argued that the judge erred  by
          not placing weight on  the  expert  reports  which  supported  the
          account and that no regard was had  to  the  email  correspondence
          between the appellant and his sister.


       6. I have not had sight of a Rule 24 response.


          The Hearing


       7. The appellant attended the hearing at which  I  heard  submissions
          from the parties. Ms Benfield  greatly  expanded  the  grounds  on
          which permission had been granted. She submitted  that  there  was
          an  overall  failure  on  the  part  of  the  judge  to  follow  a
          structured approach with regards  to  his  credibility  assessment
          and to follow the guidance set out in KB  and  AH  (credibility  -
          structured  approach)  Pakistan  [2017]  UKUT  00491  (IAC).   The
          determination did not engage with the sufficiency of detail  given
          by the appellant or the  consistency  of  his  account.  The  only
          reference to the appellant's own evidence was at paragraph 60.  It
          was unclear what the judge considered as  vague.  No  reasons  had
          been given for the rejection  of  the  claim.  There  had  been  a
          detailed asylum interview and five witness  statements  but  there
          was no analysis of the appellant's  account.  Given  the  positive
          finding that the appellant was a police officer it was  even  more
          important to give clear reasons  for  why  the  remainder  of  his
          account was rejected.  No reasons were given as to why  the  judge
          did not accept that the appellant would be treated as he was.  The
          expert supported the operational  dysfunction  of  the  police  in
          Gambia. The determination was based solely on speculation and  was
          not grounded in the evidence.


       8. Ms Benfield submitted that the  judge  had  erred  in  placing  no
          weight on the expert reports.  Dr  Kodi's  expertise  was  not  in
          dispute. It was insufficient to for the judge to find  the  report
          had  no  evidential  basis.  The  situation  in  Gambia   may   be
          inexplicable to the  judge  sitting  in  the  UK  but  not  to  an
          African. The description of  a  five-year  sentence  was  seen  as
          serious by the judge, but it was open to Dr Kodi to  find  it  was
          not, given the Gambian context.


       9. It was also argued that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
          evidence from the appellant's sister which included an  affidavit,
          albeit unsigned by her. There had been a failure to  consider  the
          evidence in the round. The letter from the Tunisian  Red  Crescent
          gave the date in a reverse format. The appellant had  provided  an
          explanation for the incorrect date but the judge had not taken  it
          into account. There was nothing erroneous about the chronology  in
          the Bench Warrant. Whilst the documents contained spelling  errors
          these were to be expected in a country such as Gambia where  there
          was illiteracy amongst the police  force.  The  determination  was
          flawed and the matter needed to be decided afresh.


      10. In response Mr Tufan submitted that the grounds were  not  put  in
          the way that they had been argued today.  The  grounds  maintained
          the judge was biased but there was nothing to  support  that.  The
          judge had not fallen foul of the guidance in KB  and  AH.  It  was
          difficult to see what he had done that  could  be  criticised.  He
          had referred to everything except the sister's evidence  and  that
          did not take things further. He had given anxious scrutiny to  the
          evidence in a lengthy and detailed determination. It was  open  to
          him not to place weight on the expert reports; he was not  obliged
          to  accept  them.  He  was  entitled  to   conclude   that   those
          persecuting him would not allow him to continue in his duties  and
          permit him to travel abroad the judge  found  that  the  appellant
          was not a credible witness and that was fatal to the case.

      11. Ms Benfield replied. She stated that she did not intend to  pursue
          the allegation of bias; it has not  been  properly  made  and  was
          just a turn of phrase in any event.  The  appellant's  credibility
          was indeed key, but the judge  had  failed  to  give  reasons  for
          rejecting the claim. His trip to Malaysia was not  a  holiday  but
          an attempt to flee the country. He  had  been  sent  for  work  to
          Tunisia because he could speak Arabic. A structured  approach  had
          not been followed.


      12. That completed the submissions. At the conclusion of the  hearing,
          I reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.


          Discussion and Conclusions


      13. I deal first with the application  for  the  submission  of  fresh
          documentary evidence made on  6  January  2020  by  the  appellant
          under Rule 15 (2A) of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules.  In
          accordance with that provision  and  the  Practice  Directions,  I
          agree to admit the further evidence in the event that an error  of
          law is found in the determination and it is set  aside.   In  this
          case the additional evidence consists  of  a  statement  from  the
          appellant  seeking  to  address  the   judge's   findings,   email
          correspondence from 7 January 2020, a press report  and  an  email
          from Dr Kodi. Ms Benfield accepted that the fresh  evidence  could
          not be admitted for the 'error of law' stage of the proceedings.


      14. I now turn to the judge's decision and  the  submissions  made  by
          the parties. I have had careful regard to the arguments.  I  reach
          my decision only after having considered the evidence as a  whole.
          I agree with Mr Tufan  that  Ms  Benfield's  submissions  did  not
          follow the grounds on which permission was granted but as he  made
          no formal objection, I have considered them.


      15. There is nothing in Judge  Woodcraft's  determination  to  support
          the complaint of bias and, in fairness to  Ms  Benfield,  she  did
          not pursue this line of arguments, preferring instead to  describe
          this as a turn of phrase. There is also nothing  to  suggest  that
          the judge approached the evidence with a view  to  fault  finding.
          He confirmed  at  the  outset  of  his  conclusions  that  he  had
          considered all the evidence in the round  (at  48)  and  correctly
          noted that other than the appellant's nationality  and  occupation
          as a police officer, the remainder of his  claim  was  in  dispute
          (ibid).


      16. Ms Benfield submitted that the  judge  had  erred  in  failing  to
          follow the structured approach recommended by KB and  AH.  I  have
          had regard to the judgment which was not placed before the  First-
          tier Tribunal and not referred to in the grounds  for  permission.
          The approach suggested by the  Tribunal  took  guidance  from  the
          Home Office API on the assessment of credibility which  identified
          credibility  indicators  as  sufficiency  of   details,   internal
          consistency and  plausibility.  The  Tribunal,  however,  made  it
          plain  that  these  were  merely  indicators  and  not   necessary
          conditions, that they were not exhaustive, that  their  main  role
          was to ensure the evidence was considered but that  they  were  no
          substitute for considering the evidence  in  the  round  or  as  a
          whole. There is no suggestion that judges are  obliged  to  follow
          such a structure nor that other formats of  assessing  credibility
          would  invalidate  conclusions  reached.  The  fact   that   Judge
          Woodcraft did not refer to this judgment and did  not  follow  the
          structure it proposes does not mean that he did not  consider  the
          evidence as a  whole.  Indeed,  he  clearly  states  that  he  had
          considered all the evidence in the round but that he  had  to,  of
          necessity, set out his conclusions in some form or order (at  48).




      17. Ms Benfield submitted that the only reference to  the  appellant's
          oral evidence was at paragraph 60. This is not the  case.  It  was
          set out at length by the judge at paragraphs 20-33. It  is  argued
          that the only finding on the evidence was that it was  "vague  and
          generally lacking in credibility" and that no reasons  were  given
          however there is nothing to support the contention that this is  a
          reference only to the oral evidence. It is plain  that  the  judge
          considered the oral and documentary evidence and that he  set  out
          numerous reasons for reaching this conclusion (at  49-64).  It  is
          simply untenable to argue that no reasons had been given  for  the
          rejection of the claim or that the judge's findings were based  on
          speculation rather than grounded in the evidence.


      18. Much is made of the fact that the cultural context  in  Gambia  is
          such that a police officer suspected of wrong doings and  targeted
          by the NIA, detained and tortured, would nevertheless  be  allowed
          to continue in his sensitive role and even be sent overseas  on  a
          work trip. This is a matter the judge  considered.  It  was  fully
          open to him to find that this did not ring true despite Dr  Kodi's
          report. It was also open to the judge to find that  the  five-year
          prison sentence  handed  down  to  the  appellant  amounted  to  a
          serious matter. That was a conclusion  the  judge  reached  having
          assessed all the evidence and the complaint that  he  was  not  so
          entitled to find is no more than a disagreement with the  finding.




      19. The first criticism in the  written  grounds  for  permission  was
          relied on by Ms Benfield in her submissions. This relates  to  the
          judge's consideration of the letter said to be from  the  Tunisian
          Red Crescent (AB:149). This letter dated 06/06/2017 refers  to  an
          asylum application being made in Tunisia on 11/5/2016 and  to  the
          appellant's departure from that country on 12/17/2016.  The  judge
          deals with this letter at paragraph 61 of the determination  where
          he rejects it as bearing an "impossible" date.  The first  of  the
          appellant's grounds takes issue with that complaining that  it  is
          "clearly in the format MM/DD/YYYY" and that the  judge  had  shown
          "bias against the appellant" by rejecting  this  letter.  I  might
          have had sympathy for this argument were it not for the fact  that
          the dates, if read in the format suggested  by  Counsel,  accorded
          with the appellant's chronology but they do not. As the  appellant
          arrived in the UK on 1 December  2016,  he  could  not  have  left
          Tunisia on 17 December 2016. Nor does his claim in  his  statement
          that he made an asylum application in  Tunisia  immediately  after
          his arrival there on 3 October 2016 (B3).


      20. It is maintained that the appellant  offered  an  explanation  for
          this matter in evidence  but  that  it  was  not  considered.  The
          judge, however, set out the appellant's explanation  at  paragraph
          28. He would, therefore, have had it in mind  when  assessing  the
          document. I would note  here  that  the  written  grounds  do  not
          support the explanation given by the  appellant  that  the  letter
          contained incorrect information. The only  point  made  there  was
          that the American date format was used. I have  already  explained
          why that complaint is not made out. In any  event  if  the  letter
          contains incorrect information, it is difficult to follow  why  it
          has been relied on.  It  simply  reinforces  the  judge's  overall
          finding that the evidence is unreliable.


      21. The second written ground, also pursued  by  Ms  Benfield,  argues
          that the judge was wrong to reject the  appellant's  documents  as
          containing errors. It is argued that  the  Bench  Warrant  (AB:47)
          has no errors but was not  commented  on.  In  fact,  it  was;  at
          paragraph 54 the judge specifically refers to it  and  notes  that
          it contains an impossible date.  I have considered that  document.
          The error is indeed very glaring. It is signed  and  issued  on  3
          October 2016 yet orders the appellant's attendance in court on  27
          September 2016. There are also other matters  such  as  "the  next
          adjournment" being entered in a space for the place of  the  court
          and a grammatical error ("has no excused") on which I  place  less
          importance and the misspelling of the Magistrates' Court as  noted
          by the judge. Ms Benfield argued that the September date  referred
          to the adjourned hearing date but that is not  what  the  document
          states.


      22. The appellant's other documents  have  been  addressed  at  length
          including a copy  of  a  newspaper  article  containing  different
          fonts and a crookedly placed photograph of the appellant,  altered
          documents, the serious spelling errors in the printed  forms  used
          by the courts and the errors in numbering sequence on  the  police
          register. It is submitted that errors are  to  be  expected  in  a
          country such as Gambia however that  submission  does  not  engage
          with the  other  difficulties  such  as,  for  example,  with  the
          newspaper article. The judge was  fully  entitled  to  reject  the
          documents as thoroughly unreliable. It should  also  be  borne  in
          mind that the appellant used false  documents  to  enter  the  UK,
          although the judge did not rely on that  to  assess  the  evidence
          adduced. He is, therefore, plainly  no  stranger  to  the  use  of
          fraudulent documents.


      23. The judge is also criticised for not giving weight  to  Dr  Kodi's
          expert  report,  despite  his  expertise  on  Gambia.  The   judge
          acknowledged that expertise (at 64) but at paragraphs 49, 51,  52,
          53, 57, 59, 62, 63 and 64 he analyses the reports,  sets  out  his
          concerns  with  them  and  provides  substantial  and   compelling
          reasons for his decision not to place weight on them.   The  judge
          was entitled to voice concerns at the  expert's  finding  that  it
          was plausible that the Gambian police would allow an officer  they
          had charged with serious offences (for which he  had  subsequently
          been convicted), detained and beaten  to  immediately  resume  his
          duties on at least two occasions,  particularly  when  the  expert
          provided no evidential basis for such a view (at 51-52). He  noted
          that Dr Kodi had given no examples of  other  instances  in  which
          the authorities had operated in such a way. He noted  that  whilst
          Dr Kodi stated that he  had  seen  documents  in  support  of  the
          appellant's claim, he did not comment upon them or  refer  to  the
          many difficulties with them that the judge  highlighted.  Nor  did
          he explain how, in the context of those documents,  he  found  the
          appellant's claim to be plausible.  It should also be  noted  that
          although Dr Kodi refers to a supporting  document  dated  15  June
          2017 in one report, it has become 15 July in another.


      24. The last criticism in the written grounds and followed  up  by  Ms
          Benfield is that the email correspondence  between  the  appellant
          and his sister (at AB:35-38) was not considered. Ms Benfield  also
          pointed to  an  affidavit  from  the  sister.  Whilst  the  emails
          themselves are not specifically referred  to,  the  judge  plainly
          had in mind the claim that the appellant's sister  approached  the
          police for documents about him  (which  is  what  the  emails  are
          adduced to show). This is plain from his finding at  paragraph  61
          where he rejected the claim that someone would be able to  contact
          the police to ask for documents  about  the  appellant,  would  be
          told that he was wanted (as in  the  second  email)  and  then  be
          questioned no further. This is particularly  difficult  to  accept
          given that the appellant's wife was arrested,  detained  and  then
          so badly ill-treated that she died.  At paragraph  34,  the  judge
          sets  out  the  evidence  on   the   unsigned   affidavit   noting
          difficulties with that evidence.


      25. No issue is taken with the judge's findings on article  8  or  the
          appellant's claim to have converted to Christianity.


      26. It follows that the appellant's challenge is  without  any  merit.
          The criticisms made of the judge  and  his  careful  and  thorough
          determination and unfounded and the decision is upheld.


          Decision


      27. The decision contains no errors of law. The appeal is dismissed.


          Anonymity


      28. No anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  no
          request for anonymity was made to this Tribunal.


    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 24 January 2020






