
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07809/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 September 2018                           |On 5 October 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                  Mr B S K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss K Smith of Counsel, instructed on a direct
access basis
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Iraq born on 26 June 1994.  His appeal came
before the Upper Tribunal for consideration of whether or not the decision
and reasons of the First tier Tribunal was vitiated by an error of law on
25 June 2018 at Liverpool Civil and Family Court.  In a decision
promulgated on 2 July 2018, an error of law was found and the appeal was
adjourned for a resumed hearing in Manchester Civil Justice Centre to be
heard on 6 September 2018.  A copy of that Decision and Directions is
appended to this Decision and Reasons.

The issue to be determined is whether, it having been accepted that the
Appellant is a national of Iraq of Kurdish origin and is from the area of
Hawija, to which he cannot return, it is reasonable to expect him to
internally relocate to the IKR.  The appeal was adjourned in order for
consideration to be given to the country guidance case in AAH (Iraqi Kurds
- internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC) which was promulgated by
the Upper Tribunal on 26 June 2018.

     Hearing

At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Miss Smith sought to rely on her
skeleton argument which was dated 30 August 2018.  She submitted the only
issue is whether it is reasonable to expect the Appellant to internally
relocate.  Although parts of his case, i.e. that his family were perceived
as being Jewish because of their surname, had not been believed by the
First-tier Tribunal Judge, the area of his origin, i.e. Hawija in Kirkuk
province, and the fact that it had been taken by ISIS had been accepted. In
light of AA (Article 15C) Iraq CG UKUT 00544 (IAC) Kirkuk governorate is a
"contested area" and there are substantial grounds for believing that if
returned there the Appellant faces a real risk of indiscriminate violence
amount to serious harm within the scope of Article 15C.

Miss Smith accepted that there was no finding by the previous judge as to
what had happened to the Appellant's family.  He was informed that his
parents and siblings had been arrested and he has no particular knowledge
of where they are.  She invited the Upper Tribunal to accept at the lower
standard that the Appellant does not currently know their whereabouts and
it is a matter of record that there were mass displacements in Hawija and
many families were arrested.  It was therefore plausible or reasonably
likely that the Appellant, particularly as he had shown efforts consistent
with his claim to trace his family via the Red Cross, does not know where
they are.

The issue, therefore, is whether in light of the country guidance decision
in AAH, the Appellant having been returned to Baghdad could physically
travel to the IKR.  She submitted that the decisions of the Respondent and
the First-tier Tribunal Judge were premised on the basis that the Appellant
does not have a CSID.  Miss Smith drew attention to evidence of Dr Fatah
given to the Upper Tribunal in AAH which is essentially that there was no
prospect of the Appellant obtaining a CSID in the United Kingdom as he did
not have the requisite evidence.  He would therefore be returned to Baghdad
on a laissez passer, which would be taken from him on arrival.  The Central
Archive in Baghdad does not provide CSIDs and therefore there was no
prospect of the Appellant being able to leave Baghdad in order to travel to
and attend a civil registration office elsewhere.  He has no family in Iraq
but even if he did, the evidence in the country guidance decision suggests
that there was real doubt that the authorities would hand over a CSID to a
family member.  She submitted that in any event the system is in disarray
due to a backlog of registering births and deaths arising from former ISIS
control, which precluded people from registering and therefore officials
are unsympathetic and unwilling to assist: [104] to [106] of AAH refer.

Ms Smith submitted that the position is that the Appellant would be stuck
in Baghdad without access to any basic services and this is accepted by the
Respondent and in AA at [151] that this would be a breach of Article 3.  In
AAH the Upper Tribunal found that it would unduly harsh to expect somebody
to remain in Baghdad without a CSID.  In the alternative, Miss Smith relied
on [16] of her skeleton argument in respect of the reasonableness of
internal relocation to the IKR and she submitted that it would be unduly
harsh to expect the Appellant to live in a critical shelter arrangement.

In his submissions, Mr Bates on behalf of the Respondent accepted the
summary of facts and the summary of the country guidance decisions as set
out in Miss Smith's skeleton argument.  He submitted that the case hinges
on the Appellant's claim to have lost contact with his family and he
accepted that without contact it is difficult to see how the Appellant
could obtain a replacement CSID.  Mr Bates pointed out that the assertion
by the Appellant in respect of having a Jewish family name was rejected by
the First tier Tribunal and he invited me to find that, contrary to what
the Appellant stated in his updated witness statement, which he adopted at
the outset of the hearing, the Appellant had not lost contact with his
family and has failed to give a credible explanation as to how this had
come about.

Mr Bates drew attention to paragraph 106(i) of AAH, which sets out the
process of obtaining a replacement CSID in relation to a laissez passer.
He submitted that if the Appellant has family contact then he could be sent
the original CSID or be provided with details from the family register that
he could pass on to the Embassy in the United Kingdom.  He submitted that
it has not been proven that the Iraqi Embassy would be unable to assist
him.  It simply has not been tested.  He submitted that it was more
connected to the issue of whether or not the Appellant has lost family
contact.

If his contention is correct, he submitted that the Appellant would be able
to board a plane and would be admitted to the IKR as a Kurd and that this
would not be unduly harsh nor would the financial cost of getting to the
IKR be an issue as he would obtain an Assisted Voluntary Return package.
In respect of the Appellant in AAH, whilst that person did not have any
family support in the IKR he had a CSID and had work experience in a semi-
skilled context, which had led the Upper Tribunal to find that it would not
be unduly harsh for him to survive in the IKR.

Miss Smith in reply submitted that the Appellant is not wholly lacking in
credibility, that he is believed in terms of his origins and that ISIS had
taken his home town of Hawija.  Miss Smith submitted that Mr Bates'
submissions were essentially based on speculation and conjecture and that a
finding was required as to whether he is in contact with his family, that
they had not been displaced and they did not leave at short notice and that
the family had their documentation.  She pointed out that there was a lack
of evidential basis for Mr Bates' contention and there was objective
support for the position that the Appellant is not in contact with them,
i.e. correspondence with the Red Cross, whom he had seen twice, having
contacted them in May 2017.

She submitted that the Respondent's reading at [106] of AAH is not the
correct one and it concerned what a Tribunal ought to take into account
when considering the documentation, which would be a passport and marriage
or birth certificate, for an expired CSID.  She submitted that there was no
suggestion that having the information contained in the CSID would assist
in obtaining a replacement, i.e. you actually need to have the document,
not just the information.  She submitted that there was no suggestion in
this case that the Appellant's family lived anywhere other than in Hawija
or that he had family in the IKR and she submitted that any remittances
would have to be meaningful and durable to prevent or preclude the
Appellant from having to stay in a critical shelter arrangement.

Miss Smith submitted that there was a massive distinction between the
Appellant in AAH and this Appellant.  She submitted that it would be unduly
harsh for this Appellant to live in the IKR with his employment history,
given that his last job was as a generator operator, which was a semi-
skilled role likely to be affected.  The Appellant's only other experience
of working was as a cleaner in a barber shop and a car wash, which are
areas of employment likely to be affected by the downturn in Iraq and that
he was distinguishable from the Appellant in AAH.

     Findings

I proceed to determine the appeal on the basis of the following findings of
fact made in light of the aspects of the decision of First tier Tribunal
Judge Cruthers unaffected by error of law:

13.1.    The Appellant is an Iraqi Kurd from Hawija and return to his home
    town would be be contrary to Article 15C of QD;

13.2.    The Appellant is not in possession of a CSID [63].

14.  Since the promulgation of his decision, the Upper Tribunal have handed
    down further country guidance in the case of AAH (Iraqi Kurds -
    internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC), which made the following
    findings





         "Section C of Country Guidance annexed to the Court of Appeal's
         decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017] EWCA Civ 944 is supplemented
         with the following guidance:


         1.   Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee (P)
         to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to do so, or do so within a
         reasonable time frame, will depend on the individual circumstances.
         Factors to be considered include:


             i)   Whether P has any other form of documentation, or
             information about the location of his entry in the civil
             register. An INC, passport, birth/marriage certificates or an
             expired CSID would all be of substantial assistance. For
             someone in possession of one or more of these documents the
             process should be straightforward. A laissez-passer should not
             be counted for these purposes: these can be issued without any
             other form of ID being available, are not of any assistance in
             'tracing back' to the family record and are confiscated upon
             arrival at Baghdad;


             ii)  The location of the relevant civil registry office. If it
             is in an area held, or formerly held, by ISIL, is it
             operational?


             iii) Are there male family members who would be able and
             willing to attend the civil registry with P? Because the
             registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant to
             consider whether the relative is from the mother or father's
             side. A maternal uncle in possession of his CSID would be able
             to assist in locating the original place of registration of
             the individual's mother, and from there the trail would need
             to be followed to the place that her records were transferred
             upon marriage. It must also be borne in mind that a
             significant number of IDPs in Iraq are themselves
             undocumented; if that is the case it is unlikely that they
             could be of assistance. A woman without a male relative to
             assist with the process of redocumentation would face very
             significant obstacles in that officials may refuse to deal
             with her case at all.


         Section E of Country Guidance annexed to the Court of Appeal's
         decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017] EWCA Civ 944 is replaced with
         the following guidance:


         2.   There are currently no international flights to the Iraqi
         Kurdish Region (IKR). All returns from the United Kingdom are to
         Baghdad.


         3.   For an Iraqi national returnee (P) of Kurdish origin in
         possession of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the journey from
         Baghdad to the IKR, whether by air or land, is affordable and
         practical and can be made without a real risk of P suffering
         persecution, serious harm, Article 3 ill treatment nor would any
         difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.


         4.   P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the
         IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.


         5.   P will face considerable difficulty in making the journey
         between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a CSID or valid
         passport. There are numerous checkpoints en route, including two
         checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of the airport. If P has
         neither a CSID nor a valid passport there is a real risk of P being
         detained at a checkpoint until such time as the security personnel
         are able to verify P's identity. It is not reasonable to require P
         to travel between Baghdad and IKR by land absent the ability of P
         to verify his identity at a checkpoint. This normally requires the
         attendance of a male family member and production of P's identity
         documents but may also be achieved by calling upon "connections"
         higher up in the chain of command.


         6.   Once at the IKR border (land or air) P would normally be
         granted entry to the territory. Subject to security screening, and
         registering presence with the local mukhtar, P would be permitted
         to enter and reside in the IKR with no further legal impediments or
         requirements. There is no sponsorship requirement for Kurds.


         7.   Whether P would be at particular risk of ill-treatment during
         the security screening process must be assessed on a case-by-case
         basis. Additional factors that may increase risk include: (i)
         coming from a family with a known association with ISIL, (ii)
         coming from an area associated with ISIL and (iii) being a single
         male of fighting age. P is likely to be able to evidence the fact
         of recent arrival from the UK, which would dispel any suggestion of
         having arrived directly from ISIL territory.


         8.   If P has family members living in the IKR cultural norms would
         require that family to accommodate P. In such circumstances P
         would, in general, have sufficient assistance from the family so as
         to lead a 'relatively normal life', which would not be unduly
         harsh. It is nevertheless important for decision-makers to
         determine the extent of any assistance likely to be provided by P's
         family on a case by case basis.


         9.   For those without the assistance of family in the IKR the
         accommodation options are limited:


             (i)  Absent special circumstances it is not reasonably likely
             that P will be able to gain access to one of the refugee camps
             in the IKR; these camps are already extremely overcrowded and
             are closed to newcomers. 64% of IDPs are accommodated in
             private settings with the vast majority living with family
             members;


             (ii) If P cannot live with a family member, apartments in a
             modern block in a new neighbourhood are available for rent at
             a cost of between $300 and $400 per month;


             (iii)    P could resort to a 'critical shelter arrangement',
             living in an unfinished or abandoned structure, makeshift
             shelter, tent, mosque, church or squatting in a government
             building. It would be unduly harsh to require P to relocate to
             the IKR if P will live in a critical housing shelter without
             access to basic necessities such as food, clean water and
             clothing;


             (iv) In considering whether P would be able to access basic
             necessities, account must be taken of the fact that failed
             asylum seekers are entitled to apply for a grant under the
             Voluntary Returns Scheme, which could give P access to �1500.
             Consideration should also be given to whether P can obtain
             financial support from other sources such as (a) employment,
             (b) remittances from relatives abroad, (c) the availability of
             ad hoc charity or by being able to access PDS rations.


         10.  Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed on a
         case-by-case basis taking the following matters into account:


             (i)  Gender. Lone women are very unlikely to be able to secure
             legitimate employment;


             (ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the IKR is
             70%;


             (iii)    P cannot work without a CSID;


             (iv) Patronage and nepotism continue to be important factors
             in securing employment. A returnee with family connections to
             the region will have a significant advantage in that he would
             ordinarily be able to call upon those contacts to make
             introductions to prospective employers and to vouch for him;


             (v)  Skills, education and experience. Unskilled workers are
             at the greatest disadvantage, with the decline in the
             construction industry reducing the number of labouring jobs
             available;


             (vi) If P is from an area with a marked association with ISIL,
             that may deter prospective employers."

15.  I make the following findings:

15.1. there is a reasonable likelihood that the Appellant's birth family of
    his parents, brother and sister in Hawija have either been taken by
    ISIS as the Appellant was told and/or if they survived that they have
    been internally displaced;

15.2.    I accept the Appellant's evidence to the lower standard of proof
    that he has been unable to locate them. There is evidence in the bundle
    submitted by Ms Smith [pages 12-25] that he submitted a tracing request
    with the Red Cross in Liverpool on 18 May 2017 in an attempt to locate
    them and I accept his evidence at [6] of his statement that he had
    returned to see the Red Cross twice and they have no news about his
    family;

15.3. I accept that the Appellant has never been to the IKR and that he has
    no known connections there in terms of his friends or family. He has
    been consistent in his evidence in this respect.

15.4.    Consequently, I find that in the absence of a CSID or any material
    documents or information, such as the page and volume number of his
    CSID and in the absence of the known whereabouts of any male relatives,
    there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that the Appellant would be
    unable to obtain a replacement CSID in Iraq.

15.5. In light of the findings in AAH the Appellant would be returned to
    Baghdad as    there are no international flights to the IKR, the
    Appellant would be unable to board  a flight to the IKR without a CSID.
    Nor is it reasonable to expect him to travel by land in the absence of
    identity documents.

15.6.    The Respondent's policy as set out at [151] of the Upper Tribunal
    decision in AA(Iraq) [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) is that:

         "A person returned to Iraq who was unable to replace their Civil
         Status ID Card or Nationality Certificate [who would] be likely to
         face significant difficulties in accessing services and a
         livelihood and would face destitution which is likely to reach the
         Article 3 threshold."

15.7.    Consequently, I find that removal of the Appellant to Iraq would
    be in breach of the United Kingdom's obligations contrary to Article 3
    of the ECHR, in the absence of any family or a support network in
    Baghdad.

16.  For the avoidance of doubt, I find that it would unreasonable and
    unduly harsh to expect the Appellant to internally relocate to the IKR.
    Whilst the First tier Tribunal Judge rejected the Appellant's evidence
    and found at [62] that he could access assistance from family and
    friends in the IKR, I found that there was no or no proper evidential
    basis for this finding, bearing in mind the Appellant's evidence, which
    was accepted at [49] that the Appellant has never been to Kurdistan and
    there was no evidence upon which the Judge could base his finding,
    which was essentially speculative. In the absence of any family or
    "special circumstances" there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that
    he would have to resort to a critical shelter arrangement and the Upper
    Tribunal found in AAH that this would be unduly harsh.

17.  The Upper Tribunal further found that that it is not possible to work
    without a CSID and thus the Appellant would have no access to the means
    of supporting himself, even if he were able to find employment in light
    of the fact he is uneducated and illiterate and the unemployment rate
    for IDPs living in the IKR is 70%.

18.  For the reasons set out above, I allow the appeal on the basis that
    removal of the Appellant to Iraq would be contrary to Article 3 and he
    is thus entitled to humanitarian protection.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 18 September 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

