
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07487/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 22 January 2021                  |On: 09 February 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     LVN
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, instructed by Thompson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam, a Roman Catholic,  born  on  10
      October 2000. He has been  given  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kinch  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the respondent's decision  to  refuse  his  asylum  and  human
      rights claim.

   3. The appellant  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  30  March  2015,
      clandestinely, at the age of 14 years. He claimed asylum on 1 December
      2017. His claim was refused on 1 June 2018. His  appeal  against  that
      decision was dismissed in the First-tier Tribunal on 4 February  2019.
      Whilst permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted and  the
      First-tier Tribunal's decision was upheld in the  Upper  Tribunal,  it
      was subsequently set aside by the Court of Appeal and the  matter  was
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a different  judge.
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Kinch heard the appeal on 25  February  2020
      and dismissed it in a decision promulgated on 24 March 2020.

   4. The basis of the appellant's claim was that he feared  being  arrested
      and put in prison, or being killed, by the Vietnamese  authorities  if
      he returned to Vietnam. The  appellant  claimed  that  he  attended  a
      protest with his father on  3  September  2013  outside  the  People's
      Committee Building of Nghi Phuong Commune, the purpose of which was to
      demand the release of two priests. The protest was  dispersed  by  the
      police and he and his father were  both  arrested  and  taken  to  the
      police station. The appellant said that he was detained  there  for  a
      month and  was  beaten  until  he  signed  a  document  confessing  to
      committing public disorder and then released on reporting  conditions.
      His father was not released and he had not seen him since. On  19  May
      2014 he attended another protest at Xa Doai Church  with  his  mother,
      objecting to the  disruption  caused  to  Vietnamese  fishing  by  the
      operation of a Chinese oil and gas platform called Haiyang  Shiyou,  a
      matter which directly affected  his  family.  The  protest  was  again
      broken up violently by the police and he was captured again,  although
      his mother got away. He was detained again in the police station,  for
      two months, and was beaten so badly that his arm was  broken.  He  was
      transferred to a youth offender detention camp where he was  held  for
      another month and he was released after signing a confession admitting
      to breaking public order, and was taken to hospital by his mother.  He
      continued reporting to the  police,  but  after  a  month  the  police
      delivered a summons to his mother to attend  the  police  station,  as
      they suspected that she had been at the protest. As a result of  this,
      his mother took him and fled to stay with a friend. They stayed  there
      for two days and then an agent took them to a safe  place  from  where
      they fled the country, on 10 October 2014.

   5. The appellant claimed that they were taken  to  Russia,  but  he  then
      became separated from his mother when travelling on to Poland,  France
      and then the UK. He was encountered by the police after  entering  the
      UK and was placed in the care of social services, but he absconded and
      went to stay with a Vietnamese man for three months,  then  a  Chinese
      group for two years and then  with  another  Vietnamese  man  for  six
      months. Finally, another Vietnamese man approached the authorities  on
      his behalf and he  then  claimed  asylum.  Since  that  time,  he  had
      attended two demonstrations outside the Vietnamese Embassy in  London,
      om 8 and 30 April 2018, which he feared would put  him  at  additional
      risk from the government in Vietnam.

   6. The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim,  accepted  that  he
      was a Vietnamese national, that he was a practising Roman Catholic and
      that he had attended two demonstrations in the UK,  but  rejected  his
      account of having attended  two  protests  in  Vietnam  and  of  being
      arrested and detained. The respondent accepted that the appellant  had
      given a detailed account of both protests but noted  that  information
      about both was widely available in the public domain.  The  respondent
      accepted that there had been a protest outside the People's  Committee
      Building of Nghi  Phuong  Commune  on  3  and  4  September  2013  but
      considered that the appellant's account of the events was inconsistent
      with the objective evidence. The appellant's account was of his arrest
      at a large demonstration on 3 September 2013 which was attacked by the
      police, whereas the background evidence referred to a larger, peaceful
      demonstration on 3 September 2013 followed by a smaller protest  on  4
      September  2013  which  turned  violent  and  was  broken  up  by  the
      authorities. Likewise, the respondent considered that the  appellant's
      account  of  the  19  May  2014  protest  was  inconsistent  with  the
      background evidence. The respondent considered further that the timing
      of the appellant's claim, only after being arrested on 30  March  2015
      under an immigration provision and  then  absconding  for  two  years,
      further undermined the credibility  of  his  claim.  Accordingly,  the
      respondent did not accept that the appellant had a genuine  subjective
      fear of persecution in Vietnam. The  respondent  considered  that  the
      appellant would not be at risk in Vietnam on the basis of his religion
      or otherwise.

   7. As for Article 8, the respondent considered that there  were  no  very
      significant obstacles to integration for the appellant in Vietnam  and
      that his removal from the UK would not breach his human rights. As for
      section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  and
      the duty of family tracing, the respondent noted  that  the  appellant
      had claimed to have lost  contact  with  his  mother  on  the  journey
      between Vietnam and the UK and considered therefore that it would  not
      be possible for  the  Home  Office  to  trace  her.  Furthermore,  the
      appellant had claimed that his father was incarcerated and that he had
      no idea where he was. Accordingly, his  family  could  not  be  traced
      using the information and family tracing steps available to  the  Home
      Office. Since the appellant was 17� years of age, he did  not  qualify
      for leave to remain under paragraph 352XE of the immigration rules  as
      an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child.

   8. The appellant's appeal was  initially  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge  Davidson,  who  did  not  accept  his  account   of   the   two
      demonstrations in Vietnam, in particular the first  one  in  September
      2013, found that his claim was not credible and concluded that he  was
      at no risk of persecution in Vietnam. The judge's decision was  upheld
      in the Upper Tribunal by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Woodcraft,  but
      was subsequently set aside by the Court Appeal on the basis of a  lack
      of adequate reasoning in relation to the adverse credibility findings,
      and was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

   9. The appeal then came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kinch  on  25
      February 2020. The appellant gave oral evidence before the judge.  The
      judge had before her an expert, medico-legal report from Professor M R
      Graham, dated 14 November 2018,  which  provided  an  opinion  on  the
      appellant's scarring and mental health. The judge  accepted  that  the
      appellant attended the demonstration on 3 September 2013 but  rejected
      his account of having been arrested and detained with his father.  She
      reached the same finding in relation to the second protest, on 19  May
      2014, and  rejected  the  appellant's  account  of  his  mother  being
      summonsed. The  judge  accepted  the  appellant's  account  of  having
      attended four demonstrations outside the Vietnamese Embassy in  London
      but noted his evidence that he was not an organiser and concluded that
      no adverse interest would have been taken in him as a  result  of  his
      attendance. The  judge  noted  further  that  the  appellant  was  not
      claiming to be at risk in Vietnam on the basis of his religion and she
      concluded that he was not at any risk on return. The judge  found,  in
      relation  to  Article  8,  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
      requirements of the immigration rules under Appendix FM and  paragraph
      276ADE(1) and that there were no compelling circumstances outside  the
      rules. She accordingly dismissed the  appeal  on  all  grounds,  in  a
      decision promulgated on 24 March 2020.

  10. Permission was  sought  by  the  appellant  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal. Permission to appeal was refused in the First-tier Tribunal,
      but was subsequently granted by the Upper Tribunal on renewed grounds:
      firstly, that the judge failed to adopt a child-sensitive  application
      of the lower standard of proof when  making  her  adverse  credibility
      findings in regard to the appellant's involvement in the protest of  3
      September 2013; secondly, that the judge failed to  make  findings  in
      relation to the appellant's mother; thirdly, that the judge had  erred
      in her consideration of the respondent's duty to  endeavour  to  trace
      family members; and fourthly, that the judge had  failed  to  consider
      the impact upon the appellant of being an unaccompanied asylum-seeking
      child, in the context of both Article 3 and Article 8.  Permission  to
      appeal was granted on 13 August 2020 and the matter then  came  before
      for a hearing, by way of skype for business.

Hearing and Submissions

  11. Both parties made submissions on the error of law issue.

  12. With regard to the first ground, Ms Reid submitted  that  Judge  Kinch
      had made the same error as the previous judge in relation to the issue
      of 3 or 4 September 2013 protest. The appellant was only 19  years  of
      age at the hearing and was recounting events which took place when  he
      was a child of 12 years at the first  protest  and  13  years  at  the
      second.  He  should  have  been  treated  as  a  vulnerable   witness,
      particularly as he had been diagnosed  as  suffering  from  PTSD.  The
      judge failed to do that and failed to consider if he could  have  been
      at the demonstration on 4 September, where it was accepted that people
      were arrested, instead of 3 September. The judge put too  much  weight
      on the  date  and  ought  to  have  taken  a  child-centred  approach,
      particularly where there was evidence of scarring consistent with  the
      injuries claimed. As for the second ground, Ms Reid submitted that the
      judge had failed to make a finding on whether the  appellant  attended
      the second protest with his mother. She had dismissed the  appellant's
      account  of  the  summons  on  the  basis  of  implausibility  without
      considering the matter in the proper context, yet there were a  number
      of reasons why the appellant's mother would  not  have  fled  earlier.
      With regard to the third ground, Ms Reid submitted that the respondent
      had failed in her duty to trace  family  members.  The  appellant  had
      provided all the details of his  parents.  It  was  perverse  for  the
      respondent to  cite  reasons,  based  upon  an  account  she  had  not
      accepted, as an answer to not being  able  to  attempt  to  trace  the
      appellants' parents.  The  judge  ought  also  to  have  accepted  the
      appellant's claim that he had made attempts to trace through  the  Red
      Cross. As for the fourth and last ground, Ms Reid submitted  that  the
      judge  had  not  taken  proper  account  of  the  appellant  being  an
      unaccompanied asylum-seeking child, which fed  into  the  question  of
      risk under Article 3,  as  well  as  the  issue  of  very  significant
      obstacles to integration under Article  8.  Ms  Reid  asked  that  the
      matter be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  again  for  a  fresh
      hearing.

  13. Ms Cunha submitted that the grounds were simply  a  disagreement  with
      the judge's decision. The judge had taken into account the appellant's
      age and vulnerability when making her  findings.  The  fact  that  the
      judge did not make  a  finding  whether  the  appellant's  mother  was
      present at the second protest was immaterial. The judge  was  entitled
      to conclude that the expert's opinion, that the appellant's scars were
      consistent with his account, was not sufficient, as they could equally
      have been caused by other means. The judge was entitled to  find  that
      the appellant had given an inconsistent  account  of  events.  As  for
      family tracing, the respondent could only  undertake  tracing  on  the
      information given by the appellant, as  was  the  case  with  the  Red
      Cross, and those details may not have been credible.

  14. Ms Reid  reiterated  some  of  the  points  previously  made,  in  her
      response.

Discussion and Conclusions

  15. I am in agreement with Ms Cunha's submissions  that  the  grounds  are
      little more than a disagreement with the judge's decision. The grounds
      assert that the judge erred in the same way as Judge Davidson had done
      previously,  by  making  adverse  credibility  findings  against   the
      appellant, a young and vulnerable 19 year old who was only 12 years of
      age at the time of the relevant events and only 17 years of  age  when
      interviewed, on the basis of what was simply a confusion about  dates,
      and accorded too much weight to the matter. If that  had  indeed  been
      the case, I would have no hesitation in agreeing that the judge was in
      legal error. However, that is not the case.

  16. Firstly, when the judge assessed the appellant's evidence, it is plain
      that  she  did  so  with  careful  regard  given  to  his   particular
      circumstances, being  mindful  of  his  age  at  all  relevant  stages
      including at his interview and his vulnerability  in  accordance  with
      the Presidential Guidance Note (at [36]), his mental health status (at
      [39] and [40]) and the reports of scarring on his  body,  assessed  by
      Professor  Green  as  being  consistent  with  the  injuries  claimed.
      Secondly, the judge also had regard to the discrepancies in  the  news
      articles about the demonstrations, at [46] and  [47],  and  considered
      the fact  that  the  appellant  could  have  confused  the  dates  and
      circumstances of the protests on 3 and 4 September 2013. Thirdly,  the
      judge gave further reasons, aside from the appellant's evidence of the
      date of the incident, for concluding that his account was inconsistent
      with the background information, and fifthly it cannot  be  said  that
      the judge erred by  according  too  much  weight  to  the  appellant's
      evidence of the protests, given that that was the basis of  his  claim
      and the events from which the claimed risk of persecution arose.

  17. The judge's findings were based upon a careful  consideration  of  the
      appellant's evidence in the context of the reports, in the  background
      information, of the events of 3 and 4 September 2013, with  clear  and
      cogent reasons given for concluding that the  accounts  could  not  be
      reconciled and that the contradictory evidence could not be  explained
      simply on the basis of confusion as to dates. The contradiction in the
      accounts is set out clearly  at  [45]  to  [47]  of  the  respondent's
      decision, whereby the respondent found that it could not be  the  case
      that the appellant attended a large demonstration  attended  by  about
      1000 people carrying banners  and chanting slogans, where  the  police
      intervened and attacked the crowds and arrested many people  including
      himself and his father, as that did not (according to all the  country
      reports) occur on either 3 or 4 September 2013, but was  a  conflation
      of the events of the two days. That was precisely what the judge found
      at [45] to [47] and what she properly concluded could not be explained
      by the appellant's age, mental health or  other  vulnerabilities.  The
      judge also went on to give further reasons as to why  the  appellant's
      account was inconsistent with the background information,  aside  from
      the date of the protest, at [48] to [53], on the basis of the  profile
      of those arrested and the period of time for which those arrested were
      detained. All of those reasons given by the judge  for  rejecting  the
      appellant's account to have been arrested and detained with his father
      were, in my view, fully and properly open to her.

  18. Likewise, with the appellant's account of  his  arrest  and  detention
      when attending the protest of 19 May 2014, the  judge's  rejection  of
      his claim followed  a  careful  analysis  of  the  background  country
      reports and was carefully and cogently reasoned. The grounds criticise
      the judge's findings on the appellant's account of the events, in that
      she failed to make a finding as to whether his  mother  attended  with
      him and erred by basing her adverse  findings  about  the  summons  on
      implausibility. However, I do not consider an absence of  findings  as
      to whether the appellant's mother attended with him was  material  and
      neither do I find the judge to have  erred  in  her  adverse  findings
      about the summons. The judge gave detailed reasons, at [54] and  [55],
      as to why the appellant's account was inconsistent  with  the  country
      information, as regards his account of the police intervention and the
      treatment of low-level offenders of his age.  In  the  light  of  that
      information, and having had regard to the findings of Professor  Green
      in regard to the  cause  of  the  appellant's  scars,  at  [56],  when
      assessing the evidence as a whole, the judge was perfectly entitled to
      conclude that the appellant's account was not a credible one  and  was
      entitled to draw the adverse conclusions that she did about the timing
      of his mother's decision to flee the country.

  19. Accordingly, I find no merit in the challenge in the  grounds  to  the
      judge's approach to the appellant's evidence. It  is  clear  that  she
      accorded appropriate weight  to  the  appellant's  vulnerabilities  in
      terms of his age and his mental health, that  she  followed  a  child-
      sensitive approach  and  that  she  gave  appropriate  weight  to  the
      background country information. She did not  dismiss  the  appellant's
      claim simply on the basis of a difference in the appellant's  evidence
      as to dates, and  neither  was  she  required  simply  to  accept  the
      appellant's account and give no weight to discrepancies because of his
      age and vulnerabilities, as the grounds  appear  to  suggest.  On  the
      contrary, the judge made her findings on the basis of a  detailed  and
      careful analysis of all the evidence and accorded relevant  weight  to
      the evidence.

  20. As to the issue of family tracing, the  respondent  asserts  that  the
      respondent's approach was perverse, in that she based her decision not
      to undertake tracing upon an account which she had  found  not  to  be
      credible,  particularly  with  regard  to  the  appellant's   father's
      whereabouts. However, it seems to me that the respondent was perfectly
      entitled  to  take  the  appellant's  evidence  about   his   family's
      whereabouts as a starting point in deciding to what extent  she  could
      undertake tracing. The respondent clearly had regard to the matter  of
      tracing and I do not see any reason to conclude that the  judge  erred
      by making no further findings in that regard. In any event  the  judge
      did consider the issue of family tracing  at  [69],  noting  that  the
      appellant claimed to have heard  from  the  Red  Cross  following  his
      application to them to trace his family, but had produced no  evidence
      to show that he had received such a response, nor that he had attended
      an appointment.

  21. The fourth ground of appeal asserts that the judge erred by not taking
      account of the impact on the appellant of having come to the UK as  an
      unaccompanied asylum-seeking child at a young  age,  and  with  mental
      health issues, in an assessment of Article 3 or  Article  8.  However,
      the judge's record of the appellant's representative's submissions, at
      [65] and [66] of her decision, make it  clear  that  that  was  not  a
      matter pursued at the hearing. The judge  in  any  event  went  on  to
      consider the appellant's age and other relevant circumstances  in  the
      context of an Article 8 assessment,  when  considering  whether  there
      were any very significant  obstacles  to  integration  in  Vietnam  or
      exceptional circumstances outside the immigration rules. The  findings
      she made in that regard were fully and properly open  to  her  on  the
      evidence before her.

  22. For all of these reasons I consider that the grounds of appeal do  not
      disclose any errors of law requiring the judge's decision  to  be  set
      aside. The judge clearly had  regard  to  all  the  evidence  and  was
      entitled to make the adverse findings that she did,  for  the  reasons
      fully and cogently given. She was perfectly entitled to conclude  that
      the appellant had not provided a genuine and credible account  of  his
      reasons for leaving Vietnam or of his circumstances on return to  that
      country. She was entitled to conclude that he was at no risk on return
      and that his removal to Vietnam would not breach his human rights.

DECISION

  23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


    Anonymity


    The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  25 January
2021
