

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07306/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29th July 2019                                |On 4th November 2019           |
|And at Field House                               |                               |
|On 16th September 2019                           |                               |
|                                                 |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     BT
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Qudia (on 29th July 2019), Ms E Fitzsimmons on
16th September 2019, instructed by Duncan Lewis
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  respondent
   in this determination  identified  as  BT.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

         1. The  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  by  Judge  C  O'Garro  was
            promulgated on 21st May 2019. She allowed the appeal "on asylum
            grounds' and on "human rights grounds (Article 3)".


         2.  The  SSHD  sought  permission  to  appeal  and   was   granted
            permission, by First-tier Tribunal judge Kelly,  on  10th  June
            2019, in the following terms:


                  Permission to appeal is refused on the grounds set out  in
                  paragraphs 2, 3,     4 and 7 of the application.
                  Permission to appeal is granted on the grounds set out  in
                  paragraphs 5, 8, and 9 to 14 of the application.
                  REASONS FOR DECISION.....
                  1.The [SSHD] seeks permission to appeal in time against  a
                  decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro, promulgated
                  on the 21st  May  [2019],  to  allow  the  appeal  against
                  refusal of his protection claim.
                  2. It was open  to  the  tribunal  to  find....  That  the
                  appellant had been trafficked in the United Kingdom. It is
                  accordingly not arguable that the tribunal  was  bound  by
                  the finding  of  the  competent  authority  (made  on  the
                  balance of probabilities) that he had only been trafficked
                  in Russia. It is moreover not arguable that  the  tribunal
                  gave insufficient reasons  for  its  conclusion  that  the
                  appellant was at risk of harm in his home area of Vietnam.
                  Indeed, the decision maker appears to  have  accepted  the
                  existence of such risk, albeit that the risk was  said  to
                  be  "limited"  [see  paragraph  7  of  the   application].
                  Permission to appeal on the grounds set out in  paragraphs
                  2, 3, 4 and 7 of the application is therefore refused.
                  3. It is however a arguable that the  tribunal  failed  to
                  give adequate reasons as to why (a) the appellant would be
                  unable to relocate within Vietnam and/ or benefit from the
                  facilities  and  protection   afforded   to   victims   of
                  trafficking by the Vietnamese state, and  (b)  his  mental
                  health problems reached the high threshold  necessary  for
                  engagement of article 3 of the human rights convention. To
                  that limited extent permission to appeal is granted on the
                  grounds set out in paragraphs 5, 8 and  9  to  14  of  the
                  application.


            On 29th July 2019 the appeal came before  me  and  I  made  the
            following decision:


                  .....


                  Error of law


               3. The First-tier Tribunal did  not,  when  sending  out  the
                  notice of grant of permission, notify the  SSHD  that  the
                  grant had been in partial terms and inform the SSHD of the
                  mechanism and time limits for seeking renewal. It was  not
                  until Mr Melvin received the papers on  Friday  26th  July
                  2019 that an application was made to renew the application
                  for  permission  to  appeal,  such   application   to   be
                  considered at the hearing on 29th  July.  The  application
                  for renewal did not expand on or seek to amend  the  basis
                  upon which permission had been sought  before  the  First-
                  tier Tribunal. Save to summarise the permission to  appeal
                  as being sought on "on the trafficking decision  and  risk
                  in home area".


               4. Ms Qudia opposed the application on the  grounds  that  it
                  was out of time, the SSHD  ought  to  have  and  could  be
                  expected to have  procedures in place  that  would  enable
                  partial grants of permission to  be  identified  and  thus
                  application to be made to renew, even  if  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal had  failed  to  serve  the  correct  notices  as
                  regards a partial grant.


               5. Whilst I would expect the SSHD to have in place procedures
                  for identification of partial grants of permission, it  is
                  also reasonable for those procedures  to  be  such  as  to
                  identify such partial grants because they  are  sent  with
                  the relevant notices, as required by  [34(4)  &  (5)]  The
                  Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and
                  Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014. It was not apparent to me that
                  the SSHD had been served in accordance with the  Procedure
                  Rules and although, as Ms Qudia pointed out, the Notice of
                  Grant was headed very clearly on what basis permission had
                  been granted and  refused,  that  is  not  sufficient.  As
                  Ferrer [2012] UKUT 00304 (IAC) makes clear, the  grant  of
                  permission on partial grounds is a  process  comprised  of
                  two elements - not only must the decision be clear on  the
                  face of the grant/refusal but also there must be notice of
                  the right to renew the application to the Upper Tribunal.


               6. I granted the SSHD an  extension  of  time  to  renew  the
                  grounds seeking permission to appeal. I  refused  to  hear
                  oral submissions on the application and put the case back;
                  I  then  gave  my  decision  on  the  renewed  grounds  of
                  application.


               7. The renewed grounds of appeal sought to rely on the
                  following paragraphs in the application made to the
                  Tribunal:


                   Risk in relation to criminal gang
                    3. The appellant claims that in 2005 - 2006  (AIR  q93),
                       that he discovered a quantity of drugs on  his  lorry
                       that he destroyed by throwing into a river and  fears
                       recrimination from that gang, a non state actor.
                    4. Apart from the passage of time, and  when  considered
                       that the fear is from a non state actor the appellant
                       has failed to the  Horvath  standard  to  demonstrate
                       that he is at risk. The appellant has never  reported
                       the claimed incident to the  authorities  (AIR  q110-
                       111), and there is no evidence that the alleged  gang
                       has any influence with the authorities, whilst it  is
                       also of note that the appellant  was  able  to  visit
                       Vietnam from Cambodia (AIR q97-99).
                    5. (permission already granted on this ground)
                    6. Therefore, it is respectfully submitted that the FTTJ
                       has failed to give any clear reasons as  to  why  the
                       appellant  would   be   entitled   to   international
                       protection (Convention reason) in respect of this non
                       state actor (criminal gang).
                       Risk of being trafficked
                    7. Although it has been accepted that the appellant  was
                       trafficked from Cambodia  to  Russia,  but  again  as
                       confirmed in decision letter of 21/ 10/17  "You  have
                       no debt to Dao," the  trafficker  from  Cambodia.  As
                       such  there  would  be  limited  risk  of  being   re
                       trafficked or serious harm in the form  of  reprisals
                       from the original  traffickers.  With  reliance  also
                       placed in the decision  letter  of  21/07/17  in  the
                       unreported  case   of   Nguyen   (Anti   -Trafficking
                       Convention: respondent's duties) 2015 UKUT 170 (IAC),
                       the Upper Tribunal held  that  'The  person  is  more
                       likely to be at risk of serious harm  if  they  still
                       have an outstanding debt to the traffickers'.


               8. As I commented, the grounds relied upon by the  SSHD  (not
                  drafted by Mr Melvin) were  unclear  and  consisted  of  a
                  mixture of statement and  submissions.


               9. Although Mr Melvin  did  not  seek  to  renew  the  ground
                  seeking  permission to appeal the decision by  the  First-
                  tier Tribunal judge that the appellant  had  rebutted  the
                  presumption under s72 Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
                  Act 2002 I nevertheless considered the First-tier Tribunal
                  decision and concluded, as I informed  the  parties,  that
                  the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had  reached  a  properly
                  reasoned and sustainable conclusion that BT  had  rebutted
                  the presumption that he had committed a serious crime  and
                  that his continuous  presence  in  the  UK  constituted  a
                  danger to the community. I did  not  grant  permission  to
                  pursue an argument that the rebuttal  of  the  presumption
                  had not been adequately reasoned.


              10. In so far as the ground of appeal headed 'Risk in relation
                  to criminal gang', is concerned, paragraphs 3 and 4 of the
                  request for  permission  to  appeal,  these  amount  to  a
                  statement of BT's claim [3] and a submission [4]; they  do
                  not identify an arguable error of law  which  is  what  is
                  identified in [5][1] and upon which permission was granted
                  by the First-tier Tribunal.


              11. In so far as the grounds of appeal headed 'Risk  of  being
                  trafficked', paragraph 7 of  the  renewed  grounds  is  in
                  essence a submission that relates to paragraph  8  of  the
                  grounds[2] upon which permission was granted by the First-
                  tier Tribunal.


              12. In summary the First-tier  Tribunal  has  already  granted
                  permission with regard to the issue of whether there is an
                  arguable error of law by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
                  that BT is at real risk of being trafficked  from  Vietnam
                  and whether BT is at risk of  Article  3  mistreatment  on
                  health grounds.


              13. It follows that it is not possible to  identify  with  any
                  clarity, as seemed to  be  accepted  by  Mr  Melvin,  what
                  grounds exactly the SSHD is seeking to renew. As clarified
                  with Ms Qudia, BT has not been disadvantaged by not having
                  received  the  application  to   renew   grounds   seeking
                  permission to appeal prior to the service of the  Rule  24
                  response; the additional paragraphs  relied  upon  by  the
                  SSHD do not identify any  additional  grounds  of  alleged
                  arguable error of law but are submissions of which BT  was
                  aware when the Rule 24 was prepared.


                  Background  and  findings  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
                  O'Garro


              14. BT  is  a  citizen  of  Vietnam  born  February  1975.  An
                  automatic deportation order was signed against BT on 9 May
                  2017 following his imprisonment  for  3  years  at  Bolton
                  Crown Court on 22nd April 2016 on a charge of  cultivation
                  of cannabis. He was convicted after a trial  at  which  he
                  had pleaded not guilty.


              15. BT's international protection and human rights claims were
                  refused by the SSHD for reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
                  dated 9th May 2017. BT appealed against that decision. His
                  appeal was first heard by First-tier Tribunal judge  Chana
                  who, in a decision  promulgated  on  29th  November  2017,
                  dismissed his appeal.  That decision was set aside by  the
                  Upper Tribunal on 6th March 2018 and remitted to the First-
                  tier Tribunal to be heard again,  no  findings  preserved.
                  The appeal thus  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
                  O'Garro who allowed the appeal.


              16. The First-tier Tribunal  judge  expressed  the  appeal  as
                  being an appeal against deportation; it is  of  course  an
                  appeal against the decision by  the  SSHD  to  refuse  his
                  international protection and human rights  claim.  Nothing
                  turns on that error of description  by  the  judge.  Those
                  claims were refused by the SSHD for the reasons set out in
                  a decision dated the same date as the deportation order.


              17. BT left Vietnam in 2006, claiming to be  in  fear  of  his
                  life. He travelled to Cambodia where  he  spent  2  years,
                  then to Thailand, then to  Russia  and  then  to  the  UK,
                  arriving  illegally  in  October  2014.  There   is   some
                  inconsistency as to his travels and the time spent in each
                  country, none of which are specifically addressed  by  the
                  First-tier Tribunal judge and she makes no findings on his
                  travels.


              18. BT claims that whilst in Vietnam he worked as  a  delivery
                  driver (AIR q50, witness statement [15]) .  He  discovered
                  he was delivering drugs and threw them in the river.  When
                  this was discovered he was called in and so,  fearing  for
                  his life, he fled to Cambodia.  During the time he was  in
                  Cambodia (1-2 years) he returned to Vietnam to  visit  his
                  family, and although he did not have any  problems  whilst
                  there, he claimed that his parents told  him  people  were
                  looking for him.  He  claims  that  he  cannot  return  to
                  Vietnam because he will be forced to carry  drugs  by  the
                  'gang' he had previously worked for; that it  is  a  mafia
                  gang linked to the government and they would  be  able  to
                  find him and kill him. He also claimed  to  fear  that  he
                  would be re-trafficked if returned to Vietnam.


              19. The judge made no specific findings as regards


                   a) Whether his account that he had been forced  to  carry
                      drugs by a gang whilst in Vietnam was credible; and
                   b) Whether his claim that he had thrown the drugs in  the
                      river was credible;


                  But she found


                       39. ...Having considered the evidence referred to in
                       Ms Fitzsimmons's skeleton argument, I am  satisfied,
                       on the low standard that  [BT]  was  trafficked  for
                       criminality.
                           ...


                       49.  [BT] was found to be credible. It  is  accepted
                       that he is a victim of trafficking. I find  that  if
                       the appellant is returned to his home area, it can't
                       be ruled out that the mafia drug gang he  fears  may
                       try to harm him and based on  the  [SSHD's]  Country
                       Policy Information note: Vietnam:  fear  of  illegal
                       moneylenders - at 5.1.2, it states that although the
                       Vietnam  police  weren't  generally   effective   at
                       maintaining public order, they were very limited  in
                       other police capabilities, especially investigative,
                       which means [BT] can expect no protection  from  the
                       authorities, if he made a complaint about the  Mafia
                       gang he fears."


              20. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found, on the basis  of  the
                  report prepared by Ms Pagella,  a  psychotherapist  and  a
                  more  recent  report  by  Ms  Westinghouse  (BT's  support
                  worker) that he is vulnerable, uneducated and in  [55  and
                  56]


                       55. [BT] has a genuine fear that he will be at  risk
                       if he is returned to  Vietnam  and  I  find  that...
                       taking account of his particular circumstances  [he]
                       will not be protected by the Vietnamese authorities,
                       if he is returned to Vietnam.
                       56. If I am wrong in finding that [BT's] claim falls
                       under the 1951 Convention, I nevertheless find  that
                       the appellant is likely to suffer treatment contrary
                       to Article 3 of the ECHR,  if  he  was  returned  to
                       Vietnam, in the  light  of  the  lack  of  available
                       support  on return for a person in [BT's] particular
                       circumstances.


              21. On 12th August  2016  BT  was  referred  to  the  National
                  Referral Mechanism (NRM) and on 17th August 2016 they made
                  a 'reasonable grounds decision' that he was  a  victim  of
                  trafficking. On 3rd  October  2016  a  conclusive  grounds
                  decision was made, on the balance of probabilities, and it
                  was accepted, by the SSHD, that he was a victim  of  human
                  trafficking.


              22. The conclusive grounds decision includes the following:


                      "..claimed in the  screening  interview  that  he  was
                      forced to grow cannabis plants in the UK.  However  in
                      the Judges Sentencing Remarks the  Judge  stated  that
                      [BT] was a gardener of a cannabis farm  on  behalf  of
                      others. The Judge went on to state  that  [BT]  gained
                      some advantage from doing this in terms  of  food  and
                      accommodation and also in money while  admitting  that
                      [BT] was vulnerable.  When  [BT]  was  interviewed  in
                      relation to trafficking, he did not mention the  above
                      claim to be trafficked within the UK.


                      It  is  clear  from  the  above  that  [BT's]  Account
                      concerning cannabis  cultivation  in  the  UK  is  not
                      consistent with the facts as stated by the Judge. [BT]
                      also did not raise this  issue  in  their  trafficking
                      interview.


                      Therefore, while there is external evidence  as  cited
                      above of Vietnamese being forced to cultivate cannabis
                      in the UK, the lack of consistency in [BT's]  accounts
                      it demonstrates that they do not meet the criteria for
                      forced criminality in the UK.


                      However the information provided by [BT] supports  the
                      account of trafficking in  terms  of  what  he  claims
                      happened  to  him  while  in  Russia.  Following   the
                      Guidance   for   Competent   Authorities    ...    the
                      decisionmaker  does  not  have  to  be  certain   that
                      trafficking did occur, the correct test is that it  is
                      more likely than not  to  have  taken  place.  In  the
                      absence  of  any  evidence  which  undermines   [BT's]
                      account, it  is  accepted  conclusively  that  he  was
                      trafficked to the UK and was forced to work in Russia.
                      ...
                      It has, therefore been decided that "on the balance of
                      probabilities" [BT] is a victim of  human  trafficking
                      from Vietnam to the United Kingdom and while in Russia
                      for the purpose of forced labour."


              23. My attention was drawn, in considering whether there  were
                  errors of law in the decision by the  First-tier  Tribunal
                  judge such that the decision is to  be  set  aside  to  be
                  remade, to
                   . the skeleton filed on behalf of BT  to  the  First-tier
                     Tribunal Judge dated 8 April 2019;
                   . the grounds seeking permission to appeal filed  by  the
                     SSHD;
                   . the SSHD's written submissions  and  application  under
                     Rule 15(2A)Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008;
                   . The Rule 24 Notice filed on behalf  of  BT  dated  19th
                     July 2019.


              24. Ms Qudia confirmed that the submissions made to the First-
                  tier Tribunal regarding Article 3 were not based  on  BT's
                  health. I note that paragraph 84  of  the  skeleton  filed
                  with the First-tier Tribunal refers to  trafficking  being
                  inhuman treatment within the meaning of Article  3;  there
                  is no reference to BT's health difficulties  reaching  the
                  high threshold required of Article 3. This  is  reinforced
                  in paragraphs 26 to 30 of the Rule 24 response where it is
                  made clear that there was and is  no  submission  made  on
                  behalf of BT that he meets the threshold of Article 3  for
                  medical reasons; the Article  3  claim  was,  and  it  was
                  submitted was allowed accordingly, on the basis that if he
                  did not meet the Refugee Convention reason then  he  would
                  succeed under Article 3  - the basis of claim was the same
                  and  issues  of  serious  harm,  internal  relocation  and
                  sufficiency of protection were the same.


              25. I agree with Ms Qudia and counsel who drafted the skeleton
                  to the First-tier Tribunal and the Rule 24  response:  The
                  First-tier Tribunal judge allowed the claim on an  Article
                  3 basis on the same findings as she allowed the appeal  on
                  the grounds that BT was a refugee. If the claim  fails  to
                  meet the criteria as a refugee because he is not  at  real
                  risk of serious harm or internal relocation  is  available
                  or there is sufficiency of  protection,  the  claim  fails
                  under Article 3 as well.


              26. There is no finding by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  that
                  removal of BT to Vietnam  would  result  in  a  breach  of
                  Article 3 because of his  health  problems  and  thus  the
                  Article 3  (health)  grounds  upon  which  permission  was
                  granted are dismissed.


              27. Accordingly, the issues that arise in this appeal are  the
                  remaining two grounds upon  which  the  SSHD  was  granted
                  permission to appeal:


                   a)    Has    the     First-tier     Tribunal     provided
                      findings/adequately reasoned findings that  were  open
                      to her as to why BT would be at  real  risk  of  being
                      persecuted for a Convention reason in respect  of  the
                      mafia gang; and
                   b) Has the First-tier Tribunal provided adequate reasoned
                      findings that were open to her that BT is at real risk
                      of being trafficked?


              28. Mr Melvin submitted that the report by  Ms  Pagella  could
                  not be relied upon as an expert report as to BT's  health.
                  This was not a submission made to the First-tier  Tribunal
                  judge. The  report by Ms Pagella and Ms  Westinghouse  set
                  out their conclusions that BT was a vulnerable person with
                  mental health problems and that  he  needed  support.  The
                  First-tier Tribunal judge agreed with  those  conclusions,
                  also drawing from the reports that he was "in a good place
                  now mentally" (paragraph 40 of her decision). In so far as
                  BT's health is relevant it seems, although  this  was  not
                  clear, that Mr Melvin  was  submitting  that  the  reports
                  relied upon were insufficient to support a contention that
                  BT's ability to relocate would be compromised.  I  do  not
                  accept that he can, now, challenge  the  expertise  of  Ms
                  Pagella and Ms Westinghouse and the conclusions  drawn  by
                  them and accepted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge,  no
                  such challenge having been  made  to  the  Judge  and  the
                  grounds seeking permission to appeal not raising  this  as
                  an issue. The finding that BT was vulnerable and that this
                  could impact upon his ability to relocate  if  he  had  to
                  stands.


              29.  Although  not  specifically  stated  by  the   First-tier
                  Tribunal judge, it  seems  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                  judge accepted BT's evidence that on one of his deliveries
                  for the people he described as a mafia  gang,  there  were
                  drugs which he had thrown in the river.


              30. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  confirmed  the  Competent
                  Authority's conclusion that BT was a victim of trafficking
                  from Vietnam to the United Kingdom. Mr  Melvin  sought  to
                  distinguish that  finding,  submitting  that  BT  was  not
                  trafficked from Vietnam initially but was trafficked  from
                  Thailand to Russia and this should have been considered by
                  the First-tier Tribunal judge when considering the risk of
                  trafficking;  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge   had,   he
                  submitted, failed to show a link between Vietnam  and  the
                  traffickers. He submitted it was plain on the  facts  that
                  BT did not come into contact with the  criminals  who  ran
                  the cannabis farm until he had been in  the  UK  for  some
                  months; thus the finding by the First-tier Tribunal  judge
                  that he had been  trafficked  for  criminal  activity  was
                  plainly wrong. He accepted that this was not raised in the
                  grounds seeking permission to appeal but it was an obvious
                  point. The problem Mr Melvin has with that  submission  is
                  that it was not only not in the grounds seeking permission
                  to appeal but nor was it in his application to  renew  the
                  application for permission made on 26th July 2019 and  nor
                  did he make an application orally before me to  amend  the
                  grounds; it was a point made by him in his submissions.


              31. Mr Melvin also  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                  judge should not have  gone  behind  the  finding  of  the
                  Competent Authority that BT was not trafficked to  the  UK
                  for the purpose of criminality in the UK. That  submission
                  is also difficult to reconcile with his earlier submission
                  that   the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   should   have
                  distinguished the finding of the Competent Authority  that
                  BT was trafficked from Vietnam  to  the  UK.  But  in  any
                  event, this was not an alleged error of law raised in  the
                  grounds seeking permission to appeal  or  in  the  renewed
                  grounds or in an oral application at  the  hearing  before
                  me. It is insufficient to raise it during  submissions  as
                  an 'obvious point'.


              32. Nevertheless, even  if  it  were  an  obvious  point,  the
                  standard of proof in an asylum claim is lower than that in
                  a trafficking claim. The Competent Authority  reached  its
                  decision that BT had not been trafficked for  the  purpose
                  of criminality to the UK on a  balance  of  probabilities.
                  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  heard   and   considered
                  evidence,  including  taking  account  of  the   Competent
                  Authority conclusion and found that BT had been trafficked
                  to the UK for the purpose of criminality. A  finding  that
                  was open to her and has not, on its facts been challenged.


              33. The Competent Authority decision refers to and finds  that
                  BT was trafficked to Russia for  the  purposes  of  forced
                  labour. There is no  claimed  or  purported  link  between
                  those who trafficked BT to Russia or from  Russia  to  the
                  UK, whether via other countries  or  not,  other  than  an
                  assertion to that effect in BT's witness  statement.  That
                  he was a victim of trafficking at  each  stage  does  not,
                  absent a specific finding to that  effect  mean  that  the
                  same individuals or gangs trafficked him.  The  First-tier
                  Tribunal judge has adopted the findings of  the  Competent
                  Authority that BT was trafficked. She has not gone  on  to
                  make any further findings other than that relating to  the
                  criminal activity in the UK being trafficking related.


              34. The First-tier Tribunal judge does not make a finding that
                  BT is at risk from the UK criminals who  required  him  to
                  work in the cannabis farm  in  the  UK.  Nor  is  there  a
                  finding that the mafia gang in Vietnam is the same gang as
                  that which was involved in the trafficking that  ended  up
                  in the UK. Nor is there a finding that the mafia gang  was
                  involved in trafficking him. The First-tier Tribunal judge
                  refers to the skeleton  argument  relied  upon  by  BT  in
                  reaching her conclusions as to trafficking. That  skeleton
                  argument does not seek to argue that the traffickers  from
                  Vietnam through to Russia and beyond to the UK are one and
                  the same. The skeleton argument does  not  seek  to  argue
                  that on arrival in the UK, BT was under the control of the
                  same traffickers  but  rather  refers  to  BT  meeting  an
                  individual  in  the  UK,  which  is  what  led  him   into
                  criminality, as he says in his witness statement.


              35. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge,  adopting  the  Competent
                  Authority decision and considering the  evidence  referred
                  to in the skeleton argument, found BT had been  trafficked
                  for the purpose of criminality. She does not however  make
                  a finding that the criminals in the UK were  those  behind
                  the trafficking  from  Vietnam.  She  does  not  make  any
                  finding regarding risks from those  criminals  but  rather
                  refers to risks from the mafia drug gang in Vietnam.


              36. It cannot be disputed but  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                  decision  is  not   particularly   clear   and   detailed.
                  Nevertheless, what does appear reasonably clear  from  her
                  findings, broken down into their constituent parts, is


                   . BT is a victim of trafficking from Vietnam to the UK;
                   . The purpose of  the  trafficking  in  the  UK  was  for
                     criminality;
                   . There is no asserted or claimed link between the  mafia
                     gang, the trafficking to Russia for forced  labour  and
                     the trafficking in the UK for criminality;
                   . BT was a delivery driver for a  mafia  linked  gang  in
                     Vietnam;
                   . BT threw drugs that he was supposed  to  be  delivering
                     into a river.


              37.  The  SSHD  was  granted  permission  with  reference   to
                  paragraph 5 of  the  grounds  of  appeal.  This  paragraph
                  commences  with  the  words  "even  if".  The   grant   of
                  permission cannot be read as being  solely  related  to  a
                  challenge to the decision by the First-tier Tribunal judge
                  on  internal  relocation,  as  is  apparent  in  the  next
                  paragraph of the grounds and  the  submission  (which  was
                  treated as a ground of appeal when  permission  was  first
                  considered) in paragraph 4 of the  grounds.  The  Rule  24
                  response and  the  submissions  before  me  were  directed
                  towards  the   question   of   internal   relocation   and
                  sufficiency of protection predicated upon BT being at real
                  risk from the mafia gang.


              38. The judge's finding in [49] refers to "it can't  be  ruled
                  out". That is not a finding that BT  will,  to  the  lower
                  standard of proof, be at real  risk  of  being  persecuted
                  from  the  mafia  gang.  The  judge  states  in  the  same
                  paragraph that BT  "can  expect  no  protection  from  the
                  authorities if he made a complaint against the mafia  gang
                  he fears".  It does not appear to have  been  in  evidence
                  that BT would, on  return  to  Vietnam  make  a  complaint
                  against the mafia gang - if they are still in existence in
                  his home area after such a lengthy period of  absence.  Of
                  course,  it  may  be  said  that  where  there  has   been
                  criminality  then  a  person  should  report  it  to   the
                  authorities, but again there does not appear to have  been
                  evidence to that effect before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
                  The issue is therefore one -step back - is BT at real risk
                  of being persecuted by the mafia gang on his return to his
                  home   area   and   then    the    issue    of    internal
                  relocation/sufficiency of  protection  would  need  to  be
                  examined. This is identified in  the  submissions  of  the
                  SSHD in the grounds of which BT was aware at the date  the
                  Rule 24 was prepared.


              39. BT's evidence was that he had  returned  to  Vietnam  from
                  Cambodia to visit his family  and  had  not  had  problems
                  because he had only visited for short periods of time  and
                  been very careful before he entered his parents' house. He
                  claimed that he had been told that people were looking for
                  him. There are a number of matters in the evidence  before
                  the First-tier Tribunal upon which the First-tier Tribunal
                  judge failed to make any findings. In particular:


                  a. Would the fact that given  his  evidence  that  he  had
                     worked in various parts of Vietnam - Hue, Hanoi, Ho Chi
                     Minh City - for periods of  time  ranging  from  a  few
                     weeks to a few months mean that he  would  be  able  to
                     relocate even though the trafficking report  refers  to
                     the requirement for registration to be notified or  has
                     he registered elsewhere in any event;
                  b.  If  he  did  have  to  register  and  given  that  the
                     trafficking  report  states  that  individuals  can  be
                     traced through the official registration scheme whether
                     that meant that, given BT's  particular  circumstances,
                     the drugs gang would be reasonably likely to trace  him
                     bearing in mind the  time  that  has  elapsed  and  his
                     lengthy absence from Vietnam;
                  c. Whether it was reasonably  likely  that  he  would,  on
                     return to Vietnam come to the attention  of  the  drugs
                     gang;
                  d. Whether it was accepted that he had a  legal  wife  who
                     had been  kidnapped  and  a  partner  and  child  whose
                     whereabouts were unknown given the contradiction in his
                     evidence  as  set  out  in  the  AIR  and  his  witness
                     statement as to whether he was married and the children
                     he had;
                  e. Whether it was  accepted  that  his  parents  had  been
                     threatened, beaten up and threatened with death and  if
                     so when and the  consequences  if  any  to  him  if  he
                     returned to Vietnam;
                  f. Whether it was accepted that he had travelled  back  to
                     Vietnam twice for very short periods of time (it  seems
                     for less than a day although that is not  clear)  given
                     the time the journey takes from Cambodia to  where  his
                     parents lived;
                  g. Whether his account of only visiting  his  parents  for
                     about 30 to 40 minutes on each visit was accepted;
                  h. Whether it was accepted, and if so  on  what  evidence,
                     that there was a link between the person who trafficked
                     him to Russia from Thailand and the person who arranged
                     for him to work in the cannabis farm  in  the  UK  some
                     months after he had arrived in the UK;
                  i. Whether, given his evidence was that he  had  not  paid
                     either of the individuals who had been involved in  his
                     trafficking (to Russia and finding work on the cannabis
                     farm in the UK), that he had not  been  asked  for  any
                     money, that he had not been told he owed any money and,
                     in the UK, that he had been given money,  there  was  a
                     debt owed to any of the traffickers and if so which.
                  j. Whether those who had arranged for  him  to  travel  to
                     Cambodia  when  he  first  fled  Vietnam,  retained  an
                     interest in finding him and if so what the evidence for
                     that was.
                  k. Whether if he lived  elsewhere  than  in  his  city  of
                     origin, he would be able to  obtain  support  from  his
                     family or if not why not or in what  way  it  would  be
                     limited;
                  l. Whether the medical evidence of previous mental  health
                     problems together with the current medical evidence was
                     such that internal relocation would be unduly harsh and
                     if so why.


              40.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  has  made   generalised
                  findings that do not address the evidence, or rather  lack
                  of evidence, that was before her.  Examples  of  this  are
                  given in the above paragraphs. The reports relied upon are
                  in general terms and although reference is  made  to  BT's
                  claim, given the areas of his claim where findings have to
                  be made, the reliance by the judge on the content of those
                  reports  to  find  that   BT   could   not   relocate   is
                  unsustainable.


              41. Sufficiency of protection is considered by the  First-tier
                  Tribunal  judge  very  briefly  and  without  having  made
                  findings of fact  that  are  directed  to  the  underlying
                  claim. Without proper findings of  fact  both  as  to  the
                  possibility  of  being  traced  and  by   whom   and   why
                  traffickers would seek him, the question of sufficiency of
                  protection has been improperly addressed.


              42. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in
                  law in failing to make findings on  the  underlying  claim
                  other than that BT had been a delivery driver for a  drugs
                  gang and had thrown away the drugs - and that finding only
                  impliedly.


              43. I am satisfied that the errors of law are  such  that  the
                  decision is set aside to be remade.


              44. In the light of my conclusion as to the lack  of  findings
                  made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge I set aside all  the
                  findings save for the conclusion that BT has rebutted  the
                  s72 presumption. I retain the resumed hearing in the Upper
                  Tribunal.


    3. I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal judge to  be  remade
       in the Upper Tribunal at a resumed hearing, submissions only, BT not
       having given evidence before the First-tier Tribunal because of  his
       vulnerability.


     Resumed hearing

    4. At the resumed hearing it was brought to my  attention  that  I  had
       erred in paragraph 39j of my error of law decision:  it  was  agreed
       between the parties that the appellant's evidence had been  that  he
       left Vietnam to Cambodia "under his own  steam";  he  had  not  been
       trafficked to Cambodia and thus the question whether those  who  had
       arranged for him to travel to Cambodia would seek him did not arise.
       Ms Fitzsimmons stated that the trafficking did  not  commence  until
       Thailand and Russia. To the extent that this issue was  raised  with
       the experts, their comments were not relevant.


    5. Mr Melvin made an application to rely on two unreported decisions of
       the Upper Tribunal. He had not made an  application  in  writing  to
       admit these decisions and nor was he able to  confirm  that  he  had
       undertaken a search on the point he wished to rely upon namely  that
       temporary residence elsewhere than the  home  registration  area  is
       available  and  that  such  temporary  residence  enables  permanent
       residence after a period of about 2 years. He had  searched  against
       the expert's name, not the proposition put  forward.  I  refused  to
       admit or place reliance upon the two unreported decisions.

    6. The source of the conclusion in the two unreported decisions  was  a
       World Bank report. Mr Melvin did not have the World Bank Report  and
       had been unable to access it because the World Bank site  was  down.
       The parties agreed that when I came to write up my decision, I could
       attempt to access the site and, if I was  able  to  and  there  were
       matters of relevance, I would direct submissions from both  parties.
       I did access  the  World  Bank  site  but,  after  some  45  minutes
       searching, I was  unable  to  find  a  document  or  documents  that
       provided information about registration. I therefore  did  not  seek
       written submissions for the parties in connection with registration.

    7. I heard submissions from both representatives. I had  the  following
       documents before me:

             . The appellant's appeal bundle lodged for the hearing  on  9th
               April 2019 (which  included  the  respondent's  bundle)  (the
               report by Bernard Gravett was not in the bundle  but  I  have
               read the separate report that was in the Tribunal file);
             . The appellant's  supplementary  appeal  bundle  lodged  under
               cover of a letter dated 10th September 2019;
             . The  respondent's  skeleton  argument  dated  13th  September
               2019;
             . The respondent  additional  written  submissions  dated  15th
               September 2019;
             . Extract from the Fact-Finding Mission September  2019:  3.1.4
               to 5.2.1;
             . Appellant's skeleton argument dated 15th September 2019.


    8. There is no challenge to the authority and expertise of Dr Tran  and
       Mr Gravett whose reports were provided to me.


    9. There are a number of core findings which underpin this appeal.


       1) Firstly, on one of the  deliveries  the  appellant  undertook  in
          Vietnam he discovered he was delivering drugs and threw  them  in
          the river.


       2) Secondly, the appellant is a victim of trafficking.

       3) Thirdly, there is no link between the mafia gang for whom he  was
          delivering drugs, the trafficking to Russia and  the  trafficking
          to the UK.

       4) Fourthly, the appellant is vulnerable, and this could impact upon
          the risk of re-trafficking and on his ability to relocate.

   10. The appellant chose not  to  give  evidence  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal; the report from Ms Pagella dated 25th October 2017  stated
       that she thought it "unwise to subject him to give evidence  at  the
       forthcoming hearing". She considered him to be  vulnerable,  subject
       to confusion, poor memory and with a tendency to fitting. There  was
       no up to date psychological report from her. Two March 2019  reports
       from City Hearts and the Medaille Trust  which  provide  support  to
       those who are victims of trafficking, confirm that the appellant has
       received some crisis counselling but that the recommended course had
       not been completed due to funding issues. He has been accepted on to
       the  NHS  waiting  list  for  Low  Intensity  Cognitive  Behavioural
       Therapy; although the acceptance  letter  refers  to  the  appellant
       being informed of the waiting list time period, that information was
       not before me. The acceptance letter refers to him being assessed as
       PHQ9 15  (moderately  severe  depression  warranting  treatment  for
       depression,   using   anti-depressant,   psychotherapy   and/or    a
       combination of treatment) and GAD7 7 (moderate generalised anxiety).
       I had stated in my Error of Law decision that  the  appellant  would
       not  be  giving  oral  evidence,  him  not  having  given   evidence
       previously. No application was made for him to give  oral  evidence.
       He filed a witness statement which  he  states  attempts  to  answer
       issues raised in the Error of Law decision. There is  no  indication
       that he had difficulty providing  the  information  in  his  witness
       statement or that he was unable to answer any questions that he  was
       asked. His witness  statements  are  of  course  untested  in  cross
       examination. The fact that he is vulnerable does not mean  that  his
       evidence is to be taken at face  value,  particularly  where  issues
       have not been dealt with but plainly his evidence is to be  seen  in
       the context of the evidence as a whole and the findings already made
       and preserved.


   11. There has been no challenge to the appellant's evidence  as  to  the
       seriously injurious treatment he received at the hands of those  who
       forced him to work in Russia and Germany. Although Mr Melvin  sought
       to raise again before me the issue of the appellant's mental health,
       it is clear that the appellant remains  in  need  of  mental  health
       treatment and that this need has arisen  not  only  from  his  early
       childhood experiences but from the mistreatment he  received  during
       the trafficking process and his anxiety about his family.


   12. Of importance is the issue of whether  the  gang  for  whom  he  was
       delivering drugs would still, a number of years after  the  incident
       when  he  threw  the  drugs  in  the  river,  be  seeking  him.  The
       appellant's evidence in relation to this is as follows:

       a) The appellant submits his parents have been visited by members of
          the drugs gang and threatened. The last visit was  about  a  year
          before his First-tier Tribunal witness statement when his parents
          were asked where he was and if he was still alive. His father was
          beaten very badly. That witness  statement  was  prepared  for  a
          hearing in the First-tier Tribunal on 9th April  2019.  The  most
          recent  witness  statement  prepared  for  the  hearing  on  16th
          September 2019 does not refer to  any  threats  received  by  his
          parents.
       b) The appellant's evidence was that his  legal  wife  and  daughter
          were kidnapped by the people who had arranged for him to work  in
          the cannabis factory in the UK; he had  been  told  this  by  his
          parents and his "employers" had told him. In about July 2016  his
          parents told him his daughter had  been  released.  His  wife  is
          still missing.
       c) The appellant's view was that there was some sort  of  connection
          between the  person  (Sang  Dao)  who  arranged  for  him  to  be
          trafficked from Thailand to Russia and the people he was  working
          for in the cannabis farm in  the  UK.  He  did  not  provide  any
          information why he thought that.
       d)  The appellant had given details of his family members in Vietnam
          to the person he worked for in the UK; this did not  include  the
          name of his "second wife" and their child, only  his  legal  wife
          and child. He did not provide  an  explanation  why  he  did  not
          provide such information given that he referred  to  her  as  his
          wife, considered himself to have two wives, they were treated  as
          a married couple from when they started living together and  this
          was acceptable in Vietnam.
       e) The appellant states he was too frightened of the people  in  the
          UK to tell the police  or  the  court  of  the  threats  and  the
          kidnapping of his wife.
       f) In his asylum interview the appellant says he  worked  away  from
          his home town for periods of a few weeks or a few months.
       g) In his asylum interview the  appellant  described  travelling  to
          Phnom Penh - leaving in the evening  and  arriving  in  the  late
          afternoon. He said he travelled back to his home city a couple of
          times during the time he was in Cambodia (2006/2007), seeing  his
          parents for only 30-40 minutes. In his first witness statement he
          says he hid before approaching his parents' house and  that  they
          told him the mafia were  looking  for  him  and  that  they  (his
          parents) told him they had been threatened they would  be  killed
          if they hid him. He said he had been able to speak to his parents
          since coming to the UK  (October 2014). In his  examination  with
          Ms Pagella he describes talking to his parents on the phone,  but
          that it is dangerous  because  calls  are  intercepted,  but  not
          knowing where his children are.
       h) In his second witness statement the appellant  describes  leaving
          Cambodia at night time, arriving in his home city in the morning,
          hiding until sunset and then leaving to catch  the  bus  back  to
          Cambodia that evening.


   13. The sentencing remarks identify  the  appellant's  vulnerability  to
       exploitation but  that  his  role  was  on  the  borderline  between
       'significant and lesser' and had  certainly  gained  some  advantage
       both in terms of accommodation, money and food.


   14. The reports of Dr Tran and Mr Gravett both confirm the account given
       by the appellant on the land dispute to be accurate. No challenge to
       that is taken by the respondent.


   15. A report by Dr Tran dated 27th October 2019 refers to:

         a) Mafia and drug gangs are national and  transnational;  they  are
            highly brutal and kill. The  examples  she  refers  to  are  all
            within Vietnam. She gives no examples of transnational brutality
            from drugs gangs.
         b) The family registration scheme - Ho Khau -officially  identifies
            a person as a resident of an area and provides an entitlement to
            health   care,   housing,    employment,    public    education,
            renting/buying a house or motorbike.
         c) The appellant would, because of his long absence,  have  to  re-
            register. His former employer  would  be  able  to  access  such
            registration by, for example, visiting the  registration  office
            and pretending to be a long-lost family member/friend seeking to
            re-establish contact.  Dr Tran refers to trafficking in  Vietnam
            being within a complex organized crime system.
         d) She  states  that  the  person  who  organised  the  appellant's
            'employment' in the UK might have influence in Vietnam but  does
            not provide any authority or source for that assertion.
         e) She considers the possibility of relocation in as  much  as  she
            accepts  that  a  person  may  move  to  another  area   without
            difficulty and may, after a period of time obtain a transfer  of
            Ho Khau such that  official  registration  is  transferred.  She
            makes the point however that this has to be done by reference to
            the original place of registration and can take as long  as  two
            years during which time the individual would not have access  to
            various state benefits including medical treatment.


   16. In her supplementary report dated 9th September 2019, Dr Tran  draws
       the following conclusions in response to questions asked of her:
       a) To obtain permanent registration in another area, requires travel
          to the original area of  registration.  She  states  that  if  he
          returns to his place of origin, he "might still be faced with the
          risk from the gangs as they might have their  associates  at  the
          local level, further, if he moved elsewhere, they may be able  to
          trace him through the registration system.
       b)  The  appellant's  account  that  his  wife  was  kidnapped   was
          plausible; she refers to one case in mid 2017  where  drugs  were
          thrown into a river and  the  victim's  wife  in  that  case  was
          tortured. She concludes that this shows the appellant's claim  to
          be  highly  consistent.   Similarly,  she  concludes   that   the
          appellant's account of his parents being tortured and  threatened
          to be highly consistent with the country information by reference
          to the same case.
       c) Travel between Cambodia and Vietnam takes about 8 hours  and  the
          appellant's account of travelling to visit his parents for  30-40
          minutes is consistent with that.
       d) In her view the traffickers who transported him from Thailand  to
          Russia then forced him to work in  a  cannabis  farm  in  the  UK
          "might be the same transnational crime organisation".
       e) That it is unlikely that his former traffickers would  retain  an
          interest in the appellant, but  he  may  face  risks  from  other
          trafficking gangs due to his vulnerability.


   17. The report by Mr Gravett has not been challenged by the  respondent.
       In a detailed analysis  he  concludes  that  the  journey  and  work
       details provided by the appellant are supportive of a  finding  that
       the appellant has been trafficked  not  only  between  Thailand  and
       Russia but also to and within the UK. This has,  he  concludes  also
       led to debt bondage, even though the appellant may not personally be
       aware  of  this.  The  appellant's  witness  statement   about   the
       kidnapping of his wife and child and threats to his parents are,  he
       concludes supportive of the appellant' trafficking account. He gives
       the firm opinion that the information provided by the  appellant  is
       the  profile  of  trafficking  by  sophisticated   criminal   groups
       operating transnationally. He expresses the  view  that  there  have
       been a number of official failures at a number of points of  contact
       with the appellant when inadequate investigation  has  been  carried
       out in breach of duties under Article 4 ECHR. Mr  Gravett  expresses
       the view that the Competent Authority decision is poor with a number
       of errors, a lack of marking of indicator boxes  and  a  failure  to
       identify salient points. He nevertheless supports  the  decision  of
       the CA that the appellant has been trafficked from  Vietnam  through
       to the UK. Mr Gravett identifies the links between  the  traffickers
       to Russia and in the UK. He acknowledges that there were periods  of
       time when the appellant appeared to be 'free' of the traffickers but
       then, because of his vulnerability is recruited  by  those  who  are
       themselves linked transnationally. He concludes that  the  appellant
       was trafficked to the UK with the intention to exploit him, but that
       immediate intention was disrupted by the intervention of the  police
       and immigration authorities. He is very firmly of the  opinion  that
       the appellant's account matches the information known of trafficking
       mechanisms and routes with the accompanying threats and violence. Mr
       Gravett does not express an opinion about the  drugs  gang  and  the
       immediate reason for the appellant leaving the UK but  rather  draws
       upon this as the nature and extent of the vulnerability of  and  the
       vulnerable situation in  which  the  appellant  found  himself  thus
       rendering him extremely liable to exploitation and trafficking.


   18. The extract from the Fact-Finding Mission of  9  September  2019  in
       essence confirms what Dr Tran says about the Ho Khau. I have  looked
       at the footnoted academic sources which support the proposition that
       there  is  a  continuing  gradual  and  general  decrease   in   the
       requirements for registration but that the acquisition of  permanent
       registration can take up to a couple of years and without  permanent
       registration access to services is limited. The report  also  refers
       to the levels of  corruption  and  the  widespread  availability  of
       information if bribes are utilised.

   19. The link to poverty is summarised in the  Fact-Finding  Report  with
       regard to trafficking with the initial travel to another country for
       promises of a job or anticipation of  a  job  then  leading  to  the
       brutality of the nature endured by the appellant. Although brief, it
       is consistent  with  the  more  detailed  analysis  provided  by  Mr
       Garrett.

   20. There is little  mention  in  the  fact-finding  report  of  support
       services available to victims of trafficking on  return  to  Vietnam
       save that there is a dearth of such support given the extent of  the
       problem both of those who  are  returned  but  also  those  in  dire
       poverty despite the increased economic wealth of the country.

   21. Of relevance to this appellant, the Fact-Finding  report  refers  to
       the following:

             . The IOM stated that victims of  trafficking  to  the  UK  are
               predominantly men with an average age of 35 and tend to  have
               a basic education and suffer some economic difficulty;
             . A record of those identified as  victims  of  trafficking  is
               kept locally;
             . In the majority of cases, victims have travelled  to  another
               country  to  obtain  a  job  and  are  then  mistreated.  The
               government do not recognise  them  as  victims  because  they
               went of their own accord;
             . An NGO told the team that if the  Vietnamese  legislation  is
               applied to victims of trafficking  in  the  UK  it  will  not
               cover them because they have often  agreed  to  go  with  the
               trafficker;
             . Only those who are issued with a victim certificate are  able
               to access state support; victim certificates  are  issued  to
               those encountered at the border; most victims do not  have  a
               victim certificate;
             .  Where  the  police  are  aware,  they  are  able  to  afford
               effective protection to victims;
             . The Vietnamese authorities seem to concentrate on  prevention
               education;
             . According to figures provided to the Fact-Finding Team,  more
               than 80% of victims  said  that  they  would  not  have  been
               victims if they had been informed and educated before;
             . There are shelters  for  vulnerable  people  with  a  maximum
               permitted stay  of 60 days;
             . Although the law provides for access  to  safe  accommodation
               and psychological support, there are not enough shelters  and
               not enough qualified counsellors;
             . Victims suffer from trauma which  affects  their  ability  to
               function;  they  find  it  difficult   to   find   employment
               especially when they return after many years  and  also  find
               it difficult to obtain identity papers;
             . One source stated  they  were  not  aware  of  any  cases  of
               retrafficking;
             . An academic source stated the  police  could  trace  someone,
               local village police are aware who lives in  each  area;  the
               network of control is very close, and a criminal  could  find
               a person's whereabouts by persuading the police to  let  them
               have the information;


   22. The respondent relies upon Nguyen  [2015] UKUT 00170 (IAC) for the
       proposition that there is sufficiency of protection. Although a
       reported case it was not reported for its consideration of
       sufficiency of protection in Vietnam but rather for the extent of
       the respondent's duties under ECAT. The decision considered the
       issue of Ms Nguyen's return to Vietnam having been a victim of
       trafficking but did not hear expert evidence on the issue and nor
       was there a submission  that she would be at risk of re-trafficking.
       Reference was made to the US State Department report of 2010 and the
       availability of support to her from her brothers and her sister.

       Conclusions

   23. I did not find Dr Tran's report particularly helpful save in so  far
       as she explained the Ho Khau process and identified the difficulties
       of registration and access to  services.  Her  views  on  this  were
       complemented by the other evidence before  me  including  the  Fact-
       Finding Mission report of September 2019. I am  satisfied  that  the
       appellant will be required to re- register on  return  to  his  home
       area given his long absence from Vietnam. I am satisfied that if  he
       re-locates to another area, he would not be prevented from obtaining
       employment or accommodation because of lack of an  official  Ho  Kau
       but that he would have difficulty accessing services such as  health
       care. I am satisfied these difficulties would continue until he  was
       able to obtain his official Ho Khau in his area of location and that
       such process could take several months; up to a couple of years.


   24. Dr Tran has said, and I accept  this  to  be  correct,  that  it  is
       possible for individuals to impersonate a  friend  or  relative  and
       thus gain access to information through the registration scheme of a
       person. But such access requires  that  individual  to  be  actively
       looking for that  person,  whether  the  access  is  sought  in  the
       original Ho Khau area or in the new area.

   25. The appellant threw the drugs in the river in 2006; he left  Vietnam
       very shortly after receiving the phone call. There  is  no  evidence
       other  than  his  witness  statement  that  his  parents  have  been
       threatened or beaten by the drugs gang. He is in  contact  with  his
       parents, albeit he is circumspect with the information they discuss,
       but despite having had solicitors acting for him for a  considerable
       length of time and despite having that contact there is  no  witness
       statement from either of his parents and no medical evidence of  the
       beating that he says his father underwent that resulted in him being
       very seriously injured. The appellant's witness  statements  do  not
       provide any significant information about how often he  speaks  with
       them or what they actually tell him  or  what  he  knows  about  the
       daughter who escaped the kidnapping.


   26. In the 1-2 years  after  he  left  Vietnam  the  appellant  says  he
       returned to Dong Hoi a couple of times. The journey from Vietnam (to
       Phnom Penh) in 2006 took him from the evening to  late  afternoon  -
       somewhere in the region of 18 or so hours which is how long it takes
       to get from Dong Hoi to Phnom Penh by bus. His  description  of  the
       two return journeys is not  inconsistent  with  that  journey  time,
       although expressed slightly differently. Dr Tran's  assertion  of  a
       journey  time  of  8  hours  is  not  only  inconsistent  with   the
       appellant's evidence but gives no indication where she is timing the
       journey from and is therefore of little assistance.

   27. The appellant does not say where he was 'hiding' when  he  travelled
       back to see his parents or how he managed to hide for a day.

   28. He does not give any information about his 'common  law  wife'  with
       whom he was living prior to  leaving  Vietnam  other  than  that  he
       doesn't know where she is. Although it seems their relationship  was
       accepted socially, he provides no explanation why his  parents  have
       no information about her.


   29. He says he did not give any information about his  'common law wife'
       to the 'employers' in the UK but does not explain  why  he  did  not
       when his evidence seems to be that it was generally accepted that he
       was married to her, he gave information about his legal wife and  he
       thought the individuals to whom he gave the information were helping
       him and kind.

   30. Although it seems he had no contact with his parents after  he  left
       Cambodia until he arrived in the UK (from about  2007  to  2014)  he
       does not give evidence that there have been continuous  or  frequent
       visits by drugs gang members since his departure from  Vietnam.  His
       evidence is that his father  was  badly  beaten  in  2016/2017.  The
       information that his legal wife had been kidnapped  came  whilst  he
       was in the UK and subject to criminal proceedings, not in the couple
       of years he was in Cambodia after he fled Vietnam.

   31. I do not find it credible that the appellant's family have continued
       to be threatened by the drugs gang. I accept, despite  the  lack  of
       detail, that on the couple of visits  to  his  parents'  house  from
       Cambodia he was very circumspect and only stayed a short  while.  It
       is reasonable to conclude that having thrown a package of  drugs  in
       the river, received a telephone call that carried with it  a  threat
       and leaving Vietnam so quickly, he would be  very  frightened  about
       returning and being discovered. I accept  that  for  the  first  few
       months after he left, his parents would have received the threats he
       describes, and they would not have wanted him around.  I  accept  as
       credible his evidence that his parents were threatened and  that  he
       was at risk from the drugs gang during that couple of  years.  I  do
       not accept that the threats and the beating of his  father  that  he
       has described as having occurred in 2016/2017, arose from the  drugs
       gang.

   32. The appellant's legal wife and child were  kidnapped,  according  to
       him, by the people he was working for in the UK. This  accords  with
       the report by Dr Garrett and with the evidence  that  the  appellant
       had provided those 'employers' with details of his wife  and  child.
       It also accords with the  information  he  gave  to  the  respondent
       during his asylum interview (once the mix-ups over  names  has  been
       accepted). I do not accept  that  his  legal  wife  and  child  were
       kidnapped by the drugs gang. The gang would have been aware of their
       existence (and the existence of the common law wife - if she exists)
       at the time he left Vietnam yet there was nothing from the appellant
       that they had been threatened or captured. I do not accept that  his
       wife and child were kidnapped by the drugs gang.

   33. The evidence in relation to the common law wife is flimsy.  Although
       he says he was living with her when he left  Vietnam,  he  does  not
       refer to having travelled back from Cambodia to see her. Although he
       says he knows he has a son with her he provides no information  that
       he has obtained from his parents about her or that his parents  have
       contacted her parents. There is no suggestion that she was contacted
       by the drugs gang. There is no explanation from the appellant why he
       did not disclose her details to the UK  'employers'  despite  saying
       that he was to all intents and purposes married to  her.  I  do  not
       accept that she, or the child, exists; if they do, the appellant was
       not in an established cohabiting relationship with her.

   34. Neither expert report directly addresses the possibility of  whether
       the person/ gang for whom he drove the lorry in Vietnam would have a
       continuing interest in the appellant. Neither report  considers  the
       makeup of drugs gangs, their continuing  evolution/strength  as  the
       drugs trade in Vietnam increases or the extent to  which  the  lorry
       owner would have been perceived, from higher up  the  chain,  to  be
       complicit and punished thus in effect removing the threat  from  the
       appellant. The appellant's evidence of threats to his parents during
       the first couple of years away from Vietnam supports objectively his
       subjective fear from the drugs gang. But thereafter the  threats  do
       not appear to have emanated from the  drugs  gang  but  rather  from
       information about his family that he gave to his 'employers' in  the
       UK. The threats from the drugs gang ceased.

   35. I am satisfied that the appellant would not  be  at  risk  from  the
       drugs gang if he returned to his home area. He has  been  away  from
       the area for many years and there is no credible evidence  that  the
       drugs gang continues to seek him. If he were to return to the  area,
       although his return would be noted generally  because  of  his  long
       absence, I am satisfied that this would not  re-ignite  interest  by
       the drugs gang. The gang has, to all intents and purposes ceased  to
       exist in terms of interest in the appellant. I am satisfied that no-
       one from the drugs gang is checking the register to find out whether
       he has returned and where he is living.

   36. The experts do not identify a link between the drugs gang and  those
       who trafficked the appellant. The trafficking came about because  of
       his extreme vulnerability which was brought about by  poverty,  loss
       of land, mental health problems and family responsibilities to  name
       but a few of the circumstances that  have  placed  him  in  such  an
       extreme position over the years. Although he may  be  at  risk  from
       traffickers - as to which see below -  I  find  that  such  interest
       would not lead to renewed interest in him by the  drugs  gang  there
       being no evidence before me to support such a  proposition  and  any
       finding to the contrary would be speculative.

   37. The report  by  Mr  Gravett  is  explicit,  detailed,  coherent  and
       comprehensive in its assessment and description of  the  trafficking
       of the appellant and the risks  he  is  now  at.  The  transnational
       nature of trafficking with  individuals  being  passed  around,  the
       ensuing debt bondage (albeit not formally notified to the individual
       concerned) and the clear conclusion that the appellant falls  within
       a classic example of such trade, cannot realistically or  reasonably
       be dismissed.

   38. Mr Melvin submits that the appellant was not trafficked in the UK. I
       do not agree. The CA report refers to  trafficking  to  the  UK  and
       whatever the shortcomings of the  CA  report  (which  were  not  the
       subject of consideration in the Error of Law hearing) the report  by
       Mr Gravett, which has not been challenged, is highly  credible.  The
       appellant's evidence in the context of the undoubted expertise of Mr
       Gravett can only result in a finding that  the  appellant  has  been
       trafficked   by   organised   criminal   gangs   that   are   linked
       transnationally.

   39. I am satisfied the appellant gave details of his parents  and  legal
       wife and child to the 'employer' in the UK. This information was,  I
       am satisfied, utilised by them as a continuing hold and threat  over
       him during his criminal trial, conviction and  sentencing.  Although
       the appellant has provided no further evidence of continuing threats
       to his family, and his daughter has escaped, I am satisfied that the
       'employers' in the UK utilised the information  about  him  and  his
       family to improperly prevent him from disclosing his account  at  an
       earlier stage. The timing of the  threats  and  the  extent  of  the
       threats is corroborative of that in the context of the report by  Mr
       Gravett. I make this finding even though I have  doubts  as  to  the
       existence of his 'common-law wife as described by him.

   40. The respondent does not seek to argue that the appellant  is  not  a
       member of a particular social group; rather she submits that  he  is
       not at risk of being persecuted, there is sufficiency of  protection
       and/or, if at risk in his home area, the  appellant  can  internally
       relocate.

   41. The starting point for assessing whether the appellant is at risk of
       being persecuted as a former victim of trafficking and  at  risk  of
       being  re-trafficked  has  to  be  the   extent   of   his   current
       vulnerability of being identified as a prospective victim.  He  made
       his way voluntarily to Cambodia  because  of  the  circumstances  in
       which he found himself. His experiences since leaving  Vietnam  have
       clearly resulted in  considerable  exacerbation  of  his  underlying
       mental health problems. There is nothing in the documents before  me
       that would indicate  that  he  has  overcome  his  naivety  and  his
       willingness to place his trust in those who exploit him for unlawful
       means. His ability to obtain employment is severely reduced  because
       of his mental health problems. His  experiences  over  the  last  10
       years have left an indelible mark upon him and that he is  extremely
       vulnerable to exploitation is self-evident.

   42. Mr Gravett's report, which has not been challenged,  concludes  that
       although an individual may not have paid personally for transport in
       the hope of employment,  he  remains  in  debt  to  those  who  have
       trafficked   him;   they   have   obtained   passports,   transport,
       accommodation and food. Mr Gravett's opinion is that although  there
       is no direct cost placed upon the victim that is not  uncommon.  The
       description by the appellant of  the  conditions  in  which  he  was
       forced to work in  Russia  and  Germany  resonates  with  the  usual
       accounts of Vietnamese trafficking victims. Mr Gravett describes the
       cooperation of  various  crime  groups  in  the  trafficking  across
       national boundaries and the increasing costs incurred. He  describes
       vulnerable individuals  being  re-joined  by  their  traffickers  or
       recruited by  new groups because of their vulnerability.

   43. In the latter part  of  his  report,  Mr  Gravett  quotes  from  the
       respondent's CIG report on Vietnam. Reference is made that the risks
       of  reprisal  or  being  re-trafficked  will  depend  on  individual
       circumstances  and  the  capability  and  degree  of  interest   the
       persecutor has in pursuing the individual.

   44. In this appellant's case, there has been a sequence of  traffickers.
       In July/August 2015 the appellant met Mr Linh who recruited him as a
       cannabis 'gardener'; he gave details of his family to  Mr  Linh.  He
       was told by these 'employers' that  his  wife  and  child  had  been
       kidnapped. The appellant was arrested on 6th  November  2015[3].  He
       was sentenced to 3 years imprisonment on 22nd April  2016  following
       trial, remaining in prison for 18 months - released  from  detention
       late 2017. He claimed asylum on 24th May 2016 and  was  screened  on
       4th July 2016. By 4th July 2016, he says his parents  had  told  him
       his daughter had escaped and  it  was  at  this  interview  that  he
       disclosed the trafficking history. A deportation order was signed on
       9th May 2017; his asylum and human rights claims  were  refused  the
       same day.  He says his father was beaten about April 2018  and  that
       people had come to his parents' home asking where he was.  There  is
       no evidence of any further visits.

   45. Neither expert report dissents significantly from  the  Fact-Finding
       team report. A significant difficulty for this appellant is that  he
       is unlikely to be recognised as  a  victim  of  trafficking  by  the
       Vietnamese authorities and thus will  not  be  able  to  access  the
       various protective measures available; nor will he be  given  access
       to the safe shelters, even though those are only available for  only
       a relatively short period of time. Because he will not be recognised
       as a victim of trafficking, police protection will not  be  present;
       nor will he have access to any educational or training measures.

   46. I note the reference in the Fact-Finding report that  there  was  no
       evidence of re-trafficking but given  the  lack  of  recognition  of
       previously trafficked victims it is not clear how reliable that  is.
       Furthermore, the indicators for  trafficking  are  the  individual's
       poverty and vulnerability. This appellant is very  naive  and  could
       not be said to come within the 80% who,  in  response  to  questions
       asked, said they would not have been trafficked if  they  had  known
       what they were subsequently taught. This  appellant's  vulnerability
       and naivety led to the trafficking in the UK  despite  his  previous
       experiences, notably the assistance he received in Thailand  from  a
       fellow Vietnamese.

   47. I am satisfied that the appellant's parents were  questioned  as  to
       his whereabouts and that, despite the lack of medical evidence,  his
       father was beaten. The timing of those assaults  together  with  the
       timing of the kidnapping of his wife and child are  consistent  with
       the chronology of events and his  failure  to  disclose  information
       until after his daughter had escaped. These incidents are consistent
       with the report by Mr Gravett of the threats and violence meted  out
       as a means of control.

   48. I am satisfied that that although  the  appellant  has  no  personal
       knowledge of a debt owed to the traffickers in any of the  countries
       he was trafficked through and within, there is a debt  which,  given
       the short period of time that the appellant was actually working  in
       the cannabis house before he was arrested, is likely to remain  due.
       That someone has attempted to establish his  whereabouts  after  his
       release from prison is indicative of this and that  he  remains,  at
       the least, a person of interest. If he returned to  his  home  area,
       first of all his re-appearance in the neighbourhood would  be  noted
       and commented upon and I am satisfied that his presence would become
       known to those who have  visited  his  parents  seeking  him.  I  am
       satisfied that he would be sought. Although  the  fact-finding  team
       does not provide evidence of re-trafficking,  the  expert's  report,
       this appellant's experiences and his evidence are indicative that he
       would be at risk of being found. That could lead to retraficking  or
       violence. I am also satisfied that his parents would not want him to
       return to live with  them  so  he  would  remain  at  large  in  the
       neighbourhood. There is no evidence the appellant is in contact with
       his siblings or that they would be able  to  provide  him  with  any
       support or assistance. I am satisfied, given in particular that  the
       appellant has been forthcoming about the contact  he  has  with  his
       parents, that if there was contact with  his  siblings  there  would
       have been evidence to that effect from him.


   49. I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  is  at  real  risk  of  being
       persecuted if he returns to his home area.

   50. I am satisfied  that  the  police  would  not  be  able  to  provide
       sufficiency of  protection.  He  would  not  be  able  to  obtain  a
       certificate as a victim of trafficking; he would not be able to call
       upon the police to protect him any more than any ordinary vulnerable
       person. Because of his naivety, mental health problems  and  overall
       vulnerability, the lack of access to the  accommodation,  employment
       and health care that he would require would in itself render him  at
       real risk of being targeted as a potential victim, even if those who
       went to his parents did not re-appear as a threat.

   51. The respondent took issue with  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
       appellant in connection with the acquisition  of  a  Ho  Khau  in  a
       different part of Vietnam. Reliance was  placed  upon  his  previous
       ability to work elsewhere and that  although  it  might  take  time,
       official registration elsewhere was more than a mere possibility.  I
       accept that registration in a different area is  possible  and  that
       many Vietnamese undertake such a task. I am also satisfied that many
       Vietnamese do not undertake the task of transferring their  Ho  Khau
       because of the administrative time involved but  that  it  does  not
       result in serious difficulties for them. But for this appellant, the
       lack of  a  Ho  Khau  means  that  he  cannot  access  the  required
       healthcare and other  official  services.  These  requirements  have
       developed because of the mistreatment he has received over the years
       and the extent of the trauma he has undergone. He  would  be  living
       somewhere where he has no contacts, no access  to  health  care,  no
       accommodation,  no  employment  and  his  particular   vulnerability
       renders him at risk of serious exploitation. I am satisfied that  it
       would not only be unduly harsh for him  to  internally  relocate  in
       Vietnam but that he would be at real risk of  being  targeted  as  a
       potential trafficking victim.


    Summary of findings

   52. I am satisfied that the appellant will be required to  re-  register
       on return to his home area given his long absence from Vietnam. I am
       satisfied that if he re-locates to another area,  he  would  not  be
       prevented from obtaining employment of accommodation because of lack
       of an official Ho Kau but that he would  have  difficulty  accessing
       services such as health care.  I  am  satisfied  these  difficulties
       would continue until he was able to obtain his official Ho  Khau  in
       his area of location  and  that  such  process  could  take  several
       months; up to a couple of years.

   53. I accept, despite the lack of detail, that on the couple  of  visits
       to his parents' house from Cambodia he was very circumspect and only
       stayed a short while.

   54. I do not accept that the threats and the beating of his father  that
       he has described, if it occurred, as having occurred in  2017  arose
       from the drugs gang.

   55. I do not accept that his wife and child were kidnapped by the  drugs
       gang.

   56. I do not accept that his 'common-law wife, or the child, exists.  If
       she does, they were not in an established cohabiting relationship.

   57. I am satisfied that the appellant would not  be  at  risk  from  the
       drugs gang if returned to his home area. The experts do not identify
       a  link  between  the  drugs  gang  and  those  who  trafficked  the
       appellant.

   58. I am satisfied the appellant gave details of his parents  and  legal
       wife and child to the 'employer' in the  UK.  This  information  was
       utilised by them as a continuing hold and threat over him during his
       criminal trial, conviction and sentencing.


   59. The appellant is at real risk of being re-trafficked  or  identified
       as vulnerable such that he would be trafficked if he returns to  his
       home area.


   60. The police and authorities are  unable  to  provide  sufficiency  of
       protection; his family are unable to protect him.


   61. It would be unduly harsh for him to relocate.


    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


    I set aside the decision.


    I re-make the decision  in  the  asylum  and  human  rights  appeal  by
    allowing it.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


                                    Date 23rd September 2019
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] Even if [BT] was at risk from non state actors in his home area the
FTTJ has failed to correctly consider the option of Internal relocation...
[2] ...at paragraph 52 (of Nguyen) the Upper Tribunal endorsed the view
that there is in general a sufficiency of protection provided by the
authorities in Vietnam regarding the risk of being trafficked,, therefore
it is respectfully submitted that the FTTJ has failed to give clear reasons
as to why the appellant would be at risk of being trafficked from Vietnam
given the absence of debt.
[3] Mr Gravett's report incorrectly notes the date of his arrest as 7th
November 2014.

