
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07254/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16th October 2018                    |On 22nd October 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     I M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Franco (instructed by Schneider Goldstein
immigration law),
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer}


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant who is  a  man
    from Bangladesh born on 10th May 1996. He was granted a visit  visa  to
    come to the UK on 28 January 2013 and he entered on 23 March 2013  with
    his mother and his younger brothers. The Appellant was 16 years of  age
    at that time. His mother and one brother returned to Bangladesh leaving
    the Appellant and one brother in the UK with an aunt.

 2. The Appellant claimed asylum on 28 November 2017 which application  was
    refused by the Secretary  of  State  on  25  May  2018.  The  Appellant
    appealed that decision  and  the  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 9 July 2018. In a Decision and Reasons  promulgated  on  25
    July 2018 Judge Bristow dismissed the appeal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it is arguable  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred by failing to make  any  findings  on
    the documents lodged by the Appellant  in  support  of  his  appeal  as
    specified in paragraph 8 of the grounds of appeal.

 4. The documents specified at paragraph 8 are as follows: -

      a) letter from BNP (youth party) and translation;

      b) Bangladesh Nationalist party volunteers list;

      c) letter from advocate in Bangladesh;

      d) notarial certificate;

      e) Appellant's father's case papers from Bangladesh including Bengal I
         version and postal envelope;

      f) letter from Appellant's father and ID card;

      g) Appellant's father's BNP membership card;

      h) letter from Mr Mizanur Rahman, General Secretary BNP;

      i) photographs of Appellant's father during protests and giving speech
         at BNP meetings;

      j) BNP district executive committee list;

      k) Appellant's father's campaign posters;

      l) BNP members list;

      m) medical report for Appellant's mother and photographs of injury;

      n) letter from Appellant's brother in Canada, ID card, medical report,
         tickets and photographs of injury;

      o) a newspaper article, postal envelopes and receipts.

 5. The Appellant had claimed asylum on  the  basis  that  his  father  was
    heavily involved with the BNP in  Bangladesh;  his  elder  brother  had
    involvement with the BNP; the family had been attacked and harassed  by
    the Awami league and the police and the Appellant himself was a  member
    of the BNP and at risk for that reason.

 6. In his Decision and Reasons the Judge, at paragraph 40 set out a number
    of findings. The first three findings  relate  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant did not claim asylum on arrival in the  UK  about  which  the
    Judge did  not  accept  as  credible  his  explanation.  The  remaining
    findings  are  adverse  credibility  findings  based  on  the  lack  of
    plausibility of the Appellant's mother returning to Bangladesh  because
    she wanted to join his father, the difficulties with the medical report
    not corroborating the gravity  of  this  brother's  burn  injuries  and
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's account. At paragraph 41  the  Judge
    said that he had made allowances for factors such  as  the  Appellant's
    younger age and noted that he  had  knowledge  of  the  BNP  which  the
    Secretary of State accepted to be consistent with what is  known  about
    the BNP. The Judge then said however that the Appellant's  account  was
    simply not credible.

 7. The reasoning is very brief in this protection claim. It is correct  to
    say that, notwithstanding the fact that  the  Judge  indicated  he  had
    taken all the evidence into account, he has not given any consideration
    to the documents listed above. It may be that they can corroborate  the
    Appellant's account.  Alternatively, they may not assist. However, they
    must be considered prior to adverse credibility findings being made  as
    to the Appellants claim.  It cannot be said that the  Judge has applied
    anxious scrutiny to this claim.

 8. Mr Lindsay submitted that the Judge had noted all of the documents that
    had been placed before him where he said at paragraph 8 that he had the
    Appellant's bundle. He also submitted that it is not  necessary  for  a
    Judge to make findings on each and every piece of evidence. However, in
    this case the Judge appears to have given no  consideration  whatsoever
    to the documents lodged by the Appellant in support of his claim.  That
    is an error of law and had he done so the outcome  of  the  appeal  may
    have been different. For that reason the  error  is  material  and  the
    decision must be set  aside  in  its  entirety  for  fresh  credibility
    findings to be made.

Decision

 9. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore allowed  to  the  limited
    extent that First-tier Tribunal's decision is set aside and the  matter
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing on all  issues
    by a different judge.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed [pic]                            Date 16th October 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

