
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07220/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Manchester Civil Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th March 2020                    |On 18th March 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     SA
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Adebayo, A2 Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent claims to be a Kuwaiti Bidoon born  in  1982.    On  the
    26th November 2019 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Bannerman)  allowed
    his appeal on protection  grounds.  The  Secretary  of  State  now  has
    permission to appeal against that decision.

 2. The only matter in issue before the First-tier Tribunal was whether the
    Respondent is as claimed, an undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon.   If  he  is,
    then applying  the  country  guidance  in  NM  (documented/undocumented
    Bidoon: risk) Kuwait CG [2013]  UKUT  00356(IAC)  and   BA  and  Others
    (Bidoon-Statelessness- Risk of Persecution) Kuwait CG [2004] UKIAT  256
    he has a well-founded fear of persecution in Kuwait and his appeal fell
    to be allowed on protection grounds.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal found much of the Respondent's evidence  to  be
    lacking in credibility. It rejected his account in several key respects
    but it was nevertheless satisfied that he was an undocumented Bidoon as
    claimed. At paragraph 57 it sets out its reasons: it was satisfied that
    he is a Kuwaiti Bidoon because his brother has been recognised to be  a
    Kuwaiti Bidoon.

 4. The Secretary of State takes issue with that reasoning as follows:

      i) It is not clear why the First-tier Tribunal even accepted that  the
         witness and Respondent were related

     ii) The brother's evidence had not been tested

    iii) The Judge failed  to  make  overall  credibility  findings  on  the
         account;

     iv)  It  was  an  error  of  law  to  treat  the  brother's  status  as
         determinative of the Respondent's.

 5. It became evident at the hearing before me that the grounds  of  appeal
    had been drafted without the benefit of the file. Had the  drafter  had
    the file she would no doubt have  seen  that  there  was  DNA  evidence
    produced establishing that  the  two  men  were  brothers.  It  is  not
    mentioned in the determination simply because it was no longer in issue
    between the parties. She would also have seen that the  Respondent  had
    given the Secretary of State some 7 weeks' notice of  the  identity  of
    the witness, and that the PO on the day confirmed that in that time  he
    had been able to check his Home Office records, thus establishing  that
    he was as claimed, an undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon with refugee  status.



 6. Despite these immediate setbacks to his case Mr Tan pursued the appeal.
    He pointed to a number of criticisms of  the  Respondent's  credibility
    which are left unmentioned in the  determination.  I  accept  that  the
    Tribunal has not dealt with each and every point made  in  the  refusal
    letter but I do not consider that omission to be in any  way  material.
    It is tolerably clear that the Tribunal rejected the account  given  by
    the Respondent, whom it describes as unimpressive and not  telling  the
    truth. Another page of negative credibility  findings  would  not  have
    added much to those adverse findings overall.  The point was  that  the
    Respondent was a liar, but he was an undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon  liar,
    and for the purpose of this appeal, that was all that mattered.

 7. This leads me to the central matter in issue. Was it open to the  Judge
    to allow the appeal, as he makes clear, solely on the  basis  that  the
    Respondent's brother was an undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon?

 8. The Judge himself makes reference to the decision in AC  (Witness  with
    refugee status - Effect) Somalia [2005] UKAIT 00124,  the  headnote  of
    which reads:

         "This decision deals with the proper approach to the evidence of  a
         witness who, it is alleged on similar facts to those put forward by
         the appellant, has been granted refugee status.  The  fact  of  the
         grant is capable of carrying weight but the  grant  is  not  to  be
         equated with  an  Immigration  Judge's  determination  following  a
         hearing.  An Immigration Judge's decision is  likely  to  be  fully
         reasoned and made after the evidence in support  has  been  tested.
         In contrast a grant of status by the Secretary of State is often an
         administrative decision based only on the papers."

 9. The context in which the Tribunal gave that guidance was this. A Somali
    asylum seeker called a witness whom he claimed to  be  his  aunt.  That
    lady had been granted refugee status on the basis that she was a member
    of a minority clan, the Reer Hamar.   AC submitted that if his aunt was
    Reer Hamar, he was too.   The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal,
    finding  that  the  aunt  was  a  "singularly  untruthful  and  evasive
    witness".   AC appealed on the grounds that this was  irrational  given
    that the Secretary of State had already accepted her claimed ethnicity.
    The Tribunal held that logic to be fallacious. Unlike the determination
    of an earlier Tribunal, the conclusions of  an  individual  immigration
    officer did not carry a Devaseelan weight of properly reasoned findings
    following a contested hearing.   As such the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    not been bound to accept as fact the basis upon which the Secretary  of
    State had granted  the  aunt  refugee  status.  It  had  made  its  own
    evaluation of her evidence, and it had been entitled so to do.

10. As can be seen from that summary, two points arise. First, the Tribunal
    is not obliged to accept the  factual  basis  upon  which  a  grant  of
    refugee status has been made to a witness before it.  Second,  a  grant
    of refugee status is nevertheless capable of attracting weight,  albeit
    not such as to be equated with  Devaseelan  findings  made  by  another
    judge.

11. Neither of those points  assist  the  Secretary  of  State  here.   The
    Respondent's brother gave  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Unlike the aunt in AC, his evidence, open to testing by the  Presenting
    Officer, was accepted by the Judge.  The Presenting Officer had (contra
    AB (witness corroboration  in  asylum  appeals)  Somalia  [2004]  UKIAT
    00125) an opportunity to confirm the witness' claims about his identity
    and claim. As the headnote in AC makes clear, the Judge  was  therefore
    entitled to place some weight on the  evidence  of  that  witness.  The
    standard of proof was relatively low. All the Judge needed to do was be
    satisfied that it was reasonably likely  that  the  Respondent  was  an
    undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon. Here was a  witness,  a  full  brother  by
    blood, whose credibility was not in doubt and who was recognised as  an
    undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon.  The First-tier Tribunal had before it the
    Home Office Country Information and Guidance note [paragraph 58 of  the
    decision refers] which confirmed that status follows the father. It was
    perfectly reasonable to infer from this  that  the  two  brothers  were
    likely to share the same status, both inherited from their  father.  Mr
    Adebayo points out that this was precisely same logic employed  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in NM at its paragraph 116 where it  places  significant
    weight  on  that  fact  that  that  appellant's  brother  was  also  an
    undocumented Bidoon.  I find no error of law is made out.




    Anonymity Order

12. This appeal concerns a claim for protection.  Having had regard to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld  and  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

14. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                                       [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              6th March 2020
