
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07328/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 September 2020 via Skype for Business    |On 23 September 2020          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     TM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Hollywood, Andrew Russell & Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to are in two appellant's bundles  of  212
and 11 pages respectively, the respondent's initial and additional  bundles,
the contents of which I have recorded.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said  this  about  the  process:  they  were  content  that  the
proceedings had been conducted fairly.

 1.  I  maintain  the  anonymity  order  previously  made  in  this   case,
    considering the well-founded fear  of  persecution  I  have  found  the
    appellant to have.

 2. This is an appeal against a decision of the respondent  dated  25  July
    2017 to refuse  the  appellant's  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    claim.  The respondent's decision, and the reasons for it, are set  out
    in a reasons for refusal letter of the same date ("the RFRL").

 3. The appellant originally appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 13 March 2019, following a  hearing
    on 9 August 2018, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  S  T  Fox  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal. Sitting at the Royal Courts of Justice in  Belfast,
    I found the decision of Judge Fox to have involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and set it aside with no findings  of  fact  preserved.  I
    directed that the matter be reheard in the Upper Tribunal, and  it  was
    in those circumstances that I heard the appellant's appeal afresh.

 4. My error of law decision may be found in the Annex to this decision.

The appellant's case and reasons for refusal letter

 5. The appellant is a female citizen of Iran born in 1980. She arrived  in
    the United Kingdom as a student on 18 July 2015. She claimed asylum  on
    2 February 2017, in connection with events which she claims took  place
    during a brief return visit to Iran in December 2015,  from  which  she
    returned on 4 January 2016.

 6. Until 2008, the appellant claims to have  had  a  "good  view"  of  the
    Iranian government. However, she became disillusioned in May 2008  when
    her brother was killed in a road accident. The driver  responsible  did
    not, in her view, receive justice  or  an  appropriate  punishment  for
    having caused her brother's death. He was able  to  avoid  imprisonment
    for reasons which, in the appellant's view, were corrupt. This led  her
    to doubt the integrity of the Iranian authorities generally.  She began
    to support the Green Movement, an opposition movement which evolved  in
    response to the disputed elections in 2009. Initially, her support  for
    the Green Movement was subtle. She accepted her parents' pleas  not  to
    protest openly in the street.  Instead, she began to wear green clothes
    to the school where she worked as  a  teacher.  She  explained  to  the
    pupils under her care that she thought the government was  corrupt  and
    that cheating had taken place during the election.

 7. The appellant claimed she was rebuked by the principal of the school, a
    member of the Basij, a volunteer morality police force, for having done
    so. She was called to the school's security office,  the  Heraset,  and
    was made to sign a declaration that she would not speak in  such  terms
    to the students again. She signed it because she was  frightened.  When
    the school broke up for the summer, she was informed that she was to be
    demoted from her post  as  a  teacher  to  work  as  a  lab  assistant,
    following her behaviour. She refused. The appellant moved to  India  to
    study and would not return to Iran until August  2014.  She  was  again
    offered a job as  a  computer  lab  technician,  which  this  time  she
    accepted. During a discussion  with  colleagues,  she  expressed  views
    concerning the hijab, religion, and politics. She was again  called  to
    the Heraset, or security office, and asked to explain why she had  been
    discussing such matters with other members of staff. She was told  that
    she would need the permission of  the  authorities  if  she  wanted  to
    travel internationally again. A few days later, in or around May  2015,
    she was discharged from that post.  By  this  stage,  she  had  already
    obtained a visa to travel to this country as  a  student  and  did  not
    inform the authorities  of  her  departure.   She  was  able  to  leave
    unhindered.

 8. The appellant returned briefly to Iran in December 2015.   During  that
    visit, she claims to have been detained by  the  Ettela'at,  physically
    and verbally mistreated, and prohibited from leaving the  country,  all
    on account of the views she previously manifested.  She was  challenged
    as to her commitment to Islam, and her true  reasons  for  wearing  the
    hijab. A friend at the airport helped her to board  a  flight  to  this
    country without detection, and she returned to the  United  Kingdom  to
    resume her studies.  The Ettela'at are still  interested  in  her,  she
    claims, and have contacted her family during her absence.  Her case  is
    that if she returns to Iran, she will either continue to manifest anti-
    regime political opinion, and will be  persecuted,  or  that  she  will
    suppress expression  of  her  political  views,  out  of  fear  of  the
    authorities. Either way, she claims, she  meets  the  definition  of  a
    "refugee".

 9. The RFRL considers that it is "unclear" as to why the  appellant  would
    seek openly to discuss her support for  the  Green  Movement,  and  her
    opposition to the ruling regime, at school in the presence of  so  many
    members of the Basij. It was unclear why she would discuss matters that
    would have the potential to land her in trouble. It was not  clear  why
    she had been offered an alternative post as a lab assistant in the same
    institution where she had been reprimanded for speaking out against the
    authorities. Part of the appellant's case was that when she refused the
    post of lab assistant, she requested, and  obtained,  a  year's  leave,
    which she used to move to India. If, as she claimed, she  had  rejected
    the proposed reassignment, and had left her employment altogether,  she
    would not need the permission of her employer to take a year's leave to
    India.  She provided no documentary evidence concerning the declaration
    she claims she was forced to sign. Nor would it have  been  consistent,
    considers the respondent, for the  appellant  to  return  to  her  same
    employer upon her eventual return from India, in light of  her  claimed
    difficulties prior to her departure. Still  less  does  the  respondent
    accept that, upon  resuming  employment  in  those  circumstances,  the
    appellant would continue to manifest her views  concerning  the  regime
    and the green movement.

10. The respondent also notes that the appellant had  been  able  to  leave
    Iran without difficulty from the authorities, despite the warnings from
    the Heraset and Ettela'at not to do so. It  was  "not  clear"  why  the
    appellant sought to return to Iran in December 2015 without  contacting
    her employers, as on her case they had  contacted  her  family  in  her
    absence. The appellant's case was that, upon  her  return  in  December
    2015, she was taken for  questioning  at  the  airport.   The  officers
    released her  but  said  that  they  would  be  in  touch  for  further
    questioning. The appellant did not answer the withheld number calls  to
    her phone in the days that followed;  that  was  not  accepted  by  the
    respondent, who considered that the appellant would have  answered  her
    phone, given she knew the security authorities were seeking to  contact
    her. When, as was the appellant's case, they contacted her  father  and
    informed him that they would come  to  the  family  home,  it  was  not
    consistent that the appellant had remained there, given  the  risk  she
    must have known that doing so would entail.

11. The appellant, noted the respondent, wears the hijab but contends  that
    doing so is part of her cultural identity, and that the practice  dates
    back to Cyrus the Great, and certainly  predates  Islam.  It  was  not,
    therefore,  clear  why  the  Eettela'at  had  any  concerns  about  the
    appellant's motivation for wearing the hijab. The respondent considered
    that it was implausible that the appellant would put  herself  at  risk
    during her detention at the hands  of  the  Ettela'at  by  maintaining,
    under questioning, her opposition to  the  Basij  system.  It  was  not
    accepted that the appellant  would  put  herself  at  further  risk  by
    claiming to hate the Basij.

12. The appellant's case was that she was released by  the  Ettela'at  upon
    her father proffering some land he owned as security. The appellant had
    provided no documentary evidence to support that contention.

13. Finally, the respondent was concerned that, were it the case  that  the
    appellant was sought by the authorities  in  the  manner  claimed,  she
    would not have been able to evade every checkpoint at the airport.

14. The respondent also considered that the appellant's general credibility
    was harmed by the delay in making a  claim  for  asylum.  Although  she
    returned to the United Kingdom on 4 January  2016,  it  was  not  until
    after her visa had expired on 30 January 2017 that she  claimed  asylum
    in February of that year. Pursuant to  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004,  her  general
    credibility was harmed.

Legal framework

15. The burden is  on  the  appellant  to  establish,  applying  the  lower
    standard of proof, that she meets the requirements of  the  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006 ("the Qualification Regulations"). The appellant must establish to
    the reasonable likelihood standard that she falls within the definition
    of "refugee" contained in Article 1(A)  of  the  Geneva  Convention  as
    incorporated into domestic law by Regulation 2(1) of the  Qualification
    Regulations.

Documentary evidence

16. The appellant relied on the bundle of evidence she originally  prepared
    for the appeal before Judge Fox, plus a supplementary bundle  submitted
    on 1 September 2020, the day before the hearing. That was a  breach  of
    the directions I gave in my error of law decision, which  required  any
    additional evidence the appellant sought to rely on to be submitted  14
    days before the  resumed  hearing.  Mr  Hollywood  explained  that  the
    hearing before the tribunal had been listed at short notice, and he had
    been on leave when the resumed hearing date had been  set.  Ms  Everett
    was content to me to rely on the additional bundle,  which  featured  a
    statement from the appellant, a letter from her PhD supervisor, and the
    latest Amnesty International report concerning  Iran.   I  allowed  the
    appellant to rely on the materials.

17. On 13 March  2020,  the  respondent  submitted  an  additional  bundle,
    featuring two decisions  of  First-tier  Tribunal  in  appeals  brought
    against separate decisions of the respondent to dismiss the unconnected
    asylum claims made by the appellant's mother and  brother.  Ms  Everett
    did not have a copy of those decisions; indeed, she was not aware  that
    they had even been served on the tribunal. It appears that they had not
    been served on the appellant.

18. Unfortunately, the respondent's systems had also failed to ensure  that
    Ms Everett was able to access the other papers in the case ahead of the
    hearing. She did not have access to the  original  First-tier  Tribunal
    bundle. I am grateful to Mr Hollywood  for  scanning  in  the  relevant
    pages of the bundle and emailing them to Ms Everett on the  morning  of
    the hearing. I rose to allow Ms Everett to consider the documents  that
    had been emailed to  her,  which  included  the  appellant's  statement
    prepared  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated  15   May   2018,   and
    correspondence from the security department at her school, the  details
    of which I shall address below.  Ms Everett was content to continue and
    did not apply for an adjournment.  I considered that it would  be  fair
    to the respondent to continue, under the circumstances.

The hearing

19. The appellant gave evidence and adopted her  statements  dated  15  May
    2018 and 1 September 2020. She was cross examined  briefly.  I  kept  a
    full record of all oral evidence in my record of  proceedings  and,  of
    course, the hearing was audio recorded. I will  summarise  the  salient
    parts of the appellant's  written  and  oral  evidence  to  the  extent
    necessary to give reasons for my findings, below.

Findings of fact

20. I reach the following findings of fact having considered  the  entirety
    of the evidence in the case, in the round, to the lower standard.

21. At the outset of the hearing, Ms Everett confirmed that  she  had  very
    few questions for the appellant. She noted that in the appellant's  May
    2018 witness statement, she had sought to provide detailed responses to
    each of the respondent's plausibility-based concerns  set  out  in  the
    RFRL. As such, Ms Everett submitted, there would be little  utility  in
    challenging  the  appellant  on  those   same   matters   under   cross
    examination, given she had already provided detailed written  responses
    to the concerns of  the  respondent,  and  need  not  be  asked  again.
    Instead,  Ms  Everett  put  to  the  appellant  a  range  of  questions
    concerning her current political opinion, and  how  she  would  conduct
    herself upon her return. I will  address  the  appellant's  answers  to
    those questions shortly.

22. In Ms Everett's submission, the main issue  for  my  consideration  was
    whether I accepted the respondent's  plausibility-based  concerns  upon
    which the RFRL was  based,  or  whether  I  considered,  to  the  lower
    standard, that the appellant had demonstrated that she suffers a  well-
    founded fear of being persecuted.  Ms  Everett  realistically  accepted
    that if I accepted that the appellant had manifested her views  against
    the Iranian regime previously, or even simply that she would do  so  in
    the  future,  then  she  would  have  a  well-founded  fear  of   being
    persecuted. Ms Everett also accepted that  if  the  appellant  were  to
    suppress expression of her political opinion on account of her fear  of
    being persecuted in the future upon her return, then that,  too,  would
    be sufficient for her to be recognised as a refugee.

23. Although Ms Everett did not seek to rely on them, it is  necessary  for
    me to address the two decisions of the First-tier Tribunal in the  case
    of the appellant's brother and mother  that  had  been  served  by  the
    respondent on the tribunal. As set out in my  error  of  law  decision,
    these had been relied upon before Judge S T Fox, although it  does  not
    appear that he ascribed any significance to their contents: see [4]  of
    the Annex.

24. The first decision is of  Judge  Sangha  promulgated  on  6  July  2017
    concerning  the  appellant's  brother.   Judge  Sangha   rejected   the
    brother's claim that he faced persecution for  being  critical  of  the
    Iranian Judiciary Department, where he claimed  to  have  worked  as  a
    senior official. He claimed that in meetings with members of the senior
    judiciary, he had been critical of the regime and of  the  increase  in
    hangings. At [38], the judge gave reasons for rejecting that aspect  of
    his case. One of those  reasons  was  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    brother had, on his own account, been able to continue working for  the
    Department despite having been openly critical of it, for  some  years.
    The judge did not consider that the Ettela'at would  have  visited  the
    appellant's brother at home; they would "have made every effort to have
    detained him" wherever he was.  The judge rejected the account given by
    the brother that he had been demoted because of  speaking  out  against
    the  judiciary.  The  brother  also  claimed  to  have   converted   to
    Christianity, but the judge rejected that aspect of his case  as  there
    was no evidence from the church he claimed to attend.

25. At [50], Judge Sangha noted that the appellant  in  these  proceedings,
    and her mother, had also made asylum claims. The judge summarised  this
    appellant's asylum claim in very brief terms, but they are terms  which
    are consistent with the way she has advanced her case  before  me.  The
    judge then said:

         "I find it significant that the appellant, his  sister  and  indeed
         his mother have made claims for asylum on dubious grounds  and,  in
         my assessment, this appears to be a blatant attempt by this  family
         to achieve settlement in the UK  by  claiming  asylum  by  whatever
         means they can."

26. The appellant's mother's appeal  against  the  refusal  of  her  asylum
    decision was withdrawn at the hearing, as noted by  Judge  Ghani  in  a
    decision promulgated on 22 August 2017.  There was no analysis in  that
    decision which pertained to this appellant; Judge Ghani  simply  quoted
    from the findings of Judge Sangha.

27. Although Ms Everett did not seek to make  submissions  based  on  these
    decisions, it is clear that there has been a prior judicial finding  of
    fact that this appellant lacks credibility, which I must consider.

28. In AA (Somalia) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2007]
    EWCA Civ 1040, the Court of Appeal considered  the  line  of  authority
    established by Devaseelan (Second Appeals -  ECHR  -  Extra-Territorial
    Effect) Sri Lanka  *  [2002]  UKIAT  00702.   Specifically,  the  court
    addressed the position where, as here, an unchallenged  decision  makes
    findings of fact concerning  an  appellant  in  subsequent,  different,
    proceedings.  At [29], Lord Justice Hooper summarised his survey of the
    authorities in these terms:

         "In cases where the parties  are  different,  the  second  tribunal
         should have regard to the factual conclusions of the first tribunal
         but must evaluate the evidence and submissions as it would  in  any
         other case. If, having considered the factual  conclusions  of  the
         first tribunal, the second tribunal  rationally  reaches  different
         factual conclusions, then it is those  conclusions  which  it  must
         apply and not those of  the  first  tribunal.  In  my  view  Ocampo
         [[2006] EWCA 1276] and LD [(Algeria) [2004] EWCA Civ  804]  do  not
         stand in the way of this simple approach. Both cases make it  clear
         the first decision is not binding and that it  is  the  fundamental
         obligation of the judge independently to decide the second case  on
         its own individual merits."

29. The difficulty for the respondent in seeking to rely on the findings of
    Judge Sangha against this appellant concerning her present asylum claim
    are as follows.

      a. First, the asylum claim advanced by this appellant is not based  on
         the same facts as the claim advanced by her brother. I accept  that
         there are parallels in the way in which each sought  to  put  their
         case, namely they each claim to have spoken out against the  regime
         in the course of their employment, and each claim to have attracted
         the adverse attention of the Ettela'at as a result.  However, there
         the similarities end.  Judge  Sangha  found  that  the  appellant's
         brother continued in his employment with the  Judiciary  Department
         for some time. By contrast,  the  appellant  in  these  proceedings
         claims that she was almost immediately demoted, and  then  took  an
         extended leave of absence to study overseas.   In  any  event,  the
         appellant  does  not  claim  to  have  worked  for  the   Judiciary
         Department, nor did she claim to have spoken out against a rise  in
         hangings or other such matters  of  concern.  She  claims  to  have
         worked in a school, as a teacher, and to have been reprimanded  for
         manifesting  her  political  opinion  to  the  students   and   her
         colleagues.

      b. Secondly, although Judge Sangha considered that this appellant  had
         conspired with her brother and mother to advanced  spurious  asylum
         claims in order to pursue settlement in this country, Judge  Sangha
         gave no reasons for finding the claim of  the  appellant  in  these
         proceedings to lack credibility.

      c. Thirdly, the documentary  and  other  evidence  outlined  by  Judge
         Sangha was not the evidence that the appellant in these proceedings
         now seeks to rely upon.  Put simply, the present matter is  founded
         on different facts, supported by different evidence.

      d. Fourthly, the appellant had no opportunity to make  submissions  on
         her own behalf, and nor did she enjoy  the  ability  to  apply  for
         permission to appeal against the adverse findings made in  relation
         to her.

      e. Fifthly, it is difficult to see how the findings  of  Judge  Sangha
         were not entirely gratuitous in relation to  the  asylum  claim  of
         this appellant.  By the time Judge  Sangha  heard  the  appellant's
         brother's appeal, on 16 June 2017, the respondent had not issued  a
         refusal decision in this appellant's case.  The judge had not heard
         any evidence about  her  claim.  Judge  Sangha  did  not  have  the
         benefit, as I have, of the documentary evidence relied upon by  the
         appellant, nor had he heard the appellant give oral  evidence.   It
         was not necessary to purport to adjudicate  upon  this  appellant's
         asylum claim in the context of dismissing the appeal of her brother
         which (as the judge noted in the brief summary of  the  appellant's
         case  at  [50])  was  founded  on  different  facts,  albeit   with
         structural similarities.

      f. Sixthly, although Judge Sangha's decision was promulgated on 6 July
         2017, some three weeks ahead of  this  appellant's  asylum  refusal
         decision, the respondent did not rely on the  adverse  findings  of
         Judge Sangha in the RFRL in the present matter.

30. For the above reasons, I find that the decisions of  Judge  Sangha  and
    Judge Ghani are of neutral relevance  to  the  decision  I  must  reach
    concerning the credibility of appellant's own  asylum  claim.   To  the
    extent that Judge Sangha made findings concerning the general  personal
    credibility of this appellant  in  her  capacity  as  a  witness  in  a
    different appeal, that is a factor I must take  into  account,  in  the
    round, as part of the  evidence  under  consideration  in  the  present
    matter, in light of my  analysis  above.   It  may  well  be  that  the
    appellant exaggerated her evidence to support her brother's case.  Even
    genuine  asylum  seekers  may  seek  to  bolster  their  own  cases  by
    exaggerating the truth, or by being otherwise  deceitful.   People  lie
    for a variety of reasons.  It does not necessarily mean that every word
    they say will always be untrue, whatever the context.  Pursuant  to  AA
    (Somalia), my role is to assess the  evidence  before  me,  taking  all
    factors into account.

31. One factor that is of relevance from the decision of  Judge  sangha  is
    the similarity between the case advanced by  the  appellant's  brother,
    and that she advances before me. There are  considerable  similarities,
    as I note above. That is  a  factor  which  causes  some  concern,  and
    perhaps was the root of Judge Sangha's observation that the family  had
    colluded together. However, as I also note  above,  there  are  crucial
    differences between the two accounts. It does  not  necessarily  follow
    that there is no shred of truth in the account given by this appellant.
    It may well be that there  was  an  element  of  collusion,  given  the
    overlap in the core elements of  the  asylum  claims  advanced  by  the
    appellant and her brother; by contrast,  the  appellant's  brother  may
    alternatively have fabricated his account on the basis of what he  knew
    happened to his sister. I readily accept that  there  is  a  degree  of
    uncertainty which hovers over this aspect of  this  appellant's  asylum
    claim. As the Court of Appeal noted in Karanakaran v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2000]  3  All  E.R.  449  at  459,  the  lower
    standard of proof entails a more positive role for uncertainty, and, at
    469, that matters should only  be  excluded  from  consideration  where
    there is no real doubt that they did not take  place.   The  impact  of
    Judge Sangha's decision is  that  elements  of  this  appellant's  case
    occupy the uncertain, yet potentially positive, territory of the  lower
    standard of proof.

32. I find that the  appellant  has  provided  a  consistent  and  detailed
    account of the difficulties she experienced on seeking to manifest anti-
    regime beliefs in Iran. She writes in  her  statement  in  considerable
    detail of the events leading up to her detention,  and  the  steps  her
    father had to take to secure her release. There is no challenge  by  Ms
    Everett to either the internal consistency  of  that  account,  or  its
    consistency with the account the appellant  gave,  in  her  substantive
    asylum interview. Indeed, although the statement is now some two  years
    old, Ms Everett did not seek to cross-examine the appellant against its
    contents.

33. I turn now to the documentary evidence relied upon by the appellant.  I
    will analyse each document in turn, before ascribing weight to them  as
    part of my overall, global, assessment of the evidence, in the round.

34. In 2009, the appellant claimed she was working as a  teacher.  She  has
    provided  English  translations  of  what  appears  to  be  an  initial
    certificate  of  qualification,  dated  9   October   2004,   and   two
    certificates of commendation from the Ministry of  Education,  dated  1
    May 2008 and 26 April 2009  respectively.   She  has  also  provided  a
    subsequent commendation from a "Teacher Education Centre" dated  2  May
    2009.  These  documents  are  consistent  with  the  overall  narrative
    advanced by the appellant concerning her qualifications as a teacher at
    the outset of her career.

35. The next documentation of significance is dated 5 April 2015. It  is  a
    detailed HR-style document which  is  categorised  at  point  18  as  a
    "change in  salary  and  benefits".   It  describes  the  role  of  the
    appellant is  being  "in  charge  of  laboratory".  In  Mr  Hollywood's
    submission, this document records the  appellant's  demotion  from  her
    role as a teacher to that of a laboratory assistant. That is consistent
    with the case advanced by the appellant that, following the four  years
    she spent in India, prior to her return in August 2014. At  page  2  of
    her first statement, the appellant writes that she sought a new role at
    a different school, and that she was offered a job as a lab technician.
    The next significant event in the appellant's narrative is that she was
    dismissed from this rule, in May 2015. While there  is  no  documentary
    evidence which supports the claimed May 2015 dismissal, the documentary
    evidence I have outlined so far is consistent with the overall  account
    the appellant has provided.

36. The principal incident which the appellant claims demonstrates that she
    is at risk of being persecuted upon her return took place  in  December
    2015. The appellant gives a detailed account of being taken  aside  for
    questioning at the airport and being  released  with  the  prospect  of
    follow-up attention from the Ettela'at.  She has provided  what  appear
    to be messages sent by the Ettela'at on 27 December 2015 asking her  to
    report to offices of the Ettela'at.  Those messages are consistent with
    the case advanced by the appellant.

37. The appellant claims she was later taken  in  for  questioning  by  the
    Ettela'at and hit repeatedly by  a  female  officer.  This  account  is
    consistent with the background materials, which  demonstrate  that  the
    Iranian attitude to any suggestion of  dissent  or  opposition  can  be
    extreme,  and  that  the  regime  is  highly  sensitive.   It  is  also
    consistent with the well-documented accounts of mistreatment in Iranian
    detention.

38. The operative reasons relied upon by the respondent  for  refusing  the
    appellant's asylum claim were, as Ms Everett noted, plausibility based.
    It is necessary to  recall  that  decision-makers  should  be  cautious
    before purporting to step into the shoes of an applicant for asylum, or
    those of an appellant in an asylum appeal,  given  the  very  different
    cultural contexts and backgrounds involved.  In Y v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1223,  Lord  Justice  Keene
    observed at [25] that a judge:

         "... should be cautious before finding an account to be  inherently
         incredible, because there is a considerable risk that  he  will  be
         over influenced by his own views on what is or  is  not  plausible,
         and those views will have inevitably been  influenced  by  his  own
         background in this country and by the customs and ways of  our  own
         society ..."

    A decision maker is  not  required  to  suspend  judgment  ([26]),  but
    instead must "look through the spectacles provided by  the  information
    he has about conditions in the country in question" ([27]).

39.  Many  of  the  reasons  given  by  the  respondent  for  refusing  the
    appellant's asylum claim seek to re-characterise the notion of what  is
    reasonable  by  reference  to  the  decision  maker's  experience.  The
    respondent did not seek to rely on background  materials  to  establish
    the plausibility-based concerns set out in the RFRL. For example, there
    are no background materials suggesting  that  those  unhappy  with  the
    regime in Iran would always suppress their beliefs to the contrary.  By
    contrast, the background materials relied upon  by  the  appellant  are
    replete with examples of those who have  manifested  their  anti-regime
    beliefs in Iran, and who have been suppressed as a result. The  extract
    from the Amnesty International Iran  2019  report  relied  upon  by  Mr
    Hollywood  records  a  pattern  of  protesters  being  crushed  by  the
    authorities. Human rights, workers and labour rights, environmental and
    political activists have all suffered persecution in Iran over the last
    year. At least 16 people who signed open letters demanding  fundamental
    changes to the country's political system have been imprisoned over the
    last year.  The background  materials  demonstrate  that  there  is  an
    active, albeit suppressed,  climate  of  political  opposition  to  the
    Iranian government. There is simply no support for the suggestion  that
    the atmosphere is so oppressive, and  the  risk  to  protesters  is  so
    great, that no person would ever seek actively to manifest their  anti-
    regime beliefs. The respondent's concerns that this appellant would not
    seek to do so involves an attempt to re-characterise what is reasonable
    by reference to the subjective standards  of  the  decision-maker,  and
    goes against well-documented examples of the conduct of  protestors  in
    Iran.

40. At page 4 of her  statement,  the  appellant  contends  that,  if  this
    concern of the respondent were valid, "no political protest  in  unjust
    or authoritarian societies would ever take place."  This  objection  of
    the respondent must fall away.

41. In  a  statement,  the  appellant  writes  that,  in  contrast  to  the
    suggestion  made  by  the  respondent,  the  practice  of  the  Iranian
    authorities would be to offer a demotion  to  an  initially  low  level
    activist, in an attempt to exert continuing pressure upon them. That is
    a coherent explanation in response to the respondent's concern that  it
    was inconsistent for the appellant  to  be  offered  a  demotion  as  a
    laboratory supervisor, rather than being dismissed altogether. At  that
    stage in the chronology of  the  appellant's  case,  she  had  not  yet
    attracted the worst of the adverse  attention  which  she  claimed  she
    would later experience upon her return in December 2015.

42. I find that the fact the appellant did not contact  her  employer  upon
    her return in December 2015 to be nothing to the point. Put simply,  it
    is not clear  why  would  she  contact  them,  especially  if  she  had
    experienced, on her account, a crescendo of difficulties culminating in
    her demotion.

43. Similarly, in relation to the respondent's concerns that the  appellant
    did not take "withheld number" calls during the  period  following  her
    release from questioning at the airport, but prior to her  re-detention
    by the Ettela'at, again, it is difficult to see why  an  individual  in
    this appellant's situation would voluntarily take such calls. Also,  it
    is nothing to the point that she  returned  to  her  home  address.  To
    suggest the appellant should have done otherwise, before the  worst  of
    the treatment she now claims took  place  had  occurred,  would  be  to
    attempt to re-characterise the  appellant's  actions  by  reference  to
    subjective notions of what is reasonable.   There  is  nothing  in  the
    background materials to suggest  that  it  is  possible  to  evade  the
    Ettela'at in Iran completely, so the fact that the appellant appears to
    have resigned herself to the possibility of the Ettela'at visiting  her
    at home is not inconsistent with the background materials.

44. I also  consider  that  the  RFRL  has  misunderstood  the  appellant's
    explanation concerning the questioning she received over the hijab. Her
    case is not that she was challenged over not wearing it, but  that  she
    was challenged as to what her motivations were for wearing it. Her case
    is that she wore the hijab for cultural  reasons,  and  that  women  of
    Persia had done so for some 2,500 years, predating the provenance, rise
    and influence of Islam. It appears that the Ettela'at were concerned to
    ensure that the true reason she wore the  hijab  was  as  a  matter  of
    adherence to its view of the requirements of  the  Islamic  faith  upon
    women. What mattered was not the outward signs of conformity  with  the
    requirements  of   Islam,   which   is   the   respondent's   erroneous
    understanding of the appellant's evidence, but whether she did save for
    genuine  reasons  of  religious  observance.  This  objection  of   the
    respondent falls away.

45. The appellant has given a detailed account of how she was able to leave
    the airport upon her return to the United Kingdom in January 2016.  She
    claims she was instructed by a contact to  purchase  a  business  class
    ticket, which gave her access to one of the  airport  lounges,  evading
    some of the normal checks.

46. I take into account the fact the Judge Sangha found  the  appellant  to
    lack credibility, and that there has been a delay in the making of  her
    claim. Had this been an asylum claim made immediately upon  her  return
    to the United Kingdom in January 2016, there would be no  such  concern
    over her credibility. However, by waiting until further in 2017, doubts
    do arise over the credibility of the entire  account.  The  explanation
    given by the appellant is that she only took legal advice  towards  the
    end of 2016 as she approached the expiration of her visa. At the  time,
    the appellant had a visa, and had no operative reason to  approach  the
    authorities in this jurisdiction.  Nevertheless, she should still  have
    done so at the earliest opportunity, and her failure to do so does harm
    her credibility to an extent.

47.  I  accept  that  there  is  no  documentary  evidence  concerning  the
    declaration she signed in which she undertook not to speak out  against
    the regime in the future, but it was no part of  the  appellant's  case
    that she was given a copy of the declaration  to  retain  for  her  own
    records. Oppressive regimes do not necessarily act in a  rational  way,
    or in the same way an authority in a western democracy could reasonably
    be expected to act. Similarly, the suggestion that her  father  had  to
    sign over the title to some land to the  Iranian  state  has  not  been
    substantiated by documentary evidence, despite  detailed  letters  from
    the appellant's father featuring in the original bundle provided to the
    first-tier tribunal. I do not consider that to be a fatal omission  as,
    again, there is no suggestion that the process entailed the creation of
    documentation which would necessarily be retained  by  the  appellant's
    father.

48. The documents relied upon by the appellant as analysed earlier in  this
    decision are consistent with the overall case that  she  advances,  and
    their reliability has not been challenged by the respondent.

49.  The  account  the  appellant  gave  under  cross  examination  of  her
    maintained political opinion in opposition to the Iranian  regime,  and
    its approach to  women's  rights,  was  entirely  consistent  with  the
    appellant's account of having become disillusioned with the  regime  in
    around 2008. She said she would seek to continue to manifest her  anti-
    regime views "to everyone around me you can understand".

50. Drawing this analysis together, while I accept that there are  elements
    of  uncertainty  in  the  appellant's  case,  those  concerns  are  not
    sufficient to dispel all real doubt in my mind about the likelihood  of
    the appellant's case being reasonably likely to  be  true.   There  are
    rational  explanations  for  the  plausibility-based  concerns  of  the
    respondent, and it is not necessary to suspend judgment to  accept  the
    appellant's account.  I find that it is reasonably likely the appellant
    spoke out against the Iranian regime for the reasons she  claimed,  and
    that she was demoted in 2015 as a result. At this stage, her status was
    that of a low-level irritant to the authorities, who had taken no steps
    actively to prevent her departure from  the  country.  The  credibility
    concerns and the uncertainty of  certain  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    account do  not  have  the  effect  of  depriving  it  of  its  overall
    credibility such that I have no real doubt that it did not take  place.
    Bearing  in  mind  the  low  standard  of  proof  applicable  to  these
    proceedings, I find that it is reasonably likely that  the  events  the
    appellant claimed to have taken  place  in  Iran,  culminating  in  the
    physical mistreatment she experienced in December 2015, did take place.

51. I find that it is reasonably likely that the appellant  would  seek  to
    manifest her anti-regime views upon her return, and that, as Ms Everett
    accepted, if she were to do so again, she would be reasonably likely to
    be persecuted by the regime as a result.  Her physical mistreatment  at
    the hands of the Ettela'at in December 2015 amounted to persecution  on
    grounds of her pro-Green Party political opinion, and is, therefore,  a
    serious indication of likely future persecution.

52. For the  above  reasons,  I  find  that  the  appellant  satisfies  the
    definition of "refugee" contained in the Qualification  Regulations  on
    account of her anti-Iranian regime political opinion.

53. This appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.




Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen  H  Smith                               Date  18  September
    2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award of �140 for the following reason.  The  appellant  was  successful  in
the appeal.


Signed   Stephen H Smith                              Date 3 September 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07328/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice, Belfast |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 February 2020                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     TM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Hollywood, Andrew Russell & Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Govan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born in 1980. She appeals against a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge S T Fox promulgated on  13  March
    2019, following a hearing on  9  August  2018,  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent dated 25 July 2017 to refuse her
    asylum and human rights claim.

Factual background

 2. The appellant worked at a school in Iran. She  wore  green  clothes  to
    school and spoke openly about the Green Movement, an opposition  party.
    She was overheard discussing whether women  should  have  to  wear  the
    Hijab and whether renouncement of Islam  should  be  possible  and  was
    later dismissed.  The appellant came to the United Kingdom on a student
    visa in July 2015, returning briefly to Iran in December 2015.   During
    that brief return visit, she  claims  to  have  been  detained  by  the
    Ettela'at, mistreated, and prohibited from leaving the country, all  on
    account of the views  she  previously  manifested.   A  friend  at  the
    airport helped her to leave, and she returned to the United Kingdom  to
    resume her studies.  The Ettela'at are still  interested  in  her,  she
    claims, and have contacted her family during her absence.   She  claims
    asylum on the basis of her imputed political opinion.

 3. Judge Fox dismissed the appeal on  credibility  grounds.   However,  in
    doing so, he did not consider  certain  documents  in  the  appellant's
    bundle.  These included notices issued to her upon her  by  the  school
    where she worked in response to her behaviour, a public  notice  issued
    against her by the Department for Education, a letter from  her  father
    detailing the attention of the  authorities,  and  a  notice  from  the
    Haraset (security office overseeing the  education  sector)  compelling
    her to attend an investigation into her behaviour,  issued  during  her
    December 2015 return to the country.

 4. Judge Fox had been invited  by  the  presenting  officer  who  appeared
    before him  to  consider  two  separate  decisions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  in  different  cases  which,  it  was  said,  undermined  the
    appellant's credibility. This  is  what  the  judge  said  about  those
    decisions:

         "[43]  [The presenting officer] has submitted two  (2)  immigration
         decisions  [reference  numbers  given]  that   he   claims   wholly
         undermines [sic] the appellant's credibility. He seeks to  rely  on
         these decisions. I resisted the temptation to read these  decisions
         until after I had considered my findings in this  appeal.  As  [the
         appellant's previous representative]  correctly  states  these  are
         separate  appeals.  I  note  the  appellant's  involvement  in  the
         relevant  findings.  There  is  no  challenge  to  these   findings
         particularly as they impact upon the appellant.  The  view  on  her
         credibility appears to reflect my own."

Permission to appeal

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro  on
    all grounds.  The grounds as originally  advanced  contended  that  the
    judge made an error of fact when, at [31], the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had  been  able  to  return  to  Iran  from  the  UK  without
    significant difficulty in December 2015; that the judge  was  wrong  to
    conclude that the appellant was an "economic migrant"; that  the  judge
    failed to consider the documents listed at paragraph 3, above; and that
    the judge failed to have regard to the relevant country guidance.

 6. Mr Hollywood was only instructed shortly before the hearing.  He sought
    permission to rely on two additional grounds  of  appeal.   First,  the
    judge's handling of the linked cases at [43]  was  procedurally  unfair
    and  denied  the  appellant  the   opportunity   to   make   meaningful
    representations, or to know what material influenced the outcome of the
    appeal. Secondly, the delay between  the  judge  hearing  the  case  in
    promulgating his decision amounted to an error of law.

Discussion

 7. It was common ground at the hearing  that  the  judge  failed  to  have
    regard to certain key documents included in the appellant's  bundle.  I
    am grateful to Mr Govan for his realistic concession, which I  consider
    to have been appropriately made.

 8. Failure to have regard to material evidence is an  error  of  law.  The
    documents under consideration went to  the  heart  of  the  appellant's
    case.  The judge simply did not consider them. His  entire  credibility
    assessment was flawed on account of his failure to consider  these  key
    documents.

 9. It is not necessary for me to reach a view  on  the  other  grounds  of
    appeal, or to consider Mr Hollywood's application to amend the  grounds
    of appeal, in light of the respondent's concession that the decision of
    Judge Fox involved the making of an error of law.

10. In conclusion, therefore,  I  find  that  the  decision  of  Judge  Fox
    involved the making of an error of law,  and  is  set  aside,  with  no
    findings preserved.

11. In view of the nature of the appellant's protection claim,  I  consider
    that it is appropriate to make a direction for anonymity.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Fox involved the making of an error of law.

I set aside the decision of Judge Fox, with no findings preserved. I  direct
that the matter be re-heard in the Upper Tribunal, on  the  first  available
date.

If the respondent wishes to  rely  on  other  decisions  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal which she contends are  relevant  to  this  case,  she  must  serve
copies of those decisions on the appellant within  14  days  of  being  sent
this decision.

The appellant may rely on whatever additional evidence she considers  to  be
appropriate, which must be served on the tribunal  within  14  days  of  the
matter being reheard.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith                         Date 2 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

