
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07669/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2019                  |On 16 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 patrick [t]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Head, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 15 March  2019  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S H Smith.  The decision allowed  Mr  [T]'s  appeal
    against the respondent's decision to deport him under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 (the EEA Regulations).

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State for
    the Home Department as the respondent and to Mr [T] as  the  appellant,
    reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The background to this matter  is  as  follows.   The  appellant  is  a
    national of Cote d'Ivoire, born on 13 November 1986.   He  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 1 September 1994, then aged 7, as  the  dependant  of
    his father who sought and was granted refugee status.

 4. By 1998, the appellant's father had married a French national  and  the
    appellant applied for a residence card as her family member.  It is not
    clear that this application was ever considered as  the  appellant  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain (ILR) on 24 November 1999.

 5. In May 2001 the appellant has his  first  dealings  with  the  criminal
    justice system and received a reprimand,  caution  or  warning  for  an
    offence of theft.  There followed an extensive and sustained pattern of
    serious criminal offending.  Between 8 November 2003 to 21  March  2014
    the appellant accumulated  twelve  convictions  for  nineteen  offences
    including taking a motor vehicle without consent, no insurance, driving
    without reasonable consideration, having an article  with  a  blade  or
    which was sharply pointed in a public place,  intimidating  witness  or
    juror with intent to  obstruct,  pervert  or  interfere  with  justice,
    burglary with intent to steal, possessing  an  offensive  weapon  in  a
    public place and possession of class A controlled drugs.

 6. It is of note that offences in 2004, 2006, 2007 and 2009 led to periods
    of imprisonment for,  respectively,  ten  months,  twelve  months,  ten
    months and two years.  The latter period of imprisonment was to  prison
    rather than to a Youth Offenders' Institute.

 7. On 21 March 2014 the appellant pleaded guilty to bringing, throwing  or
    otherwise conveying a "List A" article into a  prison  (cannabis).   He
    was sentenced to sixteen months in prison for that offence.

 8. It was the conviction and sentence of imprisonment in  2014  which  led
    the respondent to issue a liability to deportation letter on  25  April
    2014.

 9. The appellant did not appeal against the deportation  decision  at  the
    time and a signed deportation order was served on him  on  21  February
    2015.  On 2 April 2015 the appellant lodged a late appeal  against  the
    deportation decision.  No extension of time was granted by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the appellant became  appeal  rights  exhausted  that
    day.

10. On 20 November 2015 and 9  January  2016  the  appellant  made  further
    representations to the respondent.  On 26 January 2017  the  respondent
    rejected  the  additional  representations  and  did  not  afford   the
    applicant a right of appeal.  The appellant therefore sought a judicial
    review of that decision but permission was refused on 8 March 2017.

11. Protection based submissions  from  the  appellant  led  to  a  further
    decision from the respondent  dated  1  August  2017  and  it  is  that
    decision, refusing his protection claim and a human rights claim  under
    Articles 3 and 8 and  his  opposition  to  deportation  under  the  EEA
    Regulations which forms the basis of these proceedings.

12. The appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  and  his  appeal  was
    originally allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego in  a  decision
    dated 15 September 2017.  The appeal was  allowed  on  Article  3  ECHR
    grounds.  However, in a decision dated 16 January 2018  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kopieczek found an error of law in  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Housego.  The decision was  set  aside  and  the  appeal
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full  rehearing.   Thus,  the
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith on 1 March 2019.

13. The judge sets out the appellant's immigration history in paragraphs  2
    to 7 of the decision.  In paragraphs 8 to 10  he  addresses  procedural
    matters which included the appellant no longer intending  to  pursue  a
    protection claim and the need for the appellant  to  be  treated  as  a
    vulnerable witness.

14. In paragraphs 11 to 15 the judge set out the respondent's case  against
    the appellant and the appellant's grounds  for  resisting  deportation.
    In paragraph 11 the judge noted that  "the  appellant's  case  must  be
    viewed against the backdrop of his significant offending history."   In
    paragraph 12 he sets out in detail the  appellant's  criminal  offences
    between 2003  and  2014.   In  paragraph  13  the  judge  set  out  the
    appellant's case that since the most recent index offence he  had  been
    diagnosed with a  schizoaffective  disorder  and  commenced  medication
    which had had a significant impact on his behaviour and  prospects  for
    rehabilitation.

15. In paragraphs 16 to 20 the judge set out the  legal  provisions  to  be
    applied in  the  appeal.  There  was  no  dispute  that  the  appellant
    qualified for the "serious" level of  protection  as  he  had  acquired
    permanent residence; see paragraph 20.

16. In paragraphs 25 to 52 the judge set out his findings on why he did not
    consider  that  the  appellant  represented  a  genuine   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society and so could not be deported under the EEA Regulations.

17. In paragraphs 26 to 29 the  judge  reviewed  the  appellant's  criminal
    offending,  that   consideration   clearly   expressing   the   judge's
    understanding that the criminal history was serious and committed  over
    "a sustained period of time" and that, until recently the appellant had
    shown no remorse and minimal rehabilitation.  He  considered  the  full
    range of the appellant's offending.  He considered the  seriousness  of
    the offending; see paragraphs 26, 27 and 28.  In paragraph 29 the judge
    concludes that the nature of the appellant's offending  was  sufficient
    in theory to meet the initial requirement for there to be  a  "serious"
    threat to public policy and security.

18. In paragraph 31 the judge  turns  to  the  appellant's  case  that  the
    decision to deport him was not proportionate where he no longer posed a
    risk because of the proper diagnosis of treatment of his mental  health
    disorder.

19. In paragraph 33 the judge addresses the appellant's relationship with a
    British national which he found  had  provided  "a  stronger  and  more
    stabilising influence in his life" since the  index  offence  in  2014.
    This was because since then the couple had had two  children  and  been
    given permanent, appropriate accommodation.

20. In paragraph 34 the judge considered the sentencing  remarks  from  the
    index offence. In 35 the judge concluded that the appellant had finally
    heeded the comments of the  sentencing  judge  in  complying  with  the
    conditions of his licence and not reoffending.

21. In paragraph 37 the judge considered that a particular factor  weighing
    against the appellant was his two convictions for drugs offences  which
    in his view were serious, having "an impact that is broad and  deep  at
    many levels of society".  The judge also refers in paragraph 37 to  the
    "unpleasant nature of  the  escalation  in  the  appellant's  offending
    between his 2009 and 2014 custodial sentences".

22. In paragraph 39 the judge addresses  the  appellant's  submission  that
    "whatever the risk posed by the appellant  was  in  the  past,  it  has
    subsided now".  This was put forward on  the  basis  that  he  had  not
    reoffended since March 2014 and that even though there had been similar
    gaps in his offending prior to the index offence the circumstances were
    distinguishable because of his diagnosis of a schizoaffective  disorder
    and appropriate treatment.  The psychiatric evidence indicated that his
    impulsivity and  involvement  with  alcohol  and  substance  abuse  had
    remitted since he had commenced mental health medication. He had become
    more stable, gained more insight into his condition and  been  provided
    with further stability because of the family home he  shared  with  his
    partner and children.

23. In paragraph 42 the judge addressed the fact that the appellant had not
    provided any evidence of formal rehabilitative  courses.   He  did  not
    find that this meant that the appellant could not show that he had been
    rehabilitated  however.  The  judge  considered  that  the  appellant's
    diagnosis and  treatment  for  his  mental  health  condition  and  the
    stability of his family life demonstrated "a degree of rehabilitation".

24. In paragraph 44 the judge assessed the appellant's  absence  of  family
    connections in Cote  d'Ivoire.  In  paragraph  45  he  found  that  the
    appellant's limited ability to speak French would be of some assistance
    in Cote d'Ivoire. In paragraph 46 the judge considers the  difficulties
    the appellant will face in Cote d'Ivoire as a result of  his  diagnosis
    of schizoaffective disorder and need for regular medication.  The judge
    noted as part of the proportionality assessment that provision in  Cote
    d'Ivoire  was  very  limited,  there  being  only   three   psychiatric
    facilities catering for a population of 21 million people.

25. In paragraph 47 the judge set out  that  in  his  view  the  impact  of
    removal for the appellant would be "grave" as he would be returning  to
    a country:

         "... with which he has no connections, in which he has no remaining
         family or people who could be expected to  rate  his  return,  and,
         most significantly, it is very unlikely that he would  be  able  to
         secure anything  like  the  medical  assistance  and  treatment  he
         requires for his condition".

    In the same paragraph the judge weighed  that  assessment  against  the
    respondent's legitimate purpose in seeking to deport the  appellant  on
    grounds of public policy and security.  The judge concluded that  where
    the  appellant  did  not,  on  balance,  pose  a  genuine  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat at the  "serious"  level,  his  deportation
    could not be seen to be proportionate.

26. In paragraph 48 the judge went on to consider the appellant's  personal
    circumstances in the UK where he is in a  partnership  with  a  British
    national and has two  British  children.   The  judge  found  that  the
    applicant's deportation  would  have  a  "significant"  effect  on  his
    partner and children.  The judge found that the best interests  of  the
    children were to be in the UK with both parents.  In paragraph  50  the
    judge found that it was not possible to expect the British partner  and
    two British children to accompany the appellant to Cote d'Ivoire.

27. The First-tier Tribunal concluded in paragraph 52  that  the  appellant
    did not represent a sufficiently serious genuine and present threat  to
    one of the fundamental interests of society, based in particular on the
    evidence of rehabilitation following his proper diagnosis and treatment
    for his  schizoaffective  disorder.   The  judge  also  highlighted  in
    paragraph 53 that the decision would be disproportionate because of the
    impact on the appellant and his partner and children.

28. The respondent was granted permission to appeal in a  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal dated 6 August 2019.

29. The substance of the grounds is contained in  paragraphs  8  to  13  as
    follows:

         "8.  It is submitted that the FTTJ errs at [50] in finding that the
             Appellant does not pose a  genuine  present  and  sufficiently
             serious threat to one of the fundamental principles of society
             and that therefore 27(5)(c)) is not satisfied, in so doing  it
             is submitted that he has failed to have adequate regard to the
             provisions of Schedule 1 of the EEA Regulations 2016.

         9.    The  Appellant  received  a  sentence  of   sixteen   months'
             imprisonment for bringing,  throwing  or  otherwise  conveying
             cannabis into a prison.  It is submitted  that  the  FTTJ  has
             failed to have regard to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had
             already in effect been given a  second  chance  following  the
             first deportation order  following  a  period  of  criminality
             which lasted some ten years and included a two year period  of
             imprisonment for the supply of a Class A  drug.   Although  he
             makes reference  to  Schedule  1  of  the  Regulations  it  is
             submitted that the FTTJ did not have adequate  regard  to  its
             provisions.

         10.  At [39] the FTTJ has regard to the Appellant's submission that
             he has not offended since 2014.  It is submitted that at  best
             this is a neutral consideration and that some of  this  period
             would have been spent in custody in any event.  The  appellant
             has had gaps in his  offending  in  the  past,  the  FTTJ  has
             considered this point, however it is submitted that  the  FTTJ
             has placed an over reliance  on  claimed  protective  factors.
             The  Appellant's  criminality  is  blamed   on   his   medical
             condition, the FTTJ has failed to  consider  that  should  the
             Appellant's condition deteriorate, or should he fail to comply
             with his treatment that his propensity to reoffend  becomes  a
             distinct possibility.  It is submitted that the FTTJ  errs  in
             failing to take this possibility into account.

         11.  Furthermore, there  is  no  finding  that  the  Appellant  has
             undertaken any form of rehabilitation to address his offending
             behaviour and therefore, it is submitted  that  he  remains  a
             serious  threat  to  the  fundamental  interests  of  society,
             particularly in respect of sections (b), (c), (f), (g) and (h)
             of Schedule 1.

         12.   It  is  submitted  that  the   Appellant's   deportation   is
             proportionate in light of his prolific  criminality  and  that
             past conduct is indicative  of  future  behaviour.   The  FTTJ
             notes the provision that the risk "need not be imminent"  that
             may indeed be the case, however it is submitted that the  FTTJ
             has failed to consider that  the  Appellant's  correct  period
             without convictions is an anomaly and  is  vastly  outweighing
             (sic) by the length of time during which he  could  accurately
             be described as a persistent offender.

         13.  Furthermore, there is no evidence that  the  Appellant's  age,
             state of  health  or  any  other  consideration  prevents  his
             deportation to Cote d'Ivoire.  The health  facilities  may  be
             less favourable that (sic) they are in the  UK,  but  that  in
             itself is not a justification.  The  Appellant's  partner  has
             the support of public services and there is no reason why this
             should not continue in the  Appellant's  absence.   While  the
             Appellant's relationship with  his  family  will  change  such
             separation is an inevitable consequence of deportation."

30. It is not my view that the grounds of appeal have merit. The summary of
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal set out above shows that all of
    the matters that are referred to in  the  grounds,  the  provisions  of
    Schedule 1 of the EEA Regulations, the appellant's index  offence,  the
    duration  and  seriousness  of  his  criminal  history,  the  offending
    including drugs offences, lack of evidence of formal rehabilitation and
    circumstances in Cote D'Ivoire. Having taken account of those  material
    factors, it was for the judge to decide what weight to place on them.

31. The First-tier Tribunal took a rational approach in  finding  that  the
    diagnosis and treatment of the appellant's mental  disorder  since  the
    index offence in 2014 was a significant factor  and  the  grounds  only
    disagree rather than showing an error on a point of  law.  The  grounds
    only speculate that the  appellant  might  not  remain  stable  on  his
    medication or that he might default. It is clear that  the  judge  took
    into account and, quite properly, weighed  against  the  appellant  his
    serious criminal offending.  He says so quite clearly in paragraphs  26
    to 29 and paragraph 37. Again, that approach cannot be characterised as
    irrational and the grounds only seek to reargue the  case.  Those  were
    the matters at the core of this decision and the findings of First-tier
    Tribunal Smith are not shown to be in error.

32. For these reasons, it is not my view that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal discloses error on a point of law.

33. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  based  on  the  material
    before the Tribunal in March 2019. The appellant should be  aware  that
    any further  offending  will  be  likely  to  lead  to  the  respondent
    considering deportation again and that, if so, another  Tribunal  would
    not be bound by this decision.

Notice of Decision

34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed:  [pic]                                          Date:  9   September
    2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt





