
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07044/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th February 2020                         |On 21st April 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     sk
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Harper of Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Maka promulgated on 13 November 2019, in which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claim dated 11 July 2019 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Sri  Lanka  who  first  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom and claimed asylum on 16 May 2008.  The application  was
    refused on 7 October 2008 and the appeal against refusal  dismissed  on
    19 November 2008.  The Appellant made a series of  further  submissions
    to the Respondent which were all  refused  up  to  the  latest  further
    submissions made  on  31  October  2018.   The  Appellant's  claim,  in
    summary, is that he is at risk of persecution on return to Sri Lanka as
    a member of the LTTE and because of  his  sur  place  activity  in  the
    United Kingdom, including as a radio journalist, attending protests and
    as a member of the TGTE.  The Appellant  claims  to  suffer  from  poor
    mental health with PTSD and depressive episodes.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the  basis  that  the  Appellant
    would not be at risk on return to Sri  Lanka.   The  Respondent  placed
    reliance on the decision dismissing the Appellant's appeal against  the
    original refusal of asylum in 2008 and found that  that  Appellant  did
    not have any prior involvement with the LTTE and at its highest, he was
    a low level member of the  TGTE.   The  Appellant  does  not  have  any
    established family life in the  United  Kingdom  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  and  he  did  not
    meet the requirements in paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules  in
    relation to private life; nor were there any exceptional  circumstances
    to warrant a  grant  of  leave  to  remain.   Finally,  the  Respondent
    considered the Appellant's  mental  health  but  found  that  the  high
    threshold for a grant of leave to remain on this basis had not been met
    and there was treatment available on return as well as family support.

 4. Judge Maka dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  13
    November 2019 on all grounds.  In essence, the First-tier Tribunal  did
    not find the Appellant to be  credible  and  at  its  highest,  he  was
    involved at a low level in sur place activity for the purpose  only  of
    bolstering his protection claim.  The First-tier Tribunal  gave  little
    weight to the medical evidence, the  reasons  for  which  I  return  to
    below.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on three grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to have proper regard to the  medical  evidence  before
    it, which contained consistent evidence from  different  professionals.
    Secondly, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  make  sustainable
    findings on risk from the Appellant's sur place activities; including a
    failure to take into account all of  the  evidence  and  a  failure  to
    consider that the TGTE was a proscribed organisation such that  it  was
    not necessary for a person to be high level to be  at  risk.   Finally,
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred in its approach to suicide  risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka  in  light  of  the  evidence  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant's mother is a sufficient protective  factor;  the  impact  on
    return and the lack of facilities and treatment available on return.

 6. At the oral hearing, Counsel for the Appellant relied  on  the  written
    grounds of appeal and amplified them in oral submissions.  In  relation
    to the first ground, it was submitted that the reasons upon  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not accept  the  accuracy  of  the  psychiatric
    report from Dr Okon-Rocha were flawed, specifically, that Dr Okon-Rocha
    had not been provided with a copy of the previous Tribunal decision but
    the reasons for refusal letter had been  provided  which  set  out  the
    material parts of this decision; and that Dr Okon-Rocha  had  not  been
    given a full picture of the Appellant's diaspora activities, but had in
    fact confirmed knowledge of these in section 4.3.2 of her report.

 7. Further in relation to the first ground of  appeal,  Counsel  submitted
    that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    consistency of  medical  evidence  available  from  different  sources,
    including the psychiatrist report, his GP who had been responsible  for
    his initial care for ten years and from a Senior Cognitive  Behavioural
    Therapist.  The GP evidence was rejected on the basis that the  GP  was
    not a specialist, however, the GP had longstanding involvement with the
    Appellant and knowledge of his suicide attempt.  The therapist's report
    was corroborative and carried weight even if they had not been told  of
    the past adverse credibility findings from the previous Tribunal.

 8. In relation to the second ground of appeal, it was submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to consider all of the evidence in  relation
    to the Appellant's sur place activities; specifically a  second  letter
    from the Deputy Minister of Political Affairs for the TGTE  which  did,
    unlike the first  letter  referred  to  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision, state what activities the Appellant undertook  and  at  which
    events; and the public nature of the  Appellant's  involvement,  having
    been named in newspaper reports and TGTE material.   Further,  that  in
    any event the First-tier Tribunal failed to assess the significance  of
    the sur place activities and the  significance  of  the  TGTE  being  a
    proscribed organisation, such  that  it  did  not  matter  whether  his
    involvement was only at a low level.  The First-tier Tribunal failed to
    assess in accordance with the Court of Appeal's  decision  in  UB  (Sri
    Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 85,
    first whether the Appellant was a TGTE member and secondly, whether  he
    would be detected as a member by the Sri Lankan authorities.

 9. Finally, in relation to the second ground of appeal, it  was  submitted
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred in equating the circumstances of the
    Appellant's family members with his, although they did not claim to  be
    personally at risk.

10. As to the third ground of appeal, it was submitted that the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to make sustainable findings of fact in relation to the
    medical evidence and failed to properly assess the risk of  suicide  on
    return in accordance with the decision in J v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629.  The First-tier Tribunal found
    that the Appellant's mother would be a protective factor,  however  the
    underlying medical evidence from Dr Okon-Rocha  was  that  it  was  not
    possible to state confidently that the Appellant's mother  would  be  a
    sufficient protective factor.   In  relation  to  the  availability  of
    medical treatment on return, the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  take
    into account the evidence as to this in GJ and others (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)  and  in   [2013]  UKUT
    00319 (IAC) and in Y and Z (Sri Lanka) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362 about the shortage  of  psychiatric
    and mental health provision in Sri Lanka with  nothing  to  suggest  in
    significant improvement in facilities since then.

11. On behalf of the Respondent, Ms Bassi submitted on the first ground  of
    appeal that the First-tier Tribunal were factually correct in that  the
    psychiatrist had not been provided with a copy of the previous Tribunal
    decision and even if this was relied on in  part  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter, the report itself fails  to  engage  at  all  with  the
    previous adverse credibility findings.  There is  no  consideration  in
    the report as to whether there was any alternative explanation for  the
    symptoms or whether they were being feigned or exaggerated.  It is also
    of relevance that  Appellant  had  not  relied  on  any  mental  health
    difficulties at all  in  submissions  to  the  Respondent  until  2013,
    despite stating that these first arose in 2009.

12. Further in relation to the medical evidence, it was open to the  First-
    tier Tribunal to find that the GP was  not  a  specialist  and  in  any
    event, the letter from the GP was significantly lacking in detail as to
    the Appellant's mental health and treatment.

13. On the second ground of appeal, Ms Bassi submitted that the failure  to
    expressly refer to the second TGTE letter and other  evidence  was  not
    material as this evidence was not material  to  the  rejection  of  the
    Appellant's claim to be  at  risk  on  return  due  to  his  sur  place
    activity.  It is of note that no one attended the hearing on behalf  of
    the TGTE to give evidence for the  Appellant  in  his  appeal  and  the
    evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal was inconsistent in  a
    number of respects.  In any event, the Appellant had  only  joined  the
    TGTE in March 2018 and overall, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to
    find that the Appellant was only a low-level member, taking all of  the
    evidence into account.  It was  submitted  that  at  its  highest,  the
    Appellant had not shown that he had a  significant  role  nor  that  he
    posed any significant destabilising risk to the unity of Sri  Lanka  in
    accordance with the risk factors in GJ.

14. On the third ground of appeal, Ms Bassi noted that the psychiatrist did
    not say that the Appellant's mother was  not  a  sufficient  protective
    factor.  Further, there was evidence in the reasons for refusal  letter
    about the availability of mental health treatment in  Sri  Lanka  which
    post-dates GJ and provided more up to date evidence upon which  it  was
    open to the First-tier Tribunal to conclude  that  treatment  would  be
    available on return.

Findings and reasons

 1. I consider the first and third grounds of appeal  together  given  that
    they both concern the First-tier Tribunal's assessment of  the  medical
    evidence in relation to the Appellant and consequent  risk  on  return,
    including for purely medical reasons.   The  Appellant  relied  on  the
    medical evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in two different  ways,
    first, in support of his credibility and when considering  the  earlier
    adverse findings of the Tribunal  in  accordance  with  Devaseelan  and
    secondly, as a free standing claim under Articles 2, 3  and  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

 2. On the  first  point,  the  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal specifically refers to the previous Tribunal  not  having  had
    the  benefit  of  the  psychiatric  evidence  now  available  this  "is
    corroborative of  A's  detention  and  torture"  and  relevant  to  the
    assessment of the Appellant's evidence.  The Appellant  relied  on  the
    consistent view of a number of  different  professionals  (including  a
    Consultant Psychiatrist, a Senior cognitive behavioural  therapist  and
    his GP) that his symptoms were consistent with  a  diagnosis  of  PTSD.
    Specific reliance was placed on Dr Okon-Rocha's view that the Appellant
    developed PTSD following the trauma suffered following  his  detentions
    by the Sri Lankan authorities; identifying a pre-trauma risk factor  as
    his father's death and post-trauma factors  including  the  Appellant's
    uncertain immigration status.

 3. The First-tier  Tribunal  correctly  sets  out  the  previous  Tribunal
    findings in accordance with Devaseelan and the earlier conclusion  that
    the Appellant had not been detained or tortured by the  authorities  in
    Sri Lanka in either 2006 or 2008 (paragraphs 53 to 58 of the  decision)
    and notes in paragraph 60 that the Appellant does  not  deal  with  the
    earlier findings at all, even to deny them.  The Appellant did  however
    continue to rely on his previous account,  as  acknowledged  and  dealt
    with in paragraph 60 with reference to the earlier findings.  The First-
    tier Tribunal states that in conclusion in  paragraph  61  that  "I  am
    satisfied, I have not been provided with any additional evidence  which
    undermines the original Immigration Judge's decision.  I do not  accept
    there is any valid or evidence  basis  for  me  to  depart  from  these
    findings.".

 4. The decision goes on then to expressly consider the Appellant's  mental
    health and whether this had any impact on the previous  findings  made,
    but the evidence on this point is treated with caution.   The  decision
    states as follows:

         "62. ... In so far as the Appellant seeks to link his mental health
         and depression to alleged persecution  back  in  Sri  Lanka,  I  am
         satisfied this again is  evidence  I  am  entitled  to  treat  with
         caution given the Appellant was ably represented at  the  time  and
         could easily have adduced  medical  evidence  before  the  original
         Immigration Judge.  I also note the Appellant made  no  mention  of
         any mental health issues in his  subsequent  submissions  in  2011,
         2012 and 2013.

         63.  I note Dr Okon-Rocha states the Appellant went to his  GP  and
         was prescribed medication in  2009.   He  said  his  mental  health
         became  significant  in  2009.   If  so,  I  have  been  given   no
         satisfactory explanation why his mental health was not mentioned in
         his further representations in 2011, 2012 and 2013.  I also note Dr
         Okon-Rocha was not given the previous Immigration Judge's  decision
         or  told  about  his  findings  as  regards  to   the   Appellant's
         credibility.  To this extent,  I  find  she  was  given  incomplete
         information relating to the  Appellant's  background  on  which  to
         write a report given he had already been found to  have  fabricated
         an arrest and detention by a Court of law.   I  am  satisfied  this
         affects the accuracy of the report  since  Dr  Okon-Rocha  was  not
         given the complete information relating  to  the  Appellant's  past
         beyond his refusal letter."

 5. The First-tier Tribunal was correct in paragraph 63 to identify that Dr
    Okon-Rocha was not given a copy of the previous Tribunal's decision  in
    relation to this Appellant (her report confirms that this was  not  one
    of the documents provided  with  the  instructions)  but  not  entirely
    correct in stating that neither was she  told  about  the  findings  in
    relation to the Appellant's credibility; given that these  were,  to  a
    large extent, reflected in the Respondent's reasons for refusal  letter
    which was provided with the instructions.  However, the more  important
    point is that whether or not she was provided with partial  information
    as to the previous decision within another document, that the issue  is
    not dealt with or considered in the report at all.  This  is  important
    because the report proceeds on the  basis  that  the  past  account  of
    detention and persecution in Sri Lanka is true and without any  further
    analysis of the same (particularly in light of contrary findings having
    been made earlier), that is then identified as the cause of PTSD.   The
    failure to address the previous adverse credibility findings is all the
    more important in the context where a separate past traumatic event  is
    identified (the Appellant's father's death and personal  experience  of
    seeing his body recovered from a well) but only as  a  pre-trauma  risk
    factor as opposed to any assessment made as to whether this,  or  post-
    trauma risk factors were actually the cause of reported symptoms.

 6. In all of these circumstances, it was open to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to proceed with caution in relation to  the  medical  evidence  and  to
    attach little weight to it within  the  Judge's  findings  on  risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka for asylum reasons (in relation  to  his  claim  of
    past persecution) because the accuracy of the report of  Dr  Okon-Rocha
    was undermined by  the  failure  to  consider  expressly  the  previous
    adverse credibility findings and other potential causes  for  the  PTSD
    symptoms reported.  In any event, in these circumstances, it  is  clear
    that the report from Dr Okon-Rocha could not be  corroborative  of  the
    Appellant's claim of past detention and persecution and as recorded  by
    the First-tier Tribunal, the Appellant did  not  address  the  previous
    findings nor was there any other evidence or information  to  undermine
    those.

 7. The decision returns  to  consideration  of  the  medical  evidence  in
    paragraph 69 as follows:

         "69. ... I note the extent to  which  the  Appellant  was  able  to
         obtain and arrange e-signatures from 89 people at various locations
         despite stating to Dr Okon-Rocha (at 4.3.3) he hardly went out  and
         preferred to stay  at  home  and  was  mostly  accompanied.   I  am
         satisfied Dr Okon-Rocha was again not told the complete picture and
         the Appellant's activities and his evidence  on  how  he  collected
         these signatures shows someone confident in conversing with  others
         and being able to talk to them for him to convince them to sign  an
         e-petition.   I  also  do  not  accept  the  Appellant  was  mostly
         accompanied if on his own evidence he was 'living on  his  own'  as
         his brother in law and sister were at work most days.  This did not
         stop him from going out or attending events at different places  in
         and around London."

 8.  Here  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision   identifies   a   further
    discrepancy in Dr Okon-Rocha's report as to the  Appellant's  reporting
    to her (repeated elsewhere in the evidence) that he hardly goes out and
    is socially isolated but at the same time basing his sur place claim on
    activities entirely contrary  to  that.   At  paragraph  4.3.2  of  the
    report, it is recorded that the Appellant told Dr  Okon-Rocha  that  he
    attended various diaspora protest rallies and was  actively  advocating
    human rights for Tamils.  However, at paragraph 4.3.3 of the report  it
    was recorded that:

         "... He feels tired and lacks the  motivation  to  do  things.   He
         experiences daily flashbacks.  He  prefers  to  stay  at  home  and
         hardly goes out on his own but mostly accompanied.  He is  socially
         isolated.  He gets anxious when he sees Policemen, Army  people  or
         any uniformed personnel on the street.  ..."

 9. Whilst the decision refers to Dr Okon-Rocha not  having  been  given  a
    complete picture by  the  Appellant,  the  key  point  is  the  obvious
    discrepancy between these two positions which is  not  expressly  dealt
    with by Dr Okon-Rocha, nor is any assessment made of the  contradictory
    reporting when assessing symptoms or cause.  The fact  that  there  was
    some report to Dr Okon-Rocha of  claimed  sur  place  activities  again
    fails to address the real issue that the report does not deal with  the
    discrepancy or consider at all the contradictory reports.  It was  open
    to the First-tier Tribunal  to  find  that  this  also  undermined  the
    accuracy of the report and  the  Appellant's  credibility  on  symptoms
    and/or sur place activities.

10. For these reasons, I find no error of law on the first ground of appeal
    as to the First-tier Tribunal's assessment  of  the  medical  evidence.
    The fact that there is a consistent view of the  symptoms  reported  of
    PTSD  does  not  mean  that  these  were  caused  by  detention  and/or
    persecution at the hands of the Sri Lankan  authorities,  nor  that  it
    provides any corroboration of that claim such that the findings of  the
    previous Tribunal should not stand in accordance with the principles in
    Devaseelan.

11. The  third  ground  of  appeal  concerning  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    assessment of the risk of suicide on return to Sri  Lanka  and  whether
    sustainable findings were made in accordance with  J  follows  on  from
    this ground.  In particular, because of the need to assess whether  the
    fear on return is objectively well founded or if not, subjectively well
    founded because of past persecution even if there is no current risk of
    persecution on return.

12. Further to the findings that the Appellant would not be at risk of ill-
    treatment or persecution on return to Sri Lanka such that  he  did  not
    fall within the Refugee Convention nor would there  be  any  breach  of
    Articles 2 or 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights, the  First-
    tier Tribunal went on to consider  the  Appellant's  mental  health  in
    paragraph 75 onwards of the decision.  The keys parts of  this  are  as
    follows:

         "75.  I  have  considered  the  medical  evidence  as  a   separate
         assessment in its own right as  well  given  the  suggestion  of  a
         suicide risk.  I have already made various references  to  Dr  Okon
         Rocha's report.  I place little weight on this given  she  was  not
         given the whole picture on the Appellant.  She  has  therefore  not
         been able to faithfully discharge her duty (through no fault of her
         own) to give an independent unbiased report because she  was  never
         told this Appellant had already been found to have lied by a  Court
         of law.  She was also told this Appellant  was  mostly  accompanied
         and stayed at home, whereas all the evidence shows otherwise.  I do
         not accept the Appellant's explanation he  was  advised  to  attend
         these events and demonstrations as this is not mentioned by Dr Okon
         Rocha in her report.

         76.   I  do  not  accept  Dr  Okon  Rocha's  conclusions  that  the
         Appellant's memories and  nightmares  arise  because  of  his  past
         experiences in Sri Lanka.  Had Dr Okon Rocha been told his  account
         had  been  rejected,  she  would  reasonably  have  the  very  real
         alternative  possibilities  that  the  Appellant's  nightmares  and
         traumas are because he does not want to go back to Sri Lanka.

         77.  I do not accept the Appellant is a high suicide risk if  faced
         with removal.  This is merely Dr  Okon-Rocha's  opinion  given  the
         Appellant has not been removed (for some time  now).   I  note  his
         mother  and  sister  are  protective  factors.   There  is  nothing
         stopping them from travelling with him  and  the  family  returning
         back with the Appellant to  minimise  any  concerns.   I  note  the
         Appellant is not receiving any therapy.  He has  good  insight  and
         awareness and good cognition skills for him to be  called  to  give
         evidence.  ...  I do  not  accept  the  suicide  risk  based  on  a
         perceived risk of ill-treatment in Sri Lanka,  which  was  entirely
         rejected.  Nor do I accept the act of removal itself is a breach of
         Article 3 ECHR.  The Appellant is responding to  treatment.   I  am
         satisfied  a  managed  removal  is  entirely  feasible.    I   find
         psychiatric treatment and medication is available for the Appellant
         in Sri Lanka, which he can access and organise with the  assistance
         of his mother, aunt and sister, who frequently travel there."

13. The decision goes on in paragraphs 78 to 80 to attach little weight  to
    the GP report given the lack of specialism  and  little  weight  to  Dr
    Cooray's report which is undermined by the fact it was not written  for
    the purposes of evidence in an appeal nor was it based  on  a  full  or
    consistent picture of the Appellant's claim and history.

14. In terms of the GP report, whilst the Appellant has been a patient with
    the same GP for ten years, the First-tier Tribunal was correct  to  say
    that they GP is not a mental health specialist and in any event, it  is
    a very short letter containing almost no detail as to  the  Appellant's
    mental health or history.  For the latter reason alone it  does  little
    to support the Appellant's claim.

15.  In  relation  to  protective  factors,  the  Appellant's  family   and
    specifically his mother are identified as a  protective  factor  by  Dr
    Okon-Rocha and also by Talk  Wandsworth,  who  identify  the  potential
    devastating effect on the Appellant's mother as  a  protective  factor.
    Whilst Dr Okon-Rocha's view was that she could  not  confidently  state
    that the Appellant's mother would be a sufficient protective factor, it
    is also notable that conversely, she did not say that she would not be.
     On the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and in  particular  the
    way in which the assessment was phrased, it was open to the  First-tier
    Tribunal to include in its assessment of suicide risk,  the  likelihood
    of a family as a protective factor  both  for  actual  removal  and  on
    return to Sri Lanka; amongst the other factors of no objective risk  on
    return or past persecution and the availability of treatment on return.

16. Although the First-tier Tribunal does not expressly refer in  order  to
    the principles in  J   in  the  final  section  of  the  decision,  the
    questions raised therein, as supplemented by the additional factor in Y
    and Z, are all  considered  in  substance  and  materially  taken  into
    account.   In particular, when read as a whole, the decision deals with
    the  severity  of  the  Appellant's  condition   and   treatment;   the
    availability of mental health treatment and  support  as  an  effective
    mechanism  to  reduce  the  risk  of  suicide;   family   support   and
    importantly, the causative link and the lack of any objective  fear  of
    persecution on return to Sri Lanka, nor was there any past  persecution
    upon which the subjective fear could reasonably be based either.  It is
    of note that in Dr Okon-Rocha's report at paragraph 15.3 she refers  to
    "if [A's] fears with regards to the possibility of his  arrest  in  Sri
    Lanka are real, and one should take into account his subjective beliefs
    and fears, his symptoms of PTSD are likely to worsen further ...".  The
    opinion is of course conditional on the very  assessment  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal as to the genuineness, objectively and subjectively
    of the Appellant's fears.  Overall, the First-tier Tribunal has reached
    a conclusion on  the  medical  evidence  and  in  accordance  with  the
    principles in J and in Y and Z which was open to it on the evidence.

17. The second part of the third ground of appeal is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to take into account evidence in GJ and Y and Z  as  to
    the shortage of psychiatric and mental health provision  in  Sri  Lanka
    and there was an absence of any more recent evidence to show  that  the
    situation had  improved.   This  point  was  expressly  dealt  with  in
    paragraph 81 of the decision as to the historic position in  Sri  Lanka
    with no meaningful evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    situation remained the same.  In addition,  the  Respondent's  decision
    letter set out more recent evidence, including from  the  'Response  to
    Country of Origin Information Request' with regards to  PTSD  dated  22
    February 2018 and the MedCOI repose dated 19 November 2017 which listed
    inpatient and outpatient treatment and medication available.  There was
    therefore sufficient evidence before the First-tier Tribunal upon which
    it was open to the Judge to conclude that there is treatment  available
    in Sri Lanka (and family to support the Appellant to access it) as well
    as effective mechanisms in place to reduce the risk of  suicide  and  a
    meaningful likelihood that the Appellant could benefit from psychiatric
    treatment in Sri Lanka.

18. For these reasons, there is no material  error  of  law  on  the  third
    ground of appeal either.

19.  The  second  ground  of  appeal  concerns  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    assessment of risk to the Appellant on the basis of his  membership  of
    and activities for the TGTE.  The findings in relation to this are  set
    out in paragraphs 66 to 70 of the decision, in which it is  noted  that
    no one from the TGTE  attended  to  give  evidence  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant and that there was little information as to his activities in
    the letter from them.  Little weight was attached  to  TGTE  membership
    card.  In paragraph 68, little weight was attached to the  evidence  of
    the Appellant's witness given it was inconsistent with the  Appellant's
    claim as to when he joined the TGTE and due  to  his  general  lack  of
    knowledge.

20. The First-tier Tribunal went on to find as follows:

         "69. I am satisfied the photographs of  participation  merely  show
         the Appellant attending events  organised  by  others.   I  do  not
         accept he is some activist as stated in the  TGTE  letter.   If  he
         was, I find he would have joined a lot earlier.  I  do  not  accept
         merely by wearing a high visibility jacket or a TGTE  T-shirt  that
         the Appellant is somehow one of the main organisers.  I find he  is
         a low-profile member.  He is not an organiser or a leader.  I  find
         his motive for engaging was to enhance his  claim  to  remain  here
         given he only joined in 2018 after exhausting all other avenues  of
         remaining here.  The photographs of him outside a temple  does  not
         show what message he is trying to get across.  A sports  day  event
         or memorial event are merely cultural events.  ...

         70.  I am satisfied there is no evidence the Sri Lankan authorities
         are interested in this Appellant.  I do not  accept  that  the  Sri
         Lankan authorities are aware of his involvement and are  interested
         in him.  I do not accept this Appellant is in any risk category and
         would  not  be  perceived  to  have  been  involved  in  any  Tamil
         separatism or destabilising activity.  I do not accept that  he  is
         on some watch list or wanted list.  I am comforted in this  by  the
         fact his mother has feely travelled in and out of the country,  the
         last time being in 2015.  I am satisfied her coming here does  show
         she has no concerns or fears from the authorities despite the claim
         that she was asked to sign on and questioned in 2013.  I note there
         is no arrest warrant produced and despite  the  newspaper  articles
         allegedly printed in Sri Lanka, the authorities have not questioned
         or warned or visited the Appellant's mother over his activities  in
         the UK.  I do not accept that this is because his mother is somehow
         old or suffers with medical problems.  I note her statement  (pages
         24-26) do not mention any ill-health issues and I have  no  medical
         evidence from her.  I am satisfied if she were fearing for her life
         or there was any concern, she would  also  have  sought  asylum  or
         remained behind with her son in the UK.  I place little  weight  on
         her evidence and find the newspaper articles  sent  by  her  to  be
         unreliable evidence obtained in Sri Lanka, which she has  obtained,
         out of the goodness of her heart, to assist her son in the UK given
         his predicament."

21. The First-tier Tribunal did not in its decision expressly refer to  the
    second letter from the TGTE as to the  Appellant's  claimed  sur  place
    activities and attached little weight to the  first  letter,  in  part,
    because it  lacked  detail  as  to  the  same.   However,  the  claimed
    activities were referred to in substance in the decision, including the
    protests, petition signatures,  sports  day  and  memorial  events  and
    findings were made on that evidence as to the nature and level  of  the
    Appellant's involvement.   Little  weight  was  also  attached  to  the
    evidence from  the  TGTE  because  no  person  from  that  organisation
    attended to give oral evidence, a point which applies  equally  to  the
    weight to be attached to  the  second  letter  even  if  it  cured  the
    deficiency in lack of detail in the first.  I do not  find  that  there
    was any material error in failing to expressly refer to the second TGTE
    letter or  that  its  express  consideration  could  have  led  to  any
    different  findings  as  to  the   Appellant's   involvement   in   the
    organisation.

22. The Appellant also appeals within the second ground that the First-tier
    Tribunal  failed  to  assess  the  significant  of  the  TGTE  being  a
    proscribed organisation and as such it was irrelevant as to whether his
    activities were low level and further failed to assess the situation in
    accordance with UB (Sri Lanka).  Whilst the decision does not expressly
    deal with the point that the TGTE is a proscribed organisation, it does
    expressly deal with both of the questions raised in paragraph 24 of  UB
    (Sri Lanka), first by finding that the Appellant  joined  the  TGTE  in
    2018 and secondly, with the findings in paragraph 70 specifically  that
    he would not be detected as a member by the Sri Lankan  authorities  on
    return with reasons given for that, with reference to the  evidence  of
    the Appellant's sur place activities and newspaper reports.   In  these
    circumstances, I do not find that the failure to consider expressly the
    fact that the TGTE is a proscribed organisation is a material error  of
    law because in any event, sufficient reasons are given as  to  why  the
    Appellant would not be identified as a member in  any  event.   If  not
    identified by the authorities as a member (at any level, regardless  of
    whether only a low level member as found), then he would not be at risk
    on return for this reason.

23. For these reasons I find no material error of law on the second  ground
    of appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]             Date     9th April 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email


