
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07001/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 August 2019                    |On 22 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 R P (India)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:    Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:   In person


Anonymity order
The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  I continue that order pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.
Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall identify  the  original
appellant, whether directly or indirectly. This order  applies  to,  amongst
others, all parties.
Any failure to comply with this order could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Judge  Walker  sitting  at  Taylor  House  who  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal under Article 8 ECHR  having  dismissed  the  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Article 2 and 3 elements of the claim.  The
    claimant  has  not  challenged  the  dismissal  of  her   international
    protection claims, either by way of Rule 24 Reply or cross-appeal.

 2. The claimant is an Indian citizen  from  Gujarat.   She  is  a  foreign
    criminal. Section 32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  requires  the
    Secretary of State to make a deportation order unless the claimant  can
    bring herself within one of the Exceptions in section 33 of that Act.

Background

 3. The claimant came to the United Kingdom on 11 July 2009 with a  genuine
    Tier 2 General visa valid until 1  January  2012.   Her  son,  born  in
    November 2002, and her then husband joined her on  28  May  2010.   The
    claimant's son is now 16 and on arrival in the United Kingdom he  would
    have been nearly 8 years old.  He has spent more than 7  years  in  the
    United Kingdom and is a qualifying child  under  section  117D  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

 4. In India, the child attended nursery and early years education in India
    up to year 3,  taught  in  both  English  and  Hindi.   The  claimant's
    evidence is that her child no longer speaks any Hindi, and that English
    was spoken at home between her and her (now estranged) husband, who was
    a Gujarati speaker.

 5. The claimant's husband has now left the United Kingdom and is living in
    South Africa, so the persons who would be removed if the claimant  were
    deported are herself and her son.  The  child  was  referred  to  CAMHS
    following domestic violence from his father and  also  because  it  was
    considered  possible  that  he  had  ADHD.   Following   his   father's
    departure, the child was found not to have ADHD and counselling was not
    pursued.  The child self-referred to the wellbeing service  in  October
    20018 and has had some counselling recently.

 6. The family were granted  leave  to  remain  until  1  June  2014.   The
    claimant, who was a barrister qualified in India and formerly worked as
    an immigration consultant there, re-qualified as a solicitor and worked
    in a firm of solicitors which was involved in  the  perpetration  of  a
    serious fraud for the purpose of obtaining Tier 2 visas.  The fraud was
    described by the trial judge as "breathtaking" and as having  driven  a
    "coach  and  horses"  through  the  immigration  laws.   The   claimant
    benefited personally from the fraud by obtaining  a  Tier  2  visa  for
    herself and her family and  paying  the  fraudsters  a  total  of  over
    �10,000 for this.

 7. On 12 March 2015 at Oxford Crown Court the claimant was sentenced to 14
    months' imprisonment, following her conviction.  The  sentencing  judge
    accepted that she did not exploit her  position  as  a  solicitor  when
    involved in this fraud and was in no different a position  to  that  of
    some 70  others  who  were  involved  as  beneficiaries  of  fraudulent
    certificates of sponsorship.  He did consider  that  she  had  a  clear
    knowledge  of  what  she  was  doing  based  on  her  familiarity  with
    immigration law which was an aggravating feature.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 8. The First-tier Judge made no finding of fact as to  whether  the  child
    speaks any language other than English, although the  claimant  asserts
    that he does not.  It seems unlikely that that could be correct,  given
    that he went to school in India until the age  of  7,  a  school  which
    taught in English and Hindi and that the claimant herself speaks Hindi.
      The First-tier Judge noted the claimant's evidence that  her  primary
    concern was the child's education and that he planned to take A  Levels
    in physics, chemistry and mathematics.

 9. The First-tier Judge did not accept that the claimant would be  without
    family support on  return,  nor  that  she  would  be  unable  to  find
    employment or support herself  and  the  child.   She  had  an  MBA  in
    Business Administration in India, was qualified as a  barrister  there,
    and worked as an immigration consultant before travelling to the United
    Kingdom.  In the United Kingdom she achieved a Master of  Laws  degree,
    specialising in commercial and e-commerce law from  the  University  of
    Hertfordshire.  Given that he considered she  would  be  able  to  find
    work, he considered that the claimant would also be able to access  any
    medical care she required.

10. The claimant had not  demonstrated  that  the  exception  to  automatic
    deportation in section 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007 was applicable  to
    her.

11. The First-tier Judge accepted, and the respondent did not dispute, that
    it would be unduly harsh to expect the child to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom without his mother.  At [78] the Judge  defined  the  remaining
    key question as "Whether or not it would be unduly harsh for the  child
    to relocate to India with his mother".

12. The First-tier Tribunal accepted at [83]  that  there  would  be  harsh
    consequences for the child if he  were  required  to  be  relocated  to
    India, but the Judge correctly asked himself whether the harshness  was
    undue  harshness.   In  KO  (Nigeria)  Lord  Carnwath  JSC  held   that
    inevitably in the case of a foreign criminal there is a  level  of  due
    harshness and that for undue  harshness  to  be  shown  there  must  be
    something significantly more.

13. The First-tier Tribunal found that there would be education  facilities
    available for the child in India and that although he has mental health
    problems causing him severe anxiety and  depression  symptoms,  he  was
    currently receiving only very  low-level  intervention  involving  some
    counselling.

14. The First-tier Judge allowed the appeal  with  reference  to  paragraph
    399A(2)(b) of the Immigration Rules, specifically on the basis that the
    claimant's son had not yet sat for his GCSE examinations  (the  hearing
    was on 11 April 2019) and that the disruption  caused  by  missing  his
    examinations was sufficient to tip the balance and make his removal  to
    India with his mother unduly harsh.  The Judge found that returning the
    child to India would have harsh consequences but not such as to  amount
    to undue harshness, save for the disruption  which  his  removal  would
    cause to his educational development:

             "84. However, there is a further aspect which, when taken into
             account and combined with the other factors already  set  out,
             does in my judgment make the consequences so  harsh  for  [the
             child] that they amount to undue harshness.   That  aspect  is
             the stage he has reached in his  education  in  this  country.
             This is confirmed by a letter from his school  dated  3  April
             2019 ... together with an indication that he has been  offered
             a provisional place to study  A  levels  from  September  2019
             onwards at Varndean College. ...  I  accept  the  [claimant's]
             oral evidence that his exams start in the second half  of  May
             [2019].


             85.  Ms Davies [for the Secretary of State] confirmed that the
             proper approach to take when considering the harshness of  any
             deportation is to assume that deportation will take  place  on
             the date that the decision is made.  If that is the case, [the
             child] would be relocated right in  the  middle  of  his  GCSE
             exams.  I consider that relocation  at  such  a  very  crucial
             moment in his educational life does, when  combined  with  the
             other factors which I have considered, cross the threshold  of
             undue harshness.  Removal at such  a  time  would  cause  very
             substantial  disruption  to  his  academic  progress.   It  is
             difficult to imagine a  more  damaging  moment  in  a  child's
             educational development for them to be removed than this.   He
             would not be able to complete his GCSE examinations and would,
             therefore, have to effectively re-do this crucial year's work.
              Not only that, but he would have to  do  so  in  a  kpel  new
             educational system to which he would also have to adjust.


             86.  Taking all the evidence together I am satisfied  that  it
             would be unduly harsh for [the child] to be required  to  live
             in India with his mother. ..."


                                                            [Emphasis added]


15. The First-tier Judge did not write his decision immediately.  Following
    the hearing on 10  April  2019,  the  First-tier  Judge  finalised  his
    decision on 14 May 2019, but unfortunately  it  was  not  sent  to  the
    parties by the First-tier Tribunal administration until 10  July  2019.
    It is very likely that by 10 July 2019, the GCSE examinations  were  no
    longer in the future and that the child had completed sitting them.

16. The appeal was allowed. The Secretary of State appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

17. The Secretary of State challenged the decision on  perversity  grounds.
    She argued that the high threshold of unduly harsh consequences was not
    met, on the evidence, and that the First-tier Tribunal having found the
    claimant to be well educated, able to work and support herself and  the
    child, and that  the  health  concerns  fell  below  the  unduly  harsh
    threshold, had  erred  in  fact  and  law  in  finding  that  the  GCSE
    examinations tipped the balance.  The Secretary of State contended that



             "There are no reasons given as to  why  the  [claimant's]  son
             could not continue his education in India, even  if  it  meant
             retaking exams, a country his mother  was  able  to  obtain  a
             Master's degree in, as such the First-tier Judge has failed to
             give clear reasons as to how this threshold  of  unduly  harsh
             consequences  has  been  met  and  is   bordering   on   being
             irrational."

18. First-tier Judge McCarthy granted permission.  He noted that there  was
    no  challenge  to  the  dismissal  of  the  refugee  and  international
    protection claims.  He granted permission because:

             "3.  It is arguable  that  Judge  Walker  erred  in  law  when
             finding that the [claimant's] deportation to India would  have
             an unduly harsh impact on her son, because of the interruption
             to his education in the United Kingdom. It is  arguable  Judge
             Walker misdirected himself by treating the [child's] impending
             GCSE examinations and academic ambition to go  to  sixth  form
             college and then university  as  meeting  the  test  of  undue
             harshness whilst binding decisions from the  Court  of  Appeal
             indicate that at most such issues will address  the  issue  of
             reasonableness.

             4.   I mention that in addition to the issues  identified  the
             Upper Tribunal may wish  to  consider  the  Judge's  delay  in
             reaching his decision and in its promulgation.   Although  the
             appeal was heard on  11  April  2019,  the  decision  was  not
             written until 14 May 2019 and was  not  sent  to  the  parties
             until 10 July 2019.  This timeline may  add  to  the  concerns
             raised by the [Secretary of State]  because  the  delays  mean
             that the potential interruption was to some degree  alleviated
             in  that  the  [claimant's]  son  would  have  sat  all   GCSE
             examinations and the pending deportation would not  impact  on
             that pressing academic issue."

Rule 24 reply

19. There was no Rule 24 Reply by the claimant.

20. That is the basis on which the Secretary of State's appeal came  before
    the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

21. The claimant represented herself at the Upper  Tribunal  hearing.   She
    maintained that the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  was  open  to  the
    Judge because the child had  mental  health  issues,  had  studied  and
    enjoyed the social environment in the United  Kingdom,  and  no  longer
    knew any language but English.  He had never returned  to  India  after
    they left in 2010 and she had no support there (the First-tier Tribunal
    had found to the contrary).  Her son had been successful  in  his  GCSE
    examinations and now had a place in Year 12 which he would like to take
    up.

22. The claimant sought to reintroduce a claim for international protection
    at the hearing, relying on the emergency situation in Kashmir, which is
    hundreds of miles from her home area of  Gujarat,  arguing  that  there
    could be war between India and Pakistan at any time. I am not seised of
    international protection issues in this appeal as the claimant did  not
    challenge the dismissal  of  her  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    claim.

23. For the Secretary of State, Mr Tufan relied on section 117C and  on  RA
    (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness)  Iraq  [2019]  UKUT  123
    (IAC) and KO (Nigeria) and others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] UKSC  53.  The  standard  for  'undue  harshness'  as
    opposed to the 'due harshness' which followed a criminal conviction was
    high and demanding, and was not met on the facts of  this  appeal.   Mr
    Tufan asked me to allow the Secretary of State's appeal and  substitute
    a decision dismissing the claimant's appeal on all grounds.

Analysis

24. Parliament has established the correct approach to Article  8  ECHR  in
    the case of a foreign criminal.  The First-tier Judge was  required  to
    consider section 117C of the  2002  Act.    Section  117C  provides  as
    follows:

         "117C    (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                interest.

                (2)    The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign
               criminal, the greater is the public interest in  deportation
               of the criminal.

                (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal  (C)  who  has  not
               been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or
               more, the public interest requires  C's  deportation  unless
               Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies. ...

                (4)    Exception 1 applies where-"

                    (a)    C  has  been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United
                    Kingdom for most of C's life,

                    (b)    C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the
                    United Kingdom, and

                    (c)    there would be very significant obstacles to  C's
                    integration into the country to which C is  proposed  to
                    be deported.

                (5)    Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and
                subsisting relationship with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a
                genuine  and  subsisting  parental   relationship   with   a
                qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation  on  the
                partner or child would be unduly harsh.

                (6)    In the case  of  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  been
               sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at  least  four
               years, the public interest requires deportation unless there
               are very compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those
               described in Exceptions 1 and 2".

25. On any view the claimant does not meet Exception 1, since  neither  she
    nor her child have been resident in the  United  Kingdom  for  most  of
    their lives.  As regards Exception 2  it  is  not  disputed  that  this
    claimant has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  her
    son, who is a qualifying child.  It is accepted  that  her  deportation
    would be unduly harsh for him, if the child were to  remain  behind  in
    the United Kingdom; in any event, he has no lawful status here.

26. The question then was whether it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to
    find that deportation of the child and the claimant to India  would  be
    unduly harsh for the child. I have regard to the guidance given by  the
    Upper Tribunal in RA (Iraq) on the approach to applying KO (Nigeria):

         "(1) In KO (Nigeria) & Others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2018] UKSC 53, the approval by the Supreme Court of the
         test of "unduly harsh"  in  section  117C(5)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, formulated by the  Upper  Tribunal
         in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
         [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), does not mean that the test includes the way
         in which the Upper Tribunal applied its formulation to the facts of
         the case before it.

         (2)  The way in which a court or tribunal should  approach  section
         117C remains as set out  in  the  judgment  of  Jackson  LJ  in  NA
         (Pakistan) & Another v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 662.

         (3)   Section  117C(6)  applies  to  both  categories  of   foreign
         criminals  described  by  Lord  Carnwath  in  paragraph  20  of  KO
         (Nigeria);  namely,  those  who  have   not   been   sentenced   to
         imprisonment of 4 years or more, and those  who  have.  Determining
         the seriousness of the  particular  offence  will  normally  be  by
         reference to the length of sentence imposed and what the sentencing
         judge had to say about seriousness and mitigation; but the ultimate
         decision is for the court  or  tribunal  deciding  the  deportation
         case.

         (4)  Rehabilitation will not ordinarily  bear  material  weight  in
         favour of a foreign criminal."

27. The First-tier Judge did not find any very compelling circumstances  in
    this case of the  type  contemplated  in  NA  (Pakistan).   Educational
    inconvenience or delay, as here, does not reach the demanding  standard
    of undue harshness required by KO  (Nigeria)  and  RA.   There  was  no
    evidence of the workings of the educational system in  Pakistan  (other
    than the claimant's assertions) or of any recognition of United Kingdom-
    acquired qualifications, for example.

28. For completeness, I have considered  the  issue  raised  by  First-tier
    Judge McCarthy that by the date of promulgation of this  decision,  the
    GCSE examinations were no longer in the future and that the child would
    have completed sitting them.   The GCSE examinations  would  inevitably
    carry less weight if considered at the date of  promulgation  (10  July
    2019) by which time only  the  results  were  awaited.   I  recall  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in E v  Secretary  of  State  for  Home
    Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49  (E  and  R)  that  it  is  the  date  of
    promulgation  on  which  any  factual  matrix  falls  to  be  assessed.
    However, since this issue was not relied upon by either  party  at  the
    Upper Tribunal hearing, it is not necessary for  me  to  rule  on  this
    point.

29. I am satisfied that in allowing the appeal for the reasons given in his
    decision, the First-tier Judge erred in law and  that  such  error  was
    material to the outcome of the appeal.  Even on the factual  matrix  as
    it stood at the date of hearing, at worst there would  have  been  some
    delay to the child's educational attainment.  That is not capable, even
    with the very low-level mental health  intervention,  of  reaching  the
    'unduly harsh' standard.

30. I therefore set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    substitute a decision dismissing the claimant's appeal.



Conclusions

31. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.   I set aside the previous decision.
    I remake the decision by dismissing the claimant's appeal.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:    21 August 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
