
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07489/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 February 2018                  |On 22 March 2018                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 MASTER S O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. L. Profumo, counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:    Mr. K. Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

    1.     The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born on  1.1.01.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on an unknown date  but  made  an  asylum
    claim on 6 August 2015 on the basis of a fear that he would be taken by
    the Taliban. This application was refused in a decision dated 26  April
    2016 and he appealed against that decision.

    2.     The appeal came before  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ghani  for
    hearing on 8 June 2017. In a decision and  reasons  promulgated  on  18
    July  2017,  the  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal.  An  application   for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made,  in  time,  on  30
    July 2017. The grounds in support of the application asserted that  the
    Judge had erred materially in law:

    (i)    in failing to consider country guidance cases, in particular: AA
    (unattended  children)  Afghanistan  CG   [2012]   UKUT   16   and   KA
    (Afghanistan) [2012] EWCA 1014 and his claim for asylum  based  on  his
    membership of a particular social group viz children;

    (ii)   in failing to give reasons for his findings in  particular  that
    the Appellant is an economic migrant;

    (iii)  in failing to give any consideration to the reception conditions
    in Afghanistan should the Appellant be returned as a child;

    (iv)   in failing to give little or any weight to the expert opinion of
    Tim  Foxley,  which  addressed  the  plausibility  of  the  Appellant's
    account; risk on return and  internal  relocation  and  in  failing  to
    consider the psychiatric evidence of Dr Law.

    3.     In a decision dated  10  October  2017,  Resident  Judge  Zucker
    granted permission to appeal on the basis that it was arguable that the
    Judge ought to have considered whether the Appellant  was  entitled  to
    international protection as  a  refugee  by  reason  of  his  youth  by
    reference to the country guidance cases. Judge Zucker also stated:

         "Though not specifically raised in the grounds, I am concerned that
         this judge maybe allowing irrelevant considerations to  affect  his
         credibility findings and in particular,  I  refer  to  the  judge's
         reference to migration statistics relating to  Afghan  youth.  Each
         case should be determined on its own merits. There is a    risk  in
         this case of a suggestion of prejudice."

    Hearing

    4.     At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Hibbs  very  fairly
    accepted that the findings at  [9]  were  arguably  flawed  due  to  an
    absence  of  sufficient  reasons  for  reaching  negative   credibility
    findings. He further accepted that the finding at [10]  in  respect  of
    the psychiatric evidence and the Appellant's  mental  health  was  also
    flawed.

    5.     I agree that Mr Hibbs was correct to make these  concessions.  I
    find that the decision is vitiated by errors of law in that  the  Judge
    failed to  engage  sufficiently  with  the  relevant  jurisprudence  in
    respect of Afghan minors  and  with  the  expert  country  and  medical
    evidence. In these circumstances it was not necessary to hear  from  Ms
    Profumo.

    Decision

    6.     In light of the express acceptance by the  Respondent  that  the
    decision of the First tier Tribunal contains material errors of law and
    bearing in mind the terms of the grant of permission to appeal  I  find
    the decision is vitiated by material error  of  law.  The  decision  of
    First tier Tribunal Judge Ghani is set aside and the appeal is remitted
    for a hearing de novo before the First tier Tribunal.




    Rebecca Chapman


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


    22 March 2018


