
[pic]









Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/07715/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 29 June 2017                          |   On 24 July 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                             MOHAMMED ASEEM SAFI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Fox)  dismissing   his   appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision of 11 July  2016  refusing  his  application  for
    asylum.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan  who,  on  his  own  account,
    made an unlawful entry into the UK in 2008.   He  attended  the  Asylum
    Screening Unit on 23 July 2008 and claimed asylum.  He said that he was
    aged 15 but an assessment by the local authority concluded that he  was
    an adult and his date of birth was assessed as  1  January  1990.   The
    appellant  was  released  on   temporary   admission   with   reporting
    restrictions but he failed to report and was subsequently listed as  an
    absconder.  His asylum claim was treated as  withdrawn  on  17  October
    2008.

3.   The respondent next became aware of the appellant on 17 May  2016  when
    he was found with two other people attempting to leave the UK concealed
    in a lorry.  He was arrested and detained pending his removal.   On  24
    May 2016, he claimed asylum.  The screening interview took place on  13
    June 2016 and the substantive interview on 27 June 2016.

4.   The basis of the appellant's claim was that he  would  be  at  risk  of
    mistreatment on  return  to  Afghanistan  as  his  father  had  been  a
    commander in charge of a government checkpoint in Afghanistan,  whereas
    a paternal uncle was a member of the  Taliban.   In  2006  the  Taliban
    attacked the family home and both his parents were killed.  His  mother
    was killed instantly by a rocket explosion and the appellant,  who  was
    in a room with his brother, sustained injuries.  His father was stabbed
    and shot by the Taliban attackers.

5.   For the reasons set out in the detailed reasons for refusal at Annex  A
    of the decision letter of 11 July 2016, whilst the respondent  accepted
    the appellant's identity and nationality, she did not accept that he or
    his family had had problems with the Taliban in Afghanistan or that  he
    would be of any adverse interest on return.  The appellant  had  relied
    in support of his application on a rule 35  torture  allegation  report
    received on 5 July 2016, noting that he had some scarring on his  body.
    However, it was the respondent's view that the injuries could have been
    caused in any number of ways and could be every day injuries  (para  59
    of Annex A).  The respondent also took  the  view  that  the  appellant
    would be able to look to the authorities in Afghanistan for  protection
    and had failed to demonstrate that they would be unable or unwilling to
    provide it on return.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

6.   Before his appeal was heard by the First-tier  Tribunal  the  appellant
    was referred to the Medical Foundation and a  medico-legal  report  was
    prepared dated 4 January 2017.  In this report 47 scars and lesions his
    body are recorded and 45  of  these  are  attributed  to  the  injuries
    sustained during the explosion in the courtyard of his family compound.
     It was  the  doctor's  view  that  individually  all  the  scars  were
    consistent with the attribution of multiple cuts caused by flying glass
    fragments or possible shrapnel after an explosion and, when the lesions
    were considered as a whole, the scarring was highly consistent with the
    attribution  given.   The  doctor  also  considered   the   appellant's
    psychological condition and found on examination that he was  suffering
    from PTSD and severe depression and had made two suicide attempts.  She
    found that the physical and psychological findings were consistent with
    the alleged report of trauma arising from the explosion.

7.   The judge heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  two  further
    witnesses, one who had lived in the  same  village,  and  the  other  a
    British citizen, who  has  met  and  formed  a  relationship  with  the
    appellant.

8.   The judge set out his findings at [68]-[131].   He  did  not  find  the
    appellant to be a credible or reliable witness.  He said at [114]  that
    the appellant had failed to demonstrate a subjective fear of  harm  for
    the reasons he had given and that when the evidence was  considered  in
    the round it was reasonable to conclude that the first witness and  the
    appellant's partner had sought to embellish  evidence  to  bolster  his
    claim [113].  The judge considered the medical evidence but found  that
    the conclusions within the expert  report  were  of  limited  probative
    value and this included the assessment of PTSD and depression  for  the
    reasons claimed by the appellant [94].  The judge's concerns about  the
    medical evidence are set out [78]-[95].  He found  that  the  appellant
    was not entitled to asylum or humanitarian protection and there were no
    compelling or exceptional circumstances enabling him to rely on article
    8 outside the Rules.

The Grounds of Appeal

9.   The grounds of appeal focus solely  on  the  judge's  approach  to  the
    medical evidence.  It is argued that the judge was wrong  to  criticise
    the expertise and impartiality of the doctor in circumstances where the
    Medical  Foundation  was  recognised  as  having  expertise   in   this
    particular field.  The judge had been wrong to criticise the doctor for
    failing to assess points of credibility and in particular [78] and [81]
    inferred that the judge expected the doctor to take a position on  both
    the historic  age  dispute  and  the  appellant's  propensity  to  give
    misleading information but these were not matters on  which  a  medical
    expert was required to comment or resolve.  It is further  argued  that
    the judge erred by finding that the doctor had  relied  exclusively  on
    the appellant's own account [92]  and  that  this  was  not  a  legally
    permissible approach to expert opinion: R (on the application of AM)  v
    Secretary of State [2012] EWCA Civ 521.  It is further argued that  the
    judge failed to have regard to the medical evidence on the  fluctuating
    nature of  PTSD  and  had  erred  by  criticising  the  judge  for  not
    considering adverse credibility issues when it was plain that  she  did
    have regard to such matters.

10.  Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that the issues raised in the grounds revealed an arguable  error
    in the judge's overall credibility assessment.

11.  Ms Fitzsimons adopted the grounds.  She submitted that  the  judge  had
    wrongly criticised the medical evidence by commenting that  the  expert
    appeared to resist any possibility that the appellant may be dishonest,
    failed to engage with any meaningful assessment of  his  propensity  to
    provide false information or take into account the falsehood about  his
    age.  She argued that these were matters for the judge to assess.   She
    submitted that he had failed  to  take  into  account,  when  assessing
    credibility, the fact that the  appellant's  injuries  were  consistent
    with the evidence he had given about the explosion when his mother  was
    killed and his father attacked.  The judge  had  also  failed,  so  she
    argued, to take account of the appellant's  PTSD  and  depression  when
    assessing what weight to attach to matters such as discrepancies in the
    evidence when assessing credibility.

12.  Mr Kotas submitted that it was for the judge to assess what  weight  to
    give to the medical evidence.  When assessing  that  evidence,  he  was
    entitled to take into account the fact that the doctor  had  worked  on
    the basis of accepting the appellant's account and  not  engaging  with
    points which would be relevant when assessing PTSD and depression.  The
    points made by the judge in his assessment of the weight to be attached
    to the medical evidence were properly open to him.  He  had  identified
    real problems with the appellant's evidence  and  it  was  for  him  to
    assess the impact of the medical evidence  on  the  assessment  of  the
    appellant's credibility.

Assessment of Whether the Judge Erred in Law

13.  I must consider whether the judge erred in law such that  the  decision
    should  be  set  aside.   The  decision  in  JL  (medical   records   -
    credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 was produced at the hearing and at
    [70] the judge said that  he  had  considered  this  authority  in  his
    credibility assessment.  For the purposes of  considering  the  judge's
    approach to the medical evidence, it would be helpful to  set  out  the
    italicised head note to JL (China) which is as follows:

         "(1)     Those writing medical reports for use in  immigration  and
             asylum appeals  should  ensure  where  possible  that,  before
             forming their opinions, they study any assessments  that  have
             already been  made  of  the  appellant's  credibility  by  the
             immigration authorities  and/or  a  Tribunal  Judge  (SS  (Sri
             Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ  155  [30];  BN  (psychiatric  evidence
             discrepancies) Albania [2010] UKUT 279 (IAC) at  [49],  [53]).
             When the materials to which they should  have  regard  include
             previous determinations by a judge, they should not conduct  a
             running commentary on the reasoning of the judge who has  made
             such  findings,  but  should  concentrate  on  describing  and
             evaluating the medical evidence (IY (Turkey) [2012]  EWCA  Civ
             1560 [37].


         (2)      They should also bear in mind that when an advocate wishes
             to rely on their medical report to support the credibility  of
             an appellant's account, they will be expected to identify what
             about it affords support to what the appellant  has  said  and
             which is not dependent upon what the appellant has said to the
             doctor  (HE  (DRC,  credibility   and   psychiatric   reports)
             Democratic Republic of Congo [2004] UKAIT 000321).  The more a
             diagnosis is dependent on assuming that the account  given  by
             the appellant was to be believed, the less likely it  is  that
             significant weight will  be  attached  to  it  (HH  (Ethiopia)
             [2007] EWCA Civ 306 [23]).


         (3)        The  authors  of  such  medical  reports  also   need to
             understand that what is expected of them  is  a  critical  and
             objective analysis of the injuries and/or symptoms  displayed.
             They need to be vigilant but ultimately whether an appellant's
             account of the underlying events is or  is  not  credible  and
             plausible is a question of legal appraisal and  a  matter  for
             the Tribunal Judge, not the expert doctors (IY [47]; see  also
             HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306 [17]-[18]).


         (4)      For their part, judges should be  aware  that,  whilst the
             overall assessment of credibility is for them, medical reports
             may well involve  assessments  of  the  compatibility  of  the
             appellant's  account  with  physical  marks  or  symptoms,  or
             medical condition: (SA (Somalia) [2006] EWCA  Civ  1302).   If
             the  position  were  otherwise,  the  central  tenets  of  the
             Istanbul protocol would be misconceived, whenever there was  a
             dispute about claimed causation of scars, and judges could not
             apply its guidance, contrary to what they are enjoined  to  do
             by SA (Somalia). Even where medical experts  rely  heavily  on
             the account given by the person concerned, that does not  mean
             their  reports  lack  or  lose  their  status  as  independent
             evidence, although it may reduce very considerably the  weight
             that can be attached to them".


14.  The grounds of appeal focus on the criticisms of the judge's  treatment
    of the medical evidence but do not expressly identify how  the  errors,
    if established,  affect  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.   By  necessary
    inference, and as addressed in the submissions, it is argued  that  the
    medical evidence provides support for the factual account given by  the
    appellant so far as the explosion and what has happened to  his  family
    is concerned and the diagnosis of PTSD and depression is also  relevant
    to the assessment of his evidence in so far as adverse inferences  were
    drawn about his credibility  from  discrepancies  and  on  whether  his
    conduct such as failing to pursue his original claim and only  claiming
    asylum after he was arrested when attempting to leave the UK, should be
    treated as damaging his credibility.

15.  The judge's criticisms of the medical evidence set out in his  decision
    at [78]-[91] can be summarised as follows:

    (a)  No explanation is offered for the appellant's ability to take pre-
         emptive action to defend himself against the sudden effects of  the
         explosion despite his claim to be asleep at the time, implying that
         the effects of the explosion were sufficiently slow  to  allow  the
         appellant time to cover his face and turn his body  away  from  the
         blast.


    (b)  There is no reference to any medical report prior to the  doctor's
         interview with the appellant but  the  doctor  concluded  that  the
         appellant's vitiligo began at the age of 11.


    (c)  The doctor also concluded that the headaches began in 2008 and  it
         was  reasonable  to  conclude  that  she  relied   exclusively   on
         information provided by the appellant to reach these conclusions.


    (d)  In evidence the appellant  claimed  the  expert  did  not  request
         historic medical records which he would have provided if asked, nor
         did the expert  request  further  evidence  from  the  partner  who
         provided a witness  statement  detailing  the  appellant's  suicide
         attempts.  It would be reasonable to expect the doctor to  want  to
         satisfy herself of the circumstances surrounding  these  activities
         to arrive at a reliable conclusion that  the  appellant's  suicidal
         ideation was more than fanciful.   The  judge  commented  that  the
         doctor said that the appellant had locked himself in  the  bathroom
         on the first occasion he attempted to take his  own  life,  whereas
         his partner had said that  she  had  discovered  the  appellant  by
         chance and therefore the door could not have been locked.


    (e)  His partner also said that the  appellant's  suicide  attempt  was
         motivated by his situation in the UK but there was no assessment of
         this evidence despite it being in the doctor's possession.


    (f)  The doctor relied upon her assessment of PTSD  and  depression  to
         explain the inconsistencies in the appellant's claims in  2008  and
         2016 but it was reasonable to conclude that the claims in 2008  and
         2016 had no credible nexus and the doctor appeared  to  resist  any
         possibility that the appellant may be dishonest.


    (g)  The doctor acknowledged that  the  appellant  provided  misleading
         information  to  the  respondent  but  failed  to  engage  in   any
         meaningful  way  with  the  appellant's  persistent  propensity  to
         provide  false  information  and  the  vulnerability  of   reliable
         conclusions flowing from such circumstances.


    (h)  On the issue of the appellant's claimed age, the  doctor  did  not
         appear to have taken into account the falsehood  arising  from  the
         appellant's claim to be a minor when he was assessed as an adult.


    (i)  Inconsistent evidence relating to the  appellant's  departure  was
         dismissed as an error by the interpreter and confusion with the age
         of the appellant's brother in the report.


    (j)  Alleged errors made by the interpreter at a substantive  interview
         were also relied on to explain discrepancies, the appellant  saying
         that he perceived the interview to be  hostile  despite  his  legal
         representative being present and having said that he was  satisfied
         with the interpreter.


    (k)  The doctor dismissed the evidence in the first screening interview
         where the appellant had said that he worked in Pakistan  in  favour
         of the appellant's subsequent explanation.


    (l)  The  doctor  appeared  to  accept  numerous  deficiencies  in  the
         appellant's evidence without appropriate challenge.


    (m)  The doctor concluded that the appellant's account of his scars was
         consistent with the examination and that unusually she was able  to
         date the injuries to the appellant's claimed timescale despite  her
         simultaneous statement that scars cannot be dated  beyond  six  and
         twelve months after they occur.


    (n)  The doctor relied on the appellant's evidence to conclude that  he
         suffered from PTSD  and  depression.   The  doctor  relied  on  the
         headaches which began in 2008 once the appellant arrived in the UK,
         not taking account of the numerous discrepancies in the credibility
         of his evidence.


    (o)  No explanation was offered for the headaches which did  not  occur
         until four years after the alleged trauma which was two years after
         the appellant had allegedly left Afghanistan.


    (p)  There was no meaningful explanation of the evidence relied upon to
         conclude that the appellant's psychological findings  were  typical
         to stress in a cultural or social context and the doctor failed  to
         provide sufficient reasons to explain why his symptoms were  unique
         to his social or cultural background.


16.    The judge then went on to say:

    "92. For the reasons stated above it is reasonable to conclude that the
         expert relied exclusively upon the appellant's own account and she
         has unreasonably disregarded  the  numerous  deficiencies  in  the
         available evidence.  While she refers to the existence of  earlier
         credibility findings she has failed to engage with  the  available
         evidence in any meaningful way.

    93.  It is reasonable to conclude that the expert report has failed  to
         apply  the  appropriate  level  of  impartiality.   She  dismisses
         evidence  that  disadvantages  the  appellant  without  meaningful
         consideration.  The natural reading of the expert report leads the
         reasonable observer to conclude that  the  expert  has  failed  to
         demonstrate sufficient impartiality to assist the Tribunal.

    94.  It therefore follows that the conclusions within the expert report
         are of limited probative value.  This includes the  assessment  of
         PTSD and depression for the reasons claimed by the appellant".

17.  I now turn to the complaints raised in the grounds of  appeal.   It  is
    argued firstly that there was no basis for a criticism of the expertise
    and partiality of  the  expert  and  that  the  Medical  Foundation  is
    recognised both by the respondent and by the Tribunal as an expert  and
    impartial body.  That is the proper starting point although each report
    must be assessed in the context of the appeal to which it  relates.   I
    have been concerned about whether the factors identified by  the  judge
    supported his comment that it  was  reasonable  to  conclude  that  the
    expert report failed to apply the appropriate level of impartiality but
    the issue is not what I may or may not have concluded  but  whether  it
    was open to the judge to make such a comment.  I am  satisfied  in  the
    light of the factors he identified that this comment was open  to  him.
    In any event, the factors identified by the judge on which he based his
    comment remain relevant to the assessment of the weight to be  attached
    to the medical report, regardless of  what  other  conclusions  may  be
    drawn from them.

18.  The grounds then argue that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  criticise  the
    doctor for not going beyond her realm as  a  clinician  by  failing  to
    assess points of credibility.  It is correct that it  is  not  for  the
    medical expert to assess credibility but to give an  opinion  based  on
    her expertise on the plausibility or likelihood of  the  cause  of  the
    physical injuries and the  presence  and  cause  of  any  psychological
    injuries.   However,  in  the   context   particularly   of   assessing
    psychological conditions, the doctor should take into account  relevant
    aspects of the appellant's behaviour and background and if there  is  a
    failure to do so, this is a matter  for  the  judge  to  consider  when
    assessing the weight to be given to the  medical  opinion.   I  do  not
    think that the judge was seeking to fault the  doctor  for  failing  to
    make findings on credibility but for failing to take issues relating to
    the  appellant's  credibility   into   account   when   assessing   the
    psychological evidence: see BN (Albania) at para 53 as referred  to  in
    JL (China) at [13] above.

19.  It is then argued that the judge erred by criticising  the  doctor  for
    exclusive reliance on the appellant's account.  The  doctor  has  based
    her opinion on the account given by the appellant and in  this  context
    it may be that the judge expressed himself too strongly in  criticising
    the doctor's failure to consider the discrepancies in the evidence  but
    this does not in itself detract from the  judge's  comments  about  the
    medical evidence or the  fact  that  it  was  for  him  to  assess  the
    credibility of the appellant's account.  The grounds refer  to  R  (AM)
    Angola where the issue before the Court of Appeal was whether the judge
    had been entitled to find that there was no independent expert evidence
    of torture. The Court accepted that a medical opinion could  amount  to
    evidence but made clear in [30] of its judgment that a  requirement  of
    evidence  was  not  the  same  as  the  requirement  of  proof  to  the
    appropriate standard which was a matter of weight  and  assessment.  It
    was for the judge to assess the evidence and to decide the weight to be
    given to element in the context of the evidence as a whole.

20.  It is then argued that the judge failed to have regard to  the  medical
    evidence on the fluctuating nature of PTSD but I am not satisfied  that
    this is so and even if, as the grounds assert, the judge misstated  the
    evidence on this discrete issue, it had  no  material  bearing  on  the
    outcome of the appeal.  It is  also  argued  that  the  judge  made  an
    unfounded  criticism  that  the  doctor  failed   to   consider   prior
    credibility points.  There doctor does refer to a number of such issues
    in her report but the fact remains that it is for the judge  to  decide
    what weight to give to the discrepancies.

21.  The medical evidence had to be looked in the light of the  evidence  as
    a whole and in this context, the judge, when assessing the  appellant's
    credibility, took into account the numerous  factors  relevant  to  the
    credibility assessment in the evidence other than the medical evidence.
     He found that it was reasonable to expect that, if the  appellant  had
    provided a truthful account of his circumstances when he claimed asylum
    in 2008, he would be able to recall this detail; he had claimed  asylum
    in 2008 and then absconded; the  claim  had  been  made  in  materially
    different terms  from  the  claim  made  in  2016;  after  the  claimed
    explosion in 2004 the appellant had remained in Afghanistan until  2006
    and,  on  his  own  account,  the  Afghan  authorities   had   provided
    protection; he had then been taken by his uncle to  Pakistan  where  he
    remained until 2008; there were numerous discrepancies in the evidence,
    at his first screening interview the appellant had  said  that  he  had
    left Afghanistan six or seven years before claimed asylum, which  would
    have been before the 2004  incident.   His  2016  claim  provided  more
    detail than advanced in  2008  and  the  appellant  failed  to  provide
    details in 2008  which  were  now  provided  with  his  present  claim.
    Documents had been produced which were inconsistent with his claim.

22.  The judge was also entitled to  comment  that  the  Afghan  authorities
    were unable to verify dates with any level of certainty yet  they  were
    willing, on the appellant's account, to issue him amended documents and
    that the absence of original documents did not assist.  There were also
    discrepancies in the evidence about  the  reason  for  the  appellant's
    father being admitted to hospital, whether for a  gunshot  wound  or  a
    gunshot wound and a knife wound.

23.  The witness who claimed to know the appellant in his home  village  was
    unable to provide any meaningful detail including the date or  year  of
    the event as claimed.  He had also claimed that  he  was  a  recognised
    refugee but that had not been verified with documents which would  have
    been available with relative ease, and he distanced  himself  from  his
    statement in cross-examination.  He had claimed  that  he  advised  the
    appellant to claim asylum whereas  the  appellant  refuted  this.   His
    partner also claimed that she was responsible for advising him to claim
    asylum but the appellant had said that he relied on his own  initiative
    to do so.

24.  The judge also considered, as he was required to do, s.8 of the  Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act  2004  referring  to
    the fact the appellant had entered the UK clandestinely  and  travelled
    via safe third  countries  en  route  to  the  UK,  claimed  asylum  on
    encounter and then absconded.  He referred to the evidence relating  to
    the appellant's claimed attempt to reinstate his asylum claim  in  2013
    and was entitled to note that none of  the  letters  produced  on  this
    issue had a letter heading, signature or proof of postage.

25.  In summary, whilst the judge may have expressed himself strongly  about
    the medical report, the grounds do not satisfy me that he erred in law.
     The conclusion in the  medical  report  on  the  appellant's  physical
    injuries was that they were  highly  consistent  with  the  appellant's
    account of the attack on the family compound but that  simply  provides
    evidence to support the assertion that  there  was  an  attack  and  an
    explosion in which he was injured.  It does not  without  more  provide
    support for his claim that it was a  targeted  attack  on  his  father,
    still less that he would now be at risk from the Taliban.   So  far  as
    the  diagnostic  conclusion  that  the  appellant  is  suffering   from
    depression and PTSD its relevance to the appellant's account of  events
    and to the assessment of his credibility must be assessed in the  light
    of the whole of the evidence and the judge was  entitled  to  take  the
    view that the medical evidence  provided  no  adequate  explanation  to
    offset the conclusions he drew from the other aspects of  the  evidence
    summarised at [21] - [24]. His approach to  the  medical  evidence  was
    consistent with the guidance in JL (China).

26.  The criticisms raised in the grounds do not satisfy me  that  he  erred
    in law in such a way that the  decision  should  be  set  aside.  I  am
    satisfied that his findings of fact were properly open to him  for  the
    reasons he gave.





Decision

27.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err  in  law  such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside and accordingly the decision stands.  No  anonymity
    order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed:  H J E Latter                                 Date: 20 July 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
