
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07938/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 May 2018                        |On 14 May 2018                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    R. K.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq, who entered the UK illegally,  and
    then claimed asylum on 22 July 2016. That protection claim was  refused
    on 4 August 2017.  His appeal against  that  refusal  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal at North Shields on 19 September 2017, when it  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope. The appeal  was  dismissed  on
    all grounds in a decision promulgated on 24 October 2017.

 2. The Appellant's application for permission to  appeal  was  granted  by
    First tier Tribunal Judge Scott Baker on 1 February 2018.  Two  grounds
    were advanced; (i) that the Judge had deprived the Appellant of a  fair
    hearing by finding that he was not from Kirkuk, when  this  was  not  a
    claim that was in dispute, and, (ii) that the Judge's approach  to  the
    humanitarian protection claim was fundamentally flawed, and  failed  to
    consider the issue of internal relocation. Thus the matter comes before
    me.

 3. No application had been made to introduce evidence under Rule 15(2A) of
    the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules. The Appellant had not attended when
    his appeal was called on for hearing,  but  Ms  Brakaj  invited  me  to
    proceed in any event since she  could  not  state  that  the  Appellant
    wished to attend, and her firm had made no request for  an  interpreter
    to be booked for the hearing.

 4. The Appellant has always claimed to be from the area of  Dubz,  Kirkuk.
    That claim, as Ms Brakaj accepted, was properly identified by the Judge
    as having never been the  subject  of  any  formal  concession  by  the
    Respondent [85]. Ms Brakaj also accepted that the only concession  made
    was that the Appellant is a national of Iraq. Moreover that his  former
    places of residence, or origins within Iraq, were therefore  issues  of
    fact upon which the Judge had to make findings, if he could.

 5. In this case the Judge concluded, having considered the evidence fully,
    that the Appellant had not told the truth  about  where  he  originated
    from within Iraq, any more than he had done when giving an  account  of
    his previous experiences within Iraq.  No  relevant  material  evidence
    upon that issue is identified as having been left out of account by the
    Judge, and no irrelevant material is identified as having wrongly  been
    brought into account, in reaching that conclusion. In short it was open
    to the Judge to reject the claim to have originated from Kirkuk, and he
    gave entirely adequate reasons for doing so. (No challenge  is  offered
    to the adequacy of the reasons given.) Although the Judge  felt  unable
    in the light of the evidence to make a conclusive finding on the  issue
    he found that it was more likely than not that the Appellant originated
    from the KRG. It is not unusual for the Tribunal to make  a  conclusive
    finding in such circumstances, and no error of  law  follows  from  the
    failure to do so.

 6. Having rejected the Appellant's claim to originate  from  Kirkuk,  and,
    his claim  to  have  no  family  in  Iraq,  the  Judge  quite  properly
    considered the asylum, Article 3, and humanitarian protection claims in
    that light. His conclusion was that  the  Appellant  had  attracted  no
    adverse attention from the Iraqi authorities, or indeed  any  group  of
    non-state agents. He concluded that the Appellant could in  any  event,
    as a Sunni Kurd, upon return by air from the  UK  to  Baghdad  (as  the
    point of return to Iraq), travel onward to the KRG and  live  there  in
    safety. In doing  so  he  referred  himself  to  the  country  guidance
    decision of AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA  Civ  944,  and  the  reports  placed
    before him in evidence [95]. The attack made in the grounds  upon  this
    finding was predicated upon the assertion that the Appellant  was  from
    Kirkuk and that he had no right to enter, or settle  within,  the  KRG.
    That assertion falls away for the reasons set out above.

 7. The current country guidance is that even a Kurd who does not originate
    from the KRG may enter the KRG lawfully for up to  10  days,  and  then
    extend his stay  to  settle  there,  having  found  employment.  If  he
    originated from the KRG, there would appear to be no  such  restriction
    upon the length of stay. This was not a case in  which  the  Respondent
    was asserting she would make a direct return from the UK to Erbil.  Nor
    was it a case in which the Appellant made out any credible  reason  why
    he could not be expected to take an internal flight from Baghdad to the
    KRG, where he could live in safety, if he felt unable or  unwilling  to
    live in Baghdad.

 8. Although this was not part of  the  grounds,  Ms  Brakaj  attacked  the
    Judge's conclusions on the ability  to  live  within  Iraq,  or  travel
    within Iraq, on the basis  the  Judge  had  failed  to  deal  with  the
    question of what documents the Appellant would be able to obtain either
    in advance of his return, or upon his return to Baghdad.  She  asserted
    that he would be undocumented upon return, and  unable  to  obtain  the
    issue of any documents. When I  pointed  out  that  the  Appellant  had
    admitted at interview that he had previously been issued with a genuine
    Iraqi passport,  she  initially  argued  that  it  must  have  been  an
    illegitimate passport, although she then had to concede that  this  had
    not been the Appellant's case [Q67]. Whilst the Appellant  had  claimed
    to have lost this passport there was no finding from the Judge  in  his
    favour that (uniquely) this element of his evidence was  true.  Perhaps
    more importantly however, Ms Brakaj accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
    never suggested that he had sought, and  been  refused,  a  replacement
    passport by the Iraqi Embassy. I am satisfied that there appears to  be
    no good reason on the Judge's findings why the Iraqi authorities  would
    refuse to issue him with a replacement, if of course he  were  to  give
    accurate biographical information, and genuinely co-operate  with  them
    in applying for a replacement.

 9. In the circumstances I can dispose briefly  of  Ms  Brakaj's  complaint
    (not contained within the grounds) that it was not open to the Judge to
    find that the Appellant would be able to take a flight from Baghdad  to
    the KRG. If he had co-operated with the Iraqi authorities the Appellant
    would have travelled  from  the  UK  to  Baghdad  using  a  replacement
    passport. As the holder  of  an  Iraqi  passport  the  current  country
    guidance does not suggest the Appellant would be  unable  to  obtain  a
    CSID (should he genuinely need one to have one issued to him) either in
    the UK before travelling, or, in Baghdad upon arrival there.  Nor  does
    that country guidance suggest that a replacement passport and/or a CSID
    would be insufficient to allow him to board  an  internal  flight  from
    Baghdad to the KRG.

10. Ms Brakaj then sought to argue that the Judge had erred in  failing  to
    consider whether relocation to any part of the KRG was reasonable given
    his individual circumstances. She was however unable  to  identify  any
    relevant individual circumstance that the Appellant  had  relied  upon,
    or, that the Judge had accepted  existed,  which  could  have  arguably
    rendered it unreasonable to expect the Appellant to  make  a  life  for
    himself there. Although she did point to the Appellant's claim that  he
    had no family in Iraq, she abandoned that when I reminded her that  the
    Judge had specifically rejected this assertion too [86].

11. In the circumstances, and notwithstanding the terms in which permission
    to appeal was granted, I therefore dismiss the  Appellant's  challenge,
    and confirm the decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

12. The anonymity direction previously made is continued.


Notice of decision

The decision promulgated on 24 October 2017 did not involve  the  making  of
an error of law sufficient to require the decision  to  be  set  aside.  The
decision of the First tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appeal  is  accordingly
confirmed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 8 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

