
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07832/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th January 2019                 |On 7th February 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                  Moris [K]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield of Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell of the Specialist Appeals Team


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a Ugandan born on 9 October 1969.  On 2  May  2010  he
    arrived as a business visitor and on each of 28 November  2013  and  15
    October 2014 he applied for discretionary leave to remain but failed to
    pay the requisite fee.  In January 2017 he sought subsidiary protection
    because on return to Uganda he feared persecution  on  account  of  his
    sexual orientation.  He had a partner in Uganda  by  whom  he  has  two
    children born in 2001 and 2004 who remain in Uganda.

The Respondent's Original Decision

 2. On 1 August 2017 the Respondent refused his application and proposed to
    remove him to Uganda.  The Respondent considered the Appellant had:

         "...  failed  to  give  a  sufficient  level  of  detail  in  (his)
         responses.  It is considered that a person having  gone  through  a
         life changing event will be able to give a  consistent  and  highly
         detailed account of their thoughts and feelings ... in summary your
         account of your sexuality is  considered  internally  inconsistent,
         fake and evasive, implausible and lacking in detail."

    On that basis the Respondent did not  accept  the  Appellant's  claimed
    sexual orientation: see  paragraphs  29  and  33  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal.

3.   On 16 August 2017 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal of which  there
    is no copy in the Tribunal file.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 4. By a decision promulgated on 30  July  2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Lucas  did  not  accept  the   Appellant's   claimed   sexual
    orientation and dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal.  The grounds were first that
    the Judge in rejecting the Appellant's claimed sexual  orientation  had
    placed inappropriate weight upon  the  fact  that  Appellant  had  been
    married and by that marriage had two children in Uganda.  The Appellant
    had disclosed details of his children when screened by  an  Immigration
    officer on 5 February 2017.  In placing inappropriate weight, the judge
    had not taken account of the Respondent's Asylum Policy Instructions or
    assessed the evidence how he presently  identified  himself  which  was
    relevant, following the judgment in NR (Jamaica)  v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA
    Civ.856.

 6. The second ground is that the Judge had erred in placing reduced weight
    on the evidence of two witnesses from the LGBT community  to  whom  the
    Appellant  was  personally  known.   His  reason  for  rejecting  their
    evidence was that they did not know the Appellant had been married  and
    had children in Uganda.

 7. The third ground  argued  the  Judge  had  erred  in  focusing  on  the
    Appellant's family in Uganda and the perceived delay disclosure  of  it
    and not giving adequate consideration to the rest of the  evidence  was
    insufficient to support his adverse credibility finding.

 8. On 20 August 2018 permission to appeal was refused by a  Judge  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

 9. The Appellant renewed the application to appeal on similar grounds  and
    on 19 November 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan granted permission  on
    all grounds.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

10.  The Appellant attended supported by  the  two  friends  who  had  given
    testimony before the First-tier Tribunal.  Other than  to  confirm  his
    new address, neither he nor his friends took  an  active  part  in  the
    proceedings.  Indeed, it was evident when I attempted  to  explain  the
    purpose of the hearing  and  the  procedure  to  be  adopted  that  the
    Appellant  had  limited  English  which  Ms  Benfield  confirmed.   The
    Respondent had not filed any response pursuant to Procedure Rule 24.

Submissions for the Appellant

11.  Ms Benfield submitted that at paragraph 49 of his  decision  the  Judge
    had found that the Appellant had  failed  to  disclose  his  family  in
    Uganda and the this was the primary reason to reject his claimed sexual
    orientation and to reject the evidence of his  two  friends.   However,
    the Appellant had identified his two children and their dates of  birth
    at screening and so it  could  not  be  argued  that  he  had  withheld
    information about his family in Uganda.  Rather, he had disclosed it at
    the earliest opportunity.

12.  The Judge had failed to take account of the Respondent's Asylum  Policy
    Instruction: Sexual orientation in asylum claims, 3 August 2016 in  the
    Appellant's  bundle  (AB)  at  pages  B27ff.   (the  API).   This   was
    incorrectly referred to at  the  hearing  as  the  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note on Uganda:  Sexual  Orientation  and  Gender  Identity
    January 2017 at AB p.1ff.  (the CPIN).  She had set  out  the  relevant
    extract at paragraph 13 of renewed grounds for appeal to be found  also
    at AB pp.38-39.

13.  Similarly, he had failed to take account of the requirement  to  assess
    the Appellant's present sexual identity as  posited  in  NR  (Jamaica).
    Giving all the evidence careful and holistic consideration,  the  Judge
    had insufficient  reasons  his  conclusions  both  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's claimed sexual orientation and also the credibility of  his
    two friends.  That the two friends did not know  about  his  family  in
    Uganda did not constitute sufficient reason alone,  and  there  was  no
    other reason given, to make adverse credibility  findings  against  the
    friends and also against the Appellant.  Ms Benfield who  had  appeared
    before the Judge added  that  the  existence  of  the  Appellant's  two
    children in Uganda had been mentioned in oral testimony by one  of  his
    friends.

14.   The  issue  before  the  Judge  was  the  Appellant's  present  sexual
    identity, not activity.  The Judge had not considered how this  present
    identity was reflected in the evidence of his two friends.  He had  not
    taken account of the social and cultural pressures in  Uganda  on  men,
    and particularly young men, who did  not  find  themselves  happy  with
    identifying as heterosexual.

15.  The Judge at paragraph 52 had noted that  the  Appellant  had  been  an
    effective witness but had not  explained  in  his  adverse  credibility
    findings why any impact this may have had did not weigh in his favour.

16.  The Judge had not given anxious scrutiny  to  what  the  Appellant  had
    said when screened, the evidence of his two friends and the Appellant's
    own evidence.  The decision was unsafe and should be set aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

17. Ms Cunha referred to  the  instructions  about  conducting  and  asylum
    interview in the API at AB p.37ff.   Evidence  of  existing  or  former
    opposite-sex relationships or parenthood may be considered relevant  to
    a credibility assessment and a claimant's self-identification cannot be
    accepted as an established fact on the basis solely of the declarations
    of the claimant.  The Judge at paragraph 47 had acknowledged that being
    previously married and a parent was not necessarily inconsistent with a
    present  non-heterosexual  identification.   He  had   identified   the
    Appellant's very considerable delay in making the present claim and the
    explanation that he did not know asylum could be claimed on  the  basis
    of sexual orientation: see paragraph 18.

18.  Additionally,  the  Appellant  had  claimed  to  have  formed   sexual
    relationship with a Ghanaian man in 2011 mentioned at paragraph  15  of
    his decision.  Further, the Appellant knew from one of his two  friends
    who had given evidence and whom he had met in 2014 that this friend had
    claimed and in 2016 been granted asylum on  the  basis  of  his  sexual
    orientation.

19. At paragraphs 44-46 the Judge had noted the Appellant had not mentioned
    his marriage or children at interview or in his witness  statement  and
    at  paragraph  53  that  he   had   not   provided   any   photographs,
    correspondence or other evidence of his  relationships  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  At paragraph 55, the Judge had noted that all the evidence of
    the Appellant's involvement with LGBT  groups  in  the  United  Kingdom
    dated from subsequent to his asylum application.

20. The Judge had reached sustainable conclusions on  the  evidence  before
    him.  The decision should stand.

Response for the Appellant

21. Ms Benfield re-iterated that the Appellant had  given  details  of  his
    children when screened and stated at the main interview he had not been
    pressed on his family in Uganda.  In that light there was no reason for
    the Appellant to address his Ugandan family in his statement.

22. The Judge had not taken into account either  at  paragraph  47  of  his
    decision or elsewhere the social  and  cultural  pressures  of  Ugandan
    society on  those  who  are  not  fully  heterosexual.   He  had  given
    inadequate reasons for not accepting the evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    two friends or taken express account of the Appellant's present  sexual
    identification.

23. The Appellant's delay in claiming asylum was not sufficient  reason  to
    reject his claim in the light of the evidence presented.  The  decision
    should be set aside.

Consideration and decision

24. The Judge's finding the Appellant had "quite deliberately left out this
    important detail" of his family in Uganda does not fairly reflect  that
    the  Appellant  mentioned  his  children  when  screened  and  that  no
    questions were put to him at the main interview  about  any  family  in
    Uganda.  Indeed, he was not even asked whether his parents  were  aware
    of his attraction to boys or if they were aware, what they had said  to
    him on the matter.  The interview record shows considerable sensibility
    and awareness of the  approved  approach  to  ascertaining  information
    about a person's sexual orientation and identification in the  CPIN  at
    AB pp.B37ff.  The Appellant comments on what he  considers  to  be  the
    inappropriateness of the gender of the interviewer in his statement  at
    ABp.10.  The Judge has made no  comment  about  these  aspects  of  the
    interview record.  He also made no reference in his  reasoning  to  the
    acknowledged social and cultural pressures in Uganda on those  who  are
    not seen as fully heterosexual although this issue was  raised  by  the
    Appellant in his evidence as noted at paragraphs 10-14 of  the  Judge's
    decision setting out the Appellant's evidence.  Similarly, there is  no
    reference to the CPIN.

25. I accept that the Appellant may need to have some explanation  for  the
    substantial delay in claiming asylum  on  the  grounds  of  his  sexual
    orientation but any delay alone  is  without  reference  to  background
    information on LGBT  issues  in  Uganda  insufficient  to  support  the
    Judge's conclusion.  He took cognizance of the API at paragraph 47  but
    made no reference to CPIN and on balance,  I  conclude  the  Judge  has
    materially erred in law and that the decision should be  set  aside  in
    its entirety with no findings of fact preserved.

26. Having regard to my view that no findings of fact from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision can be preserved, and to Practice Statement  7.2(b)
    I consider the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    hearing afresh.

Anonymity

27. There was no request for an anonymity direction and I see no reason  to
    make one.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law
    and is set aside.

    The appeal is to be heard afresh in the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  no
    findings of fact preserved.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 25. i. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
