
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07238/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th October 2018                          |On 5th November 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                   mr s a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, Counsel instructed by Abbey Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 1 January  1988.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the
    Respondent dated 30 June 2016 to refuse  him  asylum.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 5 March 2018 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Wylie
    dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  (the  Appellant's  appeal   having
    previously been considered and dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  in
    January 2017, the Appellant being successful on  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal).

 2. The background of this case is that the Appellant claimed to be  a  gay
    man, from a strict Muslim family, although he was not strict about  his
    religion.  He claimed to have been abused by his uncle at  the  age  of
    12.  He claimed to have become aware of his homosexuality as a teenager
    and claimed to have had homosexual relationships  in  Bangladesh.   The
    Appellant claimed one of  the  relationships  was  discovered  and  the
    Appellant was abused on the basis of this relationship.  The  Appellant
    claims to have been in a relationship in the UK and has a number of gay
    and lesbian friends.  The Respondent did not accept that the  Appellant
    was credible.  The Respondent did not accept the Appellant was  gay  or
    at risk in Bangladesh.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the Appellant's  appeal.   The  judge
    did not find the Appellant credible and did not accept that he was gay.
     The judge went on to consider the risk on  return  and  based  on  the
    Appellant's life in  the  UK  the  judge  did  not  consider  that  the
    Appellant would live as an openly gay man in Bangladesh.

 4.  The  Appellant  appeals  with  permission  from  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Although Mr Whitwell initially raised a preliminary issue, arguing that
    the appeal before the Upper Tribunal was out of time and  that  it  was
    not open to the Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  to  extend  time,  I  was
    grateful to Ms Jones who provided the Notice of Decision issued to  the
    Appellant, in respect of the refusal from the First-tier Tribunal, on 5
    April.  Having seen that Notice of Decision Mr Whitwell  conceded  that
    the application for permission to the Upper Tribunal  was  in  fact  in
    time.  Mr Whitwell therefore withdrew this submission.

Grounds of Permission to the Upper Tribunal

 5. Ground 1

    It was argued that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  attach
    appropriate weight to the evidence and in  failing  to  understand  the
    evidence. The Appellant's claim was based on him being a  member  of  a
    particular social group and that he would be at risk  from  his  family
    and the Muslim community and that the judge failed to  understand  this
    evidence.

    Ground 2

    It was argued the judge erred in failing to have regard to  a  material
    matter, in particular the application of the first stage of the test in
    HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.  It was argued that the  judge's  conclusion,
    that the Appellant was not gay, was inadequate.  The judge rejected the
    Appellant's evidence that he  had  suffered  abuse  and  was  assaulted
    before coming to the UK.  It was submitted that the judge was demanding
    a higher standard of proof and failed to consider the decision  in  the
    Supreme  Court  in  RT  (Zimbabwe)  [2012]  UKSC  38,   that   it   was
    discriminatory to expect  claimants  with  sexuality  based  claims  to
    surmount a higher hurdle of providing extrinsic evidence to corroborate
    their  claims.   In  addition  there  were  no  findings  made  in  the
    Appellant's claim to have been raped as a  child.   Similarly,  it  was
    submitted that the judge again made adverse credibility findings  based
    on speculation and assumption at [65] and [73]  and  his  approach  was
    contradictory at [72].  It  was  further  argued  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was dismissive of the evidence of LR, because he  had  been  a
    witness in 10 appeals and it was argued the approach was irrational.

    Ground 3

    It was submitted that the evidence of the psychologist  was  imperative
    to the Appellant's case and the judge was dismissive of this  evidence.



    Ground 4

    It was argued that the judge, at [78], found that the Appellant did not
    lead an openly gay lifestyle and that this was  inconsistent  with  her
    findings that there was evidence from Mr L and his father that  he  had
    been in a relationship and this arguably was an irrational decision.

    Ground 5

    It was submitted that the judge did not properly deal with Article 8.

Submissions

 6. Ms Jones noted that the judge's conclusions started at [45].  The judge
    noted, at [51], that there were  receipts  for  payments  made  in  gay
    venues but that these were in January and May 2016  shortly  after  the
    claim for asylum.  At [60] the judge took into consideration that there
    was evidence from the psychologist.  At [70] the judge found that there
    was limited evidence that the Appellant lived openly as a gay man.  The
    judge gave little weight to the evidence from Mr L R and  rejected  the
    expert evidence at [71].

 7. In respect of Ground 1 Ms Jones quite properly did not rely on this and
    conceded it was generic.  In relation to Ground  2  it  was  not  being
    suggested or argued that the judge applied the  incorrect  test  in  HJ
    (Iran).  It was the judge's approach  to  the  evidence  which  was  at
    issued.  At [69] the judge had rejected the Appellant's  evidence.   Ms
    Jones submitted that his findings at  [69]  were  inadequate  and  that
    there was a demand for corroboration  which  was  unreasonable  in  the
    circumstances  of  the  case;  these  were  two  individuals  that  the
    Appellant stated he had relationships with some time ago  and  had  not
    met for  over  a  decade  and  that  the  judge  had  reached  negative
    credibility  assessment,  in  part,  because  of  improperly  demanding
    corroboration.  In addition, Ms Jones submitted that the judge had made
    no findings that the Appellant was sexually  abused.   There  were  two
    elements of the Appellant's case.  The first was his rape  as  a  child
    and findings needed to be made on this.  The judge indicated that there
    should have been additional evidence from the two persons which he  had
    had a relationship with.  However they could not have given evidence in
    relation to his alleged rape.  Ms Jones conceded that paragraphs 11 and
    12 of Ground 2, which disputed the findings at  [65],  and  [73],  were
    essentially a disagreement with the judge's findings and  she  did  not
    rely on them as it was not material.   Equally  she  did  not  rely  on
    paragraph 13, which disputed the judge's approach at [72], as this also
    appeared to be a disagreement.

 8. In respect of paragraph 14 of the second ground Ms Jones submitted that
    the judge appears to conclude, without evidence, at [70] that  Mr  L  R
    gave evidence for monetary reward.  For the judge to state that in  the
    last two years Mr R had  been  a  witness  for  ten  persons  appealing
    against refusal on asylum on the basis of sexuality was immaterial  and
    no weight should have  been  placed  on  this.   The  judge  failed  to
    consider the evidence of an active gay man indulging in a wide  variety
    of gay/sexual relationships.

 9. In respect of Ground 3, although Ms Jones accepted the  judge  was  not
    obliged to follow the psychologist's view, she was obliged to  take  it
    seriously and give adequate reasons as to why it was rejected.  In  one
    sentence the judge found that she did not doubt the  sincerity  of  the
    witness but submitted it was not her role to challenge what was said by
    the  Appellant.   Essentially  the  judge  was  concluding   that   the
    psychologist had been fooled by the Appellant.  Given that  there  were
    eighteen to twenty hour  sessions  between  the  psychologist  and  the
    Appellant, this was an inadequate dismissal  of  the  expert  evidence.
    The judge had not in any way explained how a  finding  that  an  expert
    such as this would be completely fooled and Ms Jones submitted that the
    expert had, in her report, given consideration to this  issue  and  had
    indicated that she had found the Appellant genuine.

10. In Ground 4 Ms Jones adopted the Grounds, but conceded  that  Ground  4
    was only relevant if Grounds 2 and 3 succeeded; although she  submitted
    that it was well-made out, it was secondary.  Equally in  Ground  5  it
    was difficult to see how the Appellant could succeed under Article 8 if
    the negative credibility findings stood.

11. Mr Whitwell submitted that Ms Jones was mounting a disguised perversity
    challenge.  In dealing with Ground 2 as a whole what the judge said  in
    summary at [84] was that the Appellant had not discharged the burden of
    proof.  What the judge has done is come to the conclusions on the basis
    of the evidence which is different from requiring corroboration.

12. Mr Whitwell submitted that the fact that there was no  finding  on  the
    previous sexual assault was not material.  It was difficult to see  how
    a previous sexual assault at the age of  12  could  alter  the  judge's
    conclusion in relation to sexuality, whether it did or did  not  happen
    was independent of the Appellant's sexuality and the judge's conclusion
    on that.

13. The third limb of Ground 2 relates to the evidence from  Mr  L  R.   Mr
    Whitwell submitted that at [70] the judge adequately deals  with  this.
    In particular, the judge notes the  inconsistency  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence with Mr R's and that is the reason why the judge  gave  little
    weight to the evidence.  He submitted that the sentence where it refers
    to financial reward was not material and the  judge  draws  no  adverse
    inference from this.  Drawn together there is no error in Ground 2.

14. If the judge's findings that the  appellant  was  not  gay  stand,  the
    remainder of HJ (Iran) is  not  relevant.   The  way  the  Grounds  are
    written, Mr  Whitwell  again  submitted,  was  a  disguised  perversity
    challenge and the judge had reached findings properly open to him.

15. In respect of Ground 3 and the weight attributed to the expert  report,
    put succinctly the judge provides two clear reasons why limited  weight
    is attached to this evidence.  At paragraph 71 the judge states that he
    was aware of what the Appellant told the expert.  The judge says  there
    is a difference between judicial findings of fact  in  the  adversarial
    system and a separate therapeutic environment.  Secondly, at  paragraph
    t [63] the judge notes that there was no mention in the  psychologist's
    report of the appellant returning to Bangladesh for a  month  in  2012.
    The judge is noting that the expert had not been given a  full  account
    and that detracted from the  weight  that  could  be  attached  to  her
    report, given the contradictory nature of what was told to the  expert.



16. In respect of Grounds 4 and 5 Mr Whitwell agreed that  they  stood  and
    fell with Grounds 2 and 3, but submitted that attending gay  clubs  and
    having gay friends is  not  indicative  of  sexuality  in  itself.   In
    respect  of  Ground  5,  the  judge  made  a  finding  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) that there were no significant obstacles to reintegration
    to Bangladesh, and that finding has not been challenged.

17. In reply Ms  Jones  submitted  this  was  not  a  disguised  perversity
    challenge.  She submitted that the judge had to give some  reasons  why
    he did not accept the appellant's case.  Ms Jones submitted that it was
    highly relevant as to whether the Appellant had been subjected to abuse
    as a child.  Although the Presenting Officer made a valid point  as  to
    the difference between the  adversarial  process  and  the  therapeutic
    environment and that weight was a matter for the judge, the  judge  did
    not give adequate reasons for dismissing the report and to suggest that
    a psychologist would  be  credulous  was  not  the  case.   Lastly,  in
    relation to Mr L R the evidence was set out at [56].  He is  recognised
    as a gay refugee.  The findings of the judge were set out which are not
    as characterised by Mr Whitwell.  He undoubtedly did attach  weight  to
    the fact that it was noted that he had given previous evidence  in  ten
    cases.

Conclusions

18. I am not satisfied that any of  the  grounds  of  permission  have  any
    merit.  I accept Ms Jones' concession that ground  1  is  not  properly
    arguable.

19. In relation to ground 2, I am not satisfied that this was a case of the
    judge  requiring  corroboration.   The  judge  considered  all  of  the
    evidence in the round and was entitled to reach  the  decision  he  did
    that the Appellant had not discharged the burden on  him  and  had  not
    provided a reasonable explanation for the gaps in his  evidence.    The
    judge carefully considered the evidence  from  [45]  onwards  including
    correctly directing himself to the appropriate legal tests.

20. The judge considered that there were letters from friends who know  him
    as gay, together with photographs and  receipts  for  payments  in  gay
    venues.  The judge takes into consideration however that there were  no
    dates or other information in relation to the photographs and  that  eh
    receipts were dated shortly after the appellant's claim.  Although  the
    appellant provided letters from an ML and his  father  attesting  to  a
    relationship, the judge notes  that  neither  were  present  and  their
    evidence could be tested.  The judge considered that evidence and noted
    that there was no mention of  the  appellant  visiting  Bangladesh  and
    secretly visiting his mother in 2012 as  he  has  claimed.   The  judge
    considered it to be 'beyond belief' that the appellant would  not  have
    shared his fears and concerns about return to Bangladesh at that  time.
    The judge also considered,  at  [72]  that  given  that  the  appellant
    claimed to have been in a relationship with Mr L for three years and it
    was claimed they were still good friends, he would have expected  there
    to be texts or other social media to support  his  claim.   Those  were
    findings which were properly reasoned and open to the  judge  and  were
    not challenged before me.

21. Ms Jones took issue with the judge's rejection at [69] of his claim  to
    have had relationships in Bangladesh, in Mr Jones'  submission  because
    there was no evidence from these two  persons.   However,  that  is  to
    consider [69] in isolation.  At [69] the judge stated that she  doubted
    the appellant's credibility and noted that  he  had  not  accepted  his
    claim to have suffered 'abuse or assault' prior to coming  to  the  UK.
    The judge at [65] noted that the various letters from  the  appellant's
    friends made  'no  mention  of  him  having  been  subject  to  abusive
    behaviour and assault because of his sexuality whilst  in  Bangladesh'.
    Given that Ms Jones, quite properly accepted at paragraph 11 of  ground
    2 amounted to a disagreement with the judge's findings at  [65],  there
    was no challenge to the judge's findings, which were available to  him,
    that it was simply not credible that the appellant had  not  spoken  to
    his friends, most of whom were  of  similar  heritage,  of  the  actual
    experiences he claimed to suffer.

22. It was open to the judge therefore to go on to find, at [66] that:

         'I do not accept his evidence of having been subject to  abuse  and
         persecution in Bangladesh before coming to the  United  Kingdom  in
         2009.  I consider that he left Bangladesh as arranged and with  the
         assistance of his family to study in the  United  Kingdom  and  was
         able to visit his family in Bangladesh in 2012 without problem'.

    Again,  there  was  no  substantive  challenge  to  that  well-reasoned
    finding.

23. In the context, of doubts about the appellant's credibility, considered
    in the round, including as outlined above, it was open to the judge  to
    question the lack of any evidence in relation to  the  appellant's  two
    claimed relationships in Bangladesh.  Although Ms Jones pointed to  how
    long ago these relationships were, there was  no  error  in  the  judge
    drawing adverse inference from the lack  of  any  attempts  to  contact
    these individuals, for example through  social  media,  or  from  other
    persons he knew at college or university, where such evidence ought  to
    have been reasonably available to the appellant.  There is no error  in
    that finding or in the judge's conclusion that there  was  no  reliable
    evidence of his sexuality in Bangladesh.

24. Equally, I am not satisfied that there was any error in the lack of any
    specific finding as to whether or not the Appellant was  raped  by  his
    uncle in Bangladesh as a child.  There  were  no  positive  credibility
    findings made by the First-tier Tribunal going to the  the  appellant's
    account and the judge noted, at [69] that she doubted  the  appellant's
    credibility, and at [76] was not satisfied that he was 'a  genuine  and
    reliable witness.  Therefore it is evident that the appellant's claimed
    abuse in Bangladesh  was  not  accepted.   In  any  event  and  in  the
    alternative, I am not satisfied that any error was material as it  does
    not go to the core of the appellant's claim.

25. In respect of Mr L R, I agree with Mr Whitwell that the judge made  the
    findings she did due to the inconsistencies in the evidence  considered
    in the round.  Although the judge recorded that Mr L R denied  that  he
    had received any reward  for  giving  evidence  she  made  no  specific
    finding other than attaching little weight to the evidence.

26. Whilst the fact that Mr L R had been a witness for ten persons  in  the
    last two years was not a relevant factor when considered in  isolation,
    the judge  was  entitled  to  consider  this  in  the  context  of  the
    inconsistency between the witness's evidence and that of the Appellant,
    which the judge noted in his conclusion on this  witness  at  [70]  but
    which she had considered in detail at [54] to  [57]  in  terms  of  the
    extent of their relationship.  The appellant claimed that they were  in
    a relationship, whereas  Mr  R  stated  that  they  had  casual  sexual
    encounters.  The appellant had stated  that  he  thought  that  'living
    together and 'having an open relationship with someone' meant the  same
    thing.  Considering the decision in its entirety, there was no material
    error therefore in attaching little weight  to  the  evidence  of  this
    witness.

27. I am further satisfied that it was  properly  open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to find that  there  was  a  difference,  essentially,  in  an
    assessment made in a therapeutic environment, such as that made by  the
    expert, and the judge's assessment in the  adversarial  process,  which
    looks at all the  evidence  in  the  round.   The  judge  set  out  the
    psychologist's written and oral evidence including noting the length of
    the sessions between March and June 2016.  The  judge  noted  that  the
    Psychologist concluded that  'at  no  point  had  she  thought  he  was
    dissembling or was not genuine'.

28. The judge properly took into consideration, at [63] that there  was  no
    mention of the appellant's return to Bangladesh in 2012  to  visit  his
    mother.  The psychologist had instead noted that he 'has been unable to
    call [his mother] or visit despite reports of her being  unwell'.   The
    judge was entitled therefore, on the available evidence, to record that
    there was contradictory evidence given to  the  psychologist.   It  was
    open to the judge in this context, where the judge had identified  that
    the  appellant  had  clearly  given  a  conflicting  account   to   the
    psychologist, stating that he had been unable to visit her, whereas  it
    was a key part of his claim that he visited, but in secret,  in  August
    2012, to attach limited weight to the psychologist's evidence.

29. The judge also reached this conclusion considering all the evidence  in
    the round, including the conflicting and unreliable evidence  from  the
    appellant generally.  It is not the case therefore, as asserted in  the
    grounds, that the judge was 'entirely dismissive' of the psychologist's
    account; there were adequate reasons for rejecting it as  she  did.   I
    have reminded myself that adequacy means no more nor less than that. It
    is not a 'counsel of perfection'.  Still  less  should  it  provide  an
    opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment of the reasons to see
    if they are wanting, perhaps even  surprising,  on  their  merits.  The
    purpose of the duty to give reasons, is in part, to enable  the  losing
    party to know why he has lost (see MD (Turkey) v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    1958).

30. I am satisfied therefore that the grounds do not disclose any error  of
    law, such that the decision should be set aside.  As indicated  at  the
    hearing, ground four was only arguable  if  the  previous  grounds  had
    merit.   They  do  not.   Even  if  they  did,  the   grounds   are   a
    mischaracterisation of the judge's findings, in the alternative, on the
    HJ (Iran) test:  the  judge  finds  that  there  was  limited  evidence
    concerning his lifestyle in the UK, at [78],  and  that  he  would  not
    'live openly with another man in Bangladesh' given that he had not done
    so in the United Kingdom during the preceding  eight  years,  at  [79].
    There was no error in those alternative findings and  no  challenge  to
    the judge's further alternative findings, that he could  relocate  away
    from the family home, if required.

31. In respect of ground 5, again Ms Jones conceded that it  was  difficult
    to see how this could succeed  if  the  negative  credibility  findings
    stand.  In any event, I agree with Mr Whitwell's submission that  there
    was  no  challenge  to  the  judge's  findings  that  there    were  no
    significant  obstacles  identified  to  reintegration.   It   was   not
    identified what additional factors were not  considered  by  the  judge
    which could possibly have led to a grant  of  leave  under  Article  8.
    There was no error in the judge's conclusions.

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any  error  of
    law, such that it should be set aside, and shall stand.

Notice of Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.   The  appellant's
    appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date:  25 October 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date:  25 October 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
