
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07388/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 December 2019                  |On 31 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     OG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Panagiotopoulou, Counsel, instructed by
                    Montague Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, OG, is a citizen of Turkey, born on 29 December 1986. He
    appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Lucas
    promulgated on 19  September  2019  dismissing  his  appeal  against  a
    decision of the respondent dated 21 July 2019 to refuse his asylum  and
    humanitarian protection claim.



Factual background

 2. The appellant is of Kurdish descent.  He arrived in this country  on  2
    November 2017 on a visitors' visa.  He claimed  asylum  on  12  October
    2018.   The appellant's claim for asylum was set against the background
    of decades of harassment and oppression  suffered  by  his  family  and
    other Kurds at the hands of the Turkish  state.  He  claims  he  was  a
    member of the HDP (the People's Democratic  Party)  and  the  BDP  (the
    Peace and Democracy Party). His case is that he had attended  a  number
    of public demonstrations in  support  of  each  party,  many  of  which
    featured clashes with the police. This led to  him  being  arrested  on
    four separate occasions.  The arrests were on account of his  suspected
    support and involvement with the HDP and BDP, and also on suspicion  of
    supporting the PKK (Kurdistan Worker's Party).  He claims that  he  was
    mistreated and tortured when he was detained. His claim for asylum was,
    he says,  prompted  by  the  authorities'  continued  interest  in  him
    following his departure for this country. Following the failed coup  in
    Turkey, the authorities were  more  interested  in  people  with  known
    dissenting opinions such as  him.  He  claims  the  police  raided  his
    parents' home on 20 May 2018. That prompted him to claim asylum.

 3. The appellant's appeal was dismissed by the judge on credibility terms,
    to which I shall return shortly.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Resident Judge J F  W  Phillips  in
    these terms:

         "The grounds assert that the  judge  failed  to  give  reasons  for
         material findings, erred in his assessment  of  the  evidence,  had
         regard to irrelevant considerations and failed to  have  regard  to
         relevant considerations.

         The grounds have arguable  merit.  In  particular  the  finding  at
         paragraph 64 that the appellant was not a member of the HDP and  in
         the following paragraph that he had no political involvement appear
         only to be reasoned on the statement at paragraph 54, 'the point is
         that the appellant did not claim asylum on  arrival.'  Equally  the
         findings at paragraphs 61 and 62 appear to have little reasoning."

Discussion

 5. At the outset, it is necessary to recall that it is  only  possible  to
    appeal to this tribunal on the basis of an error of law, rather than  a
    disagreement of fact. Challenges based on a judge's  claimed  erroneous
    assessment of the evidence are limited to the contention that the judge
    reached irrational findings, or findings that were not properly open to
    the judge on the evidence before the tribunal below. It is  also  trite
    law that it is not necessary for a  fact-finding  judge  to  recite  or
    rehearse every piece of evidence in the case, or to produce  an  overly
    long  decision  which  descends  into  unnecessary  levels  of  detail.
    Similarly, it is important for judges of the Upper Tribunal  to  resist
    the temptation to substitute their own analysis for that of  the  judge
    below,  provided  the  judge  below  reached  a  sufficiently  reasoned
    decision, which was open to the judge on the evidence.

 6. Mr Bramble accepted that there was superficial force in the appellant's
    submission that  the  judge  had  not  given  sufficient  reasons,  but
    submitted that, when read as a whole, it was a judgment which was  open
    to the judge on the evidence before  him.  Mr  Bramble  submitted  that
    brevity is an admirable quality in  judgments,  and  that  the  judge's
    findings at [51] onwards should be read as bullet  points  providing  a
    sufficiency of reasons.

 7. I consider that the judge did fall into errors of law when reaching his
    findings of fact.

 8. First, the judge appeared to accept that the appellant had  provided  a
    reasonably detailed account which was consistent  with  the  background
    materials concerning Turkey, Kurdish people, and those perceived by the
    state to be its opponents. The judge said, at [53]:

         "The Tribunal has carefully considered the  account  given  by  the
         Appellant. The detail is  both  generic  and  consistent  with  the
         objective evidence in relation to the treatment of those  suspected
         of involvement with the HDP or [of] those suspected of  association
         with the PKK. This, [sic] is especially so since the failed coup in
         2016."

 9. Bearing in mind that the standard of  proof  applicable  in  protection
    proceedings is the lower standard  of  reasonable  likelihood  (as  the
    judge had correctly  directed  himself  at  an  earlier  point  in  the
    decision), it  appears  that  the  operative  reasoning  of  the  judge
    expected a standard of proof which exceeded that which  was  applicable
    in the proceedings. The judge appeared to accept that the appellant had
    given  an  account  of  persecution  which  was  consistent  with   the
    background materials in relation to those suspected of involvement with
    the HDP or the PKK. The judge correctly noted that the failed  coup  in
    2016 had resulted in a heightened atmosphere of scrutiny and  potential
    persecution of those deemed to be opponents of the  state.  It  is  not
    clear what the judge meant by "generic" because, as Ms  Panagiotopoulou
    highlights, there was nothing "generic" about the highly  detailed  and
    specific account provided by the appellant of each of his four  claimed
    detention experiences in the course of his witness  statement  provided
    to the respondent, his statement prepared for  the  proceedings  before
    the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  under  lengthy  cross-examination  (see
    [34]).

10. The judge found against the appellant for reasons which were not clear.
    At [54], the judge said, "the point is that the appellant did not claim
    asylum upon arrival into the UK. He  waited  until  October  2018."  At
    [62],  the  judge  said  that,  "the  tribunal  does  not  accept   his
    explanation as to why he decided to claim asylum in October  2018."  It
    is not apparent from the terms of the  decision  what  the  appellant's
    explanation was, as the judge did not explain what  the  appellant  had
    claimed or analyse it in terms to which  the  reader  of  the  decision
    could be privy. Nor can the reader be expected to know what the judge's
    reasons were for rejecting it were. In a  single  line  paragraph,  the
    judge simply stated that the tribunal "does not accept" the appellant's
    explanation.  He did not give any reasons.

11. The reason given by the appellant for the "delay"  in  claiming  asylum
    was set out in his witness statement dated 4 February 2019 (see  [15]).
    He said that there had been a police  raid  on  his  parents'  home  in
    Turkey on 20 May  2018.  In  answer  to  question  101  in  his  asylum
    interview, the appellant gave the same explanation.

12. In his February 2019 statement, the appellant described how his parents
    told the police that the appellant was out of the country, and that the
    police arrested his brother instead. By  this  stage  in  the  UK,  the
    appellant had submitted an application  to  the  respondent  under  the
    European Communities-Turkey  Association  Agreement,  which  was  being
    processed. Although the judge noted at [59] that he had  not  seen  any
    evidence of the detail of that application, that was not in the context
    of the appellant's explanation for the delay in considering asylum,  it
    was in relation to finding the judge made that, "the point is  that  he
    has a clear intention both to enter the UK and stay here."

13. It is trite law that a judge must give sufficient reasons for  findings
    in a decision: MK (duty to give reasons)  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  00641
    (IAC), headnote (1). Again, I emphasise that detailed reasons  are  not
    necessarily required. But some reasons are  essential.  The  difficulty
    here is that the judge gave no reasons for  rejecting  the  explanation
    for the delay. That was a significant  omission,  given  the  operative
    reason the judge provided at [54] for his rejection of the  credibility
    of the appellant's asylum claim was the delay in the  appellant  making
    his claim. This was a pivotal point in the  judge's  reasoning.   Given
    the judge had already made positive preliminary findings concerning the
    overall consistency of the appellant's account (presumably the  judge's
    reference to "the detail" at [53] was to the  highly  detailed  account
    provided by the appellant as set out in his witness statements) and its
    consistency with the background position, when the judge said that  the
    appellant's delay was "the point", it was incumbent upon the  judge  to
    consider - in more than cursory terms - the explanation provided by the
    appellant. The judge simply provided no reasoning for the key reason he
    cited in finding against the appellant. In doing  so,  the  judge  fell
    into error by failing to provide "sufficient" reasons.

14. By failing to engage the reasons provided by the appellant,  the  judge
    approached the issue of delay on a basis not properly open to him.  The
    appellant's case was not that he had reasons to claim asylum  upon  his
    arrival, but he chose to wait.  Rather it was that he was only prompted
    to claim asylum when he realised that there was an ongoing  issue  with
    the police continuing to take an interest  in  him  in  Turkey.   As  a
    result of the summary dismissal of the appellant's explanation for  the
    delay, the judge did not analyse the facts of the case through the lens
    of appellant's evidence.  That was  a  failure  to  take  into  account
    material factors.

15. The judge said that it was a "surprising omission" that,  although  the
    appellant has had extensive involvement in Kurdish diaspora  groups  in
    this country, he did not provide any witnesses from that community: see
    [54].  At [63], the judge categorised the appellant's involvement  with
    "Kurdish activities and groups  within  UK"  as  "at  best...  somewhat
    peripheral or minimal, or at worst, as an opportunistic attempt to seek
    to show a commitment which otherwise did not exist."  It is  not  clear
    why the judge ascribed significance to the absence  of  witnesses  from
    the Kurdish community.  It was no part of the appellant's case that his
    detention was witnessed by persons  in  the  United  Kingdom,  or  that
    anyone here was present when he claimed the police raided his  home  on
    20 May 2018.  He had not claimed that such persons  could  support  his
    case.  He had not made a sur place claim.   The  judge  criticised  the
    appellant for not adducing witnesses to support a case that he was  not
    advancing.  The judge took into account an irrelevant consideration.

16. The judge said at [61] that, given the  appellant  was  of  no  general
    interest to the Turkish authorities  prior  to  his  departure,  "there
    could be no reason for further raids upon his house unless someone  had
    then implicated him." The judge did not think that would be  plausible:
    see [60]. It is not clear on what basis the judge purported to be  able
    to know the likely  investigative  priorities  or  tactical  techniques
    employed by the Turkish police. He had already noted at [52] that there
    was a "more oppressive climate" in Turkey since the failed coup. It did
    not refer to any background evidence as to the likely - or otherwise  -
    approach of the Turkish police.

17. The judge appeared to  approach  his  findings  on  plausibility  based
    entirely on his own subjective assumptions.  Judges should  be  careful
    when doing so, especially where - as here -  the  account  provided  is
    "consistent with the objective evidence in relation to the treatment of
    those suspected of involvement with the HDP or [of] those suspected  of
    association with the PKK..." (see [53])

18. In Y v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1223,
    Keene LJ held:

         "25.  There seems to me to  be  very  little  dispute  between  the
         parties as to the legal principles applicable to the approach which
         an adjudicator, now known as an  immigration  judge,  should  adopt
         towards issues of credibility.  The  fundamental  one  is  that  he
         should be cautious before  finding  an  account  to  be  inherently
         incredible, because there is a considerable risk that  he  will  be
         over influenced by his own views on what is or  is  not  plausible,
         and those views will have inevitably been  influenced  by  his  own
         background in this country and by the customs and ways of  our  own
         society. It is therefore important that he should seek to  view  an
         appellant's account of events, as Mr Singh rightly argues, in  the
         context of conditions in  the  country  from  which  the  appellant
         comes.  The  dangers  were  well  described  in   an   article   by
         Sir Thomas Bingham, as he then was, in 1985 in a passage quoted by
         the IAT in Kasolo v SSHD 13190, the passage being taken from an
         article in Current Legal Problems. Sir Thomas Bingham said this:

                  "'An English judge may have,  or  think  that  he  has,  a
                  shrewd  idea  of  how  a  Lloyds  Broker  or   a   Bristol
                  wholesaler, or a  Norfolk  farmer,  might  react  in  some
                  situation which is canvassed in the course of a  case  but
                  he may, and I think should, feel very much more uncertain
                  about the reactions of a Nigerian merchant, or  an  Indian
                  ships' engineer, or a Yugoslav banker. Or even, to take  a
                  more  homely  example,  a  Sikh  shopkeeper   trading   in
                  Bradford. No judge worth his salt could possibl[y]  assume
                  that men of different nationalities,  educations,  trades,
                  experience, creeds and temperaments would act as he  might
                  think he would have done or even  -  which  may  be  quite
                  different - in accordance  with  his  concept  of  what  a
                  reasonable man would have done."

         26.  None of this, however, means that an adjudicator  is  required
         to take  at  face  value  an  account  of  facts  proffered  by  an
         appellant, no matter how contrary to common sense and experience of
         human behaviour the account may  be.  The  decision  maker  is  not
         expected to suspend his own judgment, nor  does  Mr  Singh  contend
         that he should. In appropriate cases, he is entitled to  find  that
         an account of events is so far-fetched and contrary to reason as to
         be incapable of belief. The point was well put in the Awala case by
         Lord Brodie at paragraph 24 when he said this:

                  "... the tribunal of fact need not necessarily  accept  an
                  applicant's account simply because it is not  contradicted
                  at the relevant hearing. The tribunal of fact is  entitled
                  to make reasonable  findings  based  on  implausibilities,
                  common sense and rationality, and may reject  evidence  if
                  it is not consistent with the probabilities affecting  the
                  case as a whole".

         He then added a little later:

                  "... while a  decision  on  credibility  must  be  reached
                  rationally, in doing so the decision maker is entitled  to
                  draw on his common sense and his ability, as  a  practical
                  and informed  person,  to  identify  what  is  or  is  not
                  plausible".

         27.  I agree. A decision maker is entitled to regard an account  as
         incredible by such standards, but he must take care not  to  do  so
         merely because it would not seem reasonable if it had  happened  in
         this country. In essence,  he  must  look  through  the  spectacles
         provided by the information he has about conditions in the  country
         in question. That is, in effect, what Neuberger LJ was  saying  in
         the case of HK and I do not regard Chadwick LJ  in  the  passage
         referred to as seeking to disagree." (Emphasis added)

19. As the judge had  already  accepted  the  general  consistency  of  the
    appellant's account, it was not open to him to dismiss this  aspect  of
    it on plausibility grounds alone, especially given the inadequacies  in
    the remaining reasoning of the judge.

20. By the time the judge reached  [64],  he  categorised  the  appellant's
    asylum claim as "lacking in credibility". For those reasons, the  judge
    said, a letter provided by  the  appellant  purportedly  from  the  HDP
    purportedly confirming the appellant's  membership  since  2014  lacked
    weight, pursuant to Tanveer Ahmed  (Documents  unreliable  and  forged)
    Pakistan * [2002] UKIAT 00439. This led to a global finding of fact  at
    [65], that the "appellant" - by which, I think,  the  judge  meant  the
    tribunal - did not accept that the appellant was  politically  involved
    at all, prior to leaving Turkey in 2017. A translation  of  the  letter
    may be found at pages 19 and 20 of the  appellant's  bundle.  It  is  a
    brief letter, and simply states that the appellant has been a member of
    the HDP since 10 September 2014 and  has  "participated  in  our  party
    activities". The difficulty with the judge's approach to the HDP letter
    is that, rather than engaging with its contents (other  than  to  state
    that no one from the  HDP  attended  the  tribunal  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant) and taking it into account as part of his global  assessment
    of the appellant's credibility,  the  judge  found  that,  because  the
    appellant  was  not  credible,  it  followed  that  the  letter  lacked
    credibility also. In doing so, the judge failed to follow the  approach
    required by Tanveer Ahmed and reached findings  on  credibility  before
    considering the evidence in the round.

Conclusion

21. The judge's decision involved the making  of  an  error  of  law  on  a
    material matter.   The  entirety  of  his  credibility  assessment  was
    infected.  The remedy is for the decision to be set aside and  for  the
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
    different judge.


Notice of Decision

Judge Lucas's decision involved the making of an error of  law  and  is  set
aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings of  Judge
Lucas preserved.

The rehearing must take place before a different judge.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith                         Date 17 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
