
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07370/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|video conference 20 August 2020 (V)  |On 12 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     N T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
original  appellant  (NT)  is  granted  anonymity.  No   report   of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr C. Holmes, instructed by Shawstone Associates
For the respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   For the sake of continuity I will refer to the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The appellant (NT) appealed the respondent's  decision  dated  19  July
    2019 to refuse a protection and human rights claim. The respondent  was
    not satisfied that the appellant was an Eritrean national  as  claimed.
    The respondent relied on a  report  prepared  by  Sprakab  following  a
    language analysis interview held on 20 June 2019, which concluded  that
    the appellant spoke Amharic with a 'background in Addis  Ababa'.  There
    was a 'very high probability' that his linguistic background  was  from
    Ethiopia. The respondent was not satisfied that there was a  reasonable
    explanation for this when the appellant had, on his own evidence,  only
    lived in Ethiopia for a period of four years as a young child  and  had
    not lived in Ethiopia for 19 years at the date of the decision.

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert allowed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 28 February 2020. He summarised the evidence before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The  appellant's  evidence  included  his  witness
    statement, a letter from the Ethiopian Christian Fellowship  Church,  a
    receipt from  the  Ethiopian  embassy,  a  letter  from  the  'Eritrean
    community in Lambeth' and background evidence relating to Eritrea  [3].
    The judge noted that there was also  a  statement  from  an  additional
    witness, Mr H, who also attended to give evidence [4]. The respondent's
    evidence included the Sprakab report and background evidence. The judge
    recorded the following [5]:

         "... The report was challenged by the appellant's representative on
         the basis that  neither  annalyst  (sic)  is  a  native  Ethiopian,
         Amharic, or Tigrinya speaker. Although the analysts  were  born  in
         Eritrea and lived in Ethiopia from the age of 6 and returned  there
         during later years they appear to be based in Sweden which to  some
         extent undermines the capacity that they have to conduct that  type
         of language  analysis  and  keep  current  with  the  situation  of
         migrants such as the appellant."

4.   Having noted evidence to show that the appellant was suffering  from  a
    depressive  episode,  and  acknowledged  that  this  might  affect  his
    concentration and ability to  recollect  events,  the  judge  made  the
    following findings:

         "35.  I  find  that  the  appellants  (sic)  credibility  has  been
         maintained throughout in that I am satisfied to the lowest standard
         set out in Kaja (sic) and was born and spent some of his  formative
         years in Eritrea only leaving for  Ethiopia  when  his  mother  was
         dying of cancer. I  accept  that  he  was  deported  as  were  many
         thousands of people from Ethiopia back to Eritrea and that he  left
         subsequently for Djibouti and then  Sudan  arriving  eventually  in
         Belgium. I do not find that the  appellant's  account  of  speaking
         Amharic is undermined by the linguistic report as  the  appellant's
         lifestyle and migration history does not lend easily in itself to a
         determination that he is simply not Eritrean but must be Ethiopian.

         36. The suggestion by the linguist that his language is  consistent
         with a person that is from Addis Ababa discounts the fact that will
         apply to millions of people living in Ethiopia  many  of  whom  are
         still and  have  always  been  native  Eritreans.  This  background
         ignores that for many years Ethiopia has been one country  and  was
         not split into Ethiopia and  Eritrea  for  much  of  its  long  and
         impressive history. I am also concerned with the fact that  despite
         the background of both  linguists  they  are  clearly  Swedish  and
         therefore likely Swedish  was  their  first  language  and  neither
         Amharic nor Tigrinya.

         37. I am certain that these companies provide an excellent facility
         for the respondent but on the application  and  the  usefulness  of
         this I note that on the authority before me that their  opinion  is
         not determinative of nationality, particularly given the  migration
         pattern of this appellant. I find that  the  central  core  of  his
         account has always remained consistent namely that he moved between
         Eritrea and Ethiopia having originated from Eritrea.  I  do  accept
         that he is a Pentecostal Christian and as such he would  be  likely
         to face persecution if attempting to practice his faith in Eritrea,
         which banned the religion from 2000. I  also  note  that  this  was
         accepted by the respondent in so  far  as  he  accepted  he  was  a
         Pentecostalist.

         38. I was also impressed by the evidence given [by] the  appellants
         (sic) witness [Mr H] who I accept did meet  the  appellant  in  the
         circumstances described and  that  he  did  know  his  father.  His
         evidence was completely unrehearsed and came  across  very  clearly
         not only in his (sic) relation with the church attendance with  the
         appellant but in relation to the visit [to] the Ethiopian  embassy.
         It is hardly surprising that the appellant did not wish  to  go  to
         the Eritrean embassy because of the dangers that that may  pose  to
         himself if he identified himself upon arrival  as  someone  who  is
         trying  to  establish  their  Eritrean  nationality.  He  would  be
         particularly worried about the fact that he  had  avoided  military
         service and there's significant evidence in the objective  material
         that if a person evades military service he may suffer  a  sentence
         of imprisonment on return of up to 5 years. The prospect  of  doing
         military service has driven hundreds of thousands of  Eritreans  to
         leave their country over a period of time and it  is  still  viewed
         with fear and suspicion by the vast majority  of  young  people  in
         Eritrea. It is one  of  the  most  significant  driving  forces  of
         migration across the Mediterranean and into southern Europe. I take
         Judicial notice of this fact from the background CPIN and from  the
         various UNHCR reports. In all the circumstances  I  find  that  the
         appellant is likely to face  persecution  as  a  Pentecostalist  in
         Eritrea, as a person who has escaped unlawfully and as a person who
         has escaped military service. I find that there is  ample  evidence
         to the lowest standard set  out  in  Kaja  (sic)  that  he  is  not
         Ethiopian and is an Eritrean national who is forced to live in  the
         circumstances described.  I  do  not  find  the  respondents  (sic)
         language report displaces the weight of evidence  produced  by  the
         Appellant for the reasons stated above."

5.   The Secretary of State appealed the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
    the following ground:

         "1.  The  appellant's  nationality  is  the  key  issue   in   this
         determination. In reaching a decision on this, the Sprakab language
         report was the essential piece of evidence. The Tribunal  dismissed
         the relevance of the report. However, it is submitted that this was
         for spurious reasons that are not sustainable. The reasons are two-
         fold; that while the consistent (sic) with a person  that  is  from
         Addis Ababa, this applies to  millions  of  people;  and  that  the
         authors of the report are Swedish.

         2. It is respectfully  submitted  that  neither  of  these  reasons
         stands up to scrutiny. The first reason is speculation on the  part
         of the Tribunal which, unlike the authors of the  report,  has  not
         been trained to discern differences  in  linguistics.  The  opinion
         expressed by the Tribunal has no objective basis and is  simply  an
         assertion by the Tribunal. The second reason  is  simply  nonsense.
         Applying this principle to any form of  decision-making  shows  the
         incompetence of the Tribunal's approach; this decries  the  use  of
         any specialist training or the ability to make expert judgements on
         anything outside one's own direct experience."

Decision and reasons

6.   The appellant says that he was born in Assab  in  Eritrea.  He  accepts
    that his first language is Amharic. He says that  he  understands  some
    Tigrinya but does not speak it well. He speaks a little Arabic. He says
    that he was taken to Ethiopia in 1996 when he was seven months old. His
    mother died shortly after. In interview he said that his  family  lived
    in 'Merkato' [qu.66], which was never clarified, but publicly available
    information indicates is likely to be  an  area  of  Addis  Ababa.  The
    appellant's evidence was that he lived in Ethiopia with his father  and
    another relative called Bethlehem for about  four  years  before  being
    deported to Eritrea in 2000. The  family  returned  to  live  in  Campo
    Sudan, an area of Assab, Eritrea where the appellant says  most  people
    speak Amharic. He  remained  there  until  2004  before  travelling  to
    Djibouti, Sudan and eventually on to Europe.

7.   Even if the Sprakab report was taken at  its  highest,  it  is  perhaps
    unsurprising  that  the  analysts  concluded  that  he  spoke   Amharic
    consistent with a background in Addis Ababa.  The appellant  says  that
    he lived in Merkato until he was around four  years  old,  which  is  a
    formative age when he would have  been  learning  to  speak.  The  same
    section of the report recognised that Amharic is still spoken  in  some
    areas of Eritrea such as Assab, which was consistent with the  evidence
    given  by  the  appellant.  The  report  does  not  explain  what   the
    distinction might be between Amharic spoken in Addis Ababa and  how  it
    might be spoken elsewhere in Ethiopia or in Assab. The few places where
    the report made a comparison, it was with Tigrinya words.

8.   The decision letter extrapolated from the Sprakab report  that  it  was
    unlikely that the appellant would continue to speak Amharic  in  a  way
    that suggested a background from Addis Ababa when he had not  lived  in
    Ethiopia for 19 years. The decision letter also  appeared  to  find  it
    implausible that his father did not teach him Tigrinya  and  noted  his
    lack of language ability in Tigrinya and Arabic. The appellant did  not
    claim to speak Tigrinya with any fluency. He said that he continued  to
    speak Amharic  when  he  returned  to  Eritrea  with  his  father.  The
    respondent's own Sprakab report accepted that  Amharic  was  spoken  in
    parts of Assab. The decision letter also  accepted  that  there  was  a
    small population of  Amharic  speakers  in  Djibouti.  Given  that  the
    appellant also said that he understood  a  little  Arabic  it  was  not
    implausible that he could manage to live in Djibouti and  Sudan  for  a
    period as claimed. In any event, whether he spoke Arabic was immaterial
    to the question of whether he was an Eritrean or an Ethiopian national.
    Even if he did not, many  people  are  able  to  remain  in  countries,
    including the UK, without speaking the local language.

9.    This  was  the  background  to  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The judge noted the experience of the analysts at [5] of  the
    decision. At [21]  he  referred  to  the  decision  in  RB  (Linguistic
    evidence - Sprakab) Somalia [201] UKUT 329,  which  was  cited  in  the
    decision letter. He emphasised the main findings from the  case,  which
    confirmed that linguistic analysis reports from  Sprakab  should  carry
    considerable weight but should not be treated as infallible. The  judge
    went on to note that the  Upper  Tribunal  in  RB  found  that  Sprakab
    reports should  not  be  considered  as  determinative  of  nationality
    without first considering all the available evidence [22].

10.  The respondent also relies on the Supreme Court decision in SSHD  v  MN
    & KY [2014] 1 WLR 2064. The Supreme Court found that the findings in RB
    were sufficient to demonstrate acceptable expertise and methodology  by
    Sprakab "which can properly  be  accepted  unless  the  evidence  in  a
    particular case shows otherwise". It  noted  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    ought  to  give  further  consideration  to  how  the  basis  for   the
    geographical attribution of particular dialects or usages can be better
    explained and not left implicit. The Tribunal would need to be able  to
    satisfy itself as to the data  by  reference  to  which  analysts  make
    judgments on the geographical range of a particular dialect or usage. A
    Sprakab report needs to explain the source and nature of the  knowledge
    of the analyst.

11.  Keeping these principles in mind I find that there is  nothing  in  the
    judge's findings to indicate that he erred in  his  assessment  of  the
    Sprakab report, and even if he did, that it would  not  have  made  any
    material difference to the outcome of the appeal. The judge  considered
    the question of  the  appellant's  nationality  in  light  of  all  the
    evidence, which included his assessment of the appellant's credibility,
    the fact that his account  was  consistent  with  the  well  documented
    deportation of many Eritreans from Ethiopia in 2000, the fact that  the
    respondent accepted  that  he  had  shown  knowledge  of  Eritrea,  the
    credible evidence of a witness who had known his father in Eritrea  and
    attended  the  Ethiopian  embassy  with  him  (where  he  was   refused
    registration). It was open to the judge to observe that the appellant's
    account of moving from Ethiopia,  Eritrea,  Djibouti,  Sudan  and  then
    onwards to Europe "does not lend easily in itself  to  a  determination
    that he is simply not Eritrean but must be Ethiopian".

12.  Although the judge could have  given  more  detailed  analysis  to  the
    content of the report and  the  backgrounds  of  the  analysts,  in  my
    assessment it was open to him to observe  that  Amharic  was  a  widely
    spoken language. As I have already noted above, the report did not,  as
    a matter of fact, go into the kind of detail suggested by  the  Supreme
    Court to explain why the appellant's dialect was typically  from  Addis
    Ababa or how it might differ from Amharic that  the  analysts  accepted
    was also spoken in areas of Assab. It seems clear that  the  judge  had
    taken into account the experience of the analysts, but it was  open  to
    him to observe that they were unlikely to be native speakers albeit  he
    appeared to do so based on assumptions made about  the  analysts  names
    and the summary of their experience.  However,  it  was  reasonable  to
    infer from that information that the analysts were  not  likely  to  be
    nationals of  Ethiopia  or  Eritrea.  Their  names  were  of  typically
    northern European origin and the summary of their educational and  work
    experience was primarily focussed in Sweden.

13.   Even  if  the  judge's  approach  could  be  criticised   for   making
    assumptions about the analysts' likely nationality, it was unlikely  to
    make any material difference to the outcome. The  appellant's  evidence
    was that he lived in an area of Addis Ababa for about four years  at  a
    time when he was likely to be developing language skills. He then lived
    in an area of Assab which the background  evidence  described  as  "the
    former domain of Ethiopian residents" before spending much of the  rest
    of his childhood outside Eritrea. In light of this evidence it was open
    to the judge to conclude that the Sprakab report was not  determinative
    of the appellant's nationality given his peripatetic childhood.

14.  It was open to the judge to observe that Amharic  is  a  widely  spoken
    language. As a matter of  fact  the  Sprakab  report  did  not  explain
    anything more about the "geographical range of a particular dialect  or
    usage" or explain how it might compare to other Amharic dialects.   The
    judge acknowledged that such reports should normally  be  given  weight
    but was  not  obliged  to  treat  it  as  determinative.  After  having
    considered the report  alongside  the  other  evidence  before  him  he
    concluded that it was reasonably likely that the appellant was Eritrean
    as claimed. For the reasons given above I conclude  that  his  findings
    were within a range of reasonable responses to the  evidence  and  were
    open to him to make.

15.  The respondent did not challenge any of the other findings relating  to
    risk on return to Eritrea.

16.  I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law. The First-tier Tribunal  decision
    shall stand.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  of
law

The decision shall stand


Signed   M. Canavan        Date 10 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

