
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07054/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 June 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                     mAG
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, of Counsel, instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

Anonymity

    1. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  order.  I  have  not  been
       invited to rescind that order. The order remains appropriate as  this
       is a protection claim.

Background

    2. This is an appeal  from  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       O'Garro (hereafter "the Judge") promulgated on 26 March 2019, whereby
       she dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
       Secretary of State to refuse to recognise him as a refugee, or  as  a
       person otherwise requiring international protection.

    3. The Appellant is a national of Iran  and  of  Kurdish  ethnicity.  He
       entered the United Kingdom on 14 December 2016 as a minor and claimed
       asylum. Following an interview, the Respondent did  not  dispute  the
       Appellant's nationality, race or age and,  in  view  of  the  latter,
       granted leave to remain until 29 October 2017. The Respondent however
       did not accept the material facts underpinning the asylum  claim.  It
       is  not  necessary  to  delve  into  the  detail  of  the  claim  but
       essentially the Appellant feared the  Iranian  authorities  following
       the discovery by police of anti-government political material amongst
       his father's belongings who smuggled goods between Iraq and Iran.

    4. The Judge  accepted  the  Appellant's  father  engaged  in  smuggling
       activity and that the Appellant assisted him as this  was  consistent
       with the background evidence that stated smuggling  was  integral  to
       village life [33]. The Judge did not  accept  the  remainder  of  the
       account finding implausibility's therein and  its  incongruence  with
       the background evidence [34] to [39]. These findings  were  construed
       as being fatal to the Appellant's credibility leading  the  Judge  to
       dismiss the protection claim.



The Application for Permission to Appeal

    5. The Appellant's representatives applied on his behalf for  permission
       to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and permission  was  granted  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal on 22 April 2019.



Discussion

    6. Mr Kandola fairly concedes that the Judge's decision cannot stand. He
       properly accepts that the Judge's credibility assessment  is  flawed,
       and this vitiates the Decision. I agree. In view of the  Respondent's
       concession that the decision cannot stand  it  is  not  necessary  to
       traverse all the grounds raised by Mr Slatter or set out  my  reasons
       in detail, but I briefly do so below.

  7.  First, there is a mistake of fact at [34]. Therein  the  Judge  noted
       the background evidence reporting monthly killings by Iranian  border
       guards of Kurdish people smuggling goods across the border from Iraqi
       Kurdistan. In  view  of  this,  the  Judge  concluded  "that  if  the
       Appellant's father was found to be smuggling  goods,  which  included
       political leaflets the likelihood is the  border  guards  would  have
       killed him right there at the border and there  would  have  been  no
       need to raid his home."

  8.  The obvious difficulty with this conclusion is that it  was  not  the
       Appellant's claim that his father was caught at the border let  alone
       with political leaflets which he claimed were in fact  discovered  at
       his  home.  There  is  no  dispute  that  the  Judge's  view  of  the
       Appellant's claim in this regard is mistaken. The error  is  manifest
       and evidently impacted upon the Judge's assessment of credibility.

  9.  Second, at [35] to [36] the Judge found that the covert  presence  of
       military activities in Kurdish areas together with the high  risk  of
       being arrested and  detained  would  have  deterred  the  Appellant's
       father from engaging in adverse activities. The difficulty with  that
       is that it suggests that no Kurd would engage in any adverse activity
       in Iran in fear of being arrested and detained or,  in  other  words,
       indicates that the Judge believed that no-one advancing such a  claim
       could  be  believed.  Either  premise  is  not  consistent  with  the
       background evidence the Judge quoted at  [30]  which  indicates  that
       Kurds engage in anti-governmental activities despite  being  targeted
       by the authorities notwithstanding the risk of arrest and  detention.



  10. Third, and similarly, the Judge falls into error at [37]  in  finding
       that the background evidence suggests  that  a  person  connected  to
       Kurdish political parties may simply be called in for questioning and
       that this undermined the Appellant's claim. It is not entirely  clear
       why the Judge took that view but, in any event, it is contrary to the
       findings of the Upper Tribunal in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 430.

  11. Overall, I  agree  with  Mr  Slatter  that  the  background  evidence
       supported the Appellant's account rather than undermined it and  that
       the Judge's conclusions to the contrary lacked clarity and logic.




Decision

  12. In all the circumstances, the Judge materially erred in  law.  I  set
       aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The appeal is required
       to be reheard de novo.



Disposal

  13. As for the venue for the rehearing, while Mr Slatter  invited  me  to
       remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  expressed  some
       reservations in doing so. This appeal has been  previously  heard  by
       the First-tier Tribunal on two occasions and the parties are entitled
       to finality of litigation. However, Mr Kandola was also of  the  view
       that the matter should be remitted because not do  so  would  deprive
       the Appellant of  his  right  of  appeal  to  this  Tribunal.  Having
       considered the  submissions  of  the  representatives  and  paragraph
       7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014, I have  decided
       reluctantly to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. Given the
       history of the appeal, I am of the view that the rehearing should  be
       before an experienced Salaried Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision did involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law  sufficient  to
require  the  decision  to  be  set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
Accordingly,  the  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
rehearing  de  novo  by  a  Salaried  Judge  (not  Judge  O'Garro  or  Judge
Davidson).



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Dated: 5 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

