

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/07648/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On June 30, 2017                         | On  July 4, 2017                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                             mr hismadden ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeetie (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make  an  anonymity  order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

 2. The appellant is a national  of  Iraq.   He  entered  this  country  on
    January 24, 2016 and claimed asylum the following day. His  application
    was refused by the respondent on July 15, 2016 under paragraphs 336 and
    339F/339M HC 395. The appellant appealed that decision on July 27, 2016
    under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    and his appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O  Williams
    (hereinafter called the Judge) on November 25, 2016 and in  a  decision
    promulgated on December 16, 2016 he dismissed the appellant's appeal on
    all grounds.

 3. The  appellant's  former  representatives  appealed  that  decision  on
    January 4, 2017 inviting the Tribunal to consider the  appeal  in  line
    with judgment in Robinson. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Page  found
    there was an arguable error in law on March 24,  2017.  In  a  Rule  24
    response the respondent appeared to concede an error but asked  for  an
    oral hearing.

 4. The matter came before me on the above date.

 5. The appellant was unrepresented and asked me to find an  error  in  law
    based on the fact he would be  at  risk  were  he  to  be  returned.  I
    explained to him that this was not a re-hearing of his original  appeal
    but was in fact a hearing about whether the original Judge had  made  a
    mistake.

 6. I pointed out to him that Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Page  had
    suggested there may be an error as internal relocation had possibly not
    been properly considered.

 7. Mr McVeetie did not adopt the Rule 24 letter but stated that the  Judge
    accepted the appellant was a Christian convert and that whilst he would
    not be safe in Baghdad he would be safe in the IKR-a point conceded  by
    his original representative. He submitted that being a convert had been
    considered by the Judge and the Judge had concluded at  paragraph  [43]
    of his decision that the appellant would not be at risk in the IKR  for
    this reason. The secondary issue was risk from S's (alleged girlfriend)
    family who had connections with the KDP. The Judge rejected this aspect
    of the claim and consequently there was no risk on return to  the  IKR.
    Finally, being a member of the PUK in the IKR would not  place  him  at
    risk.

    FINDINGS

 8. Permission to appeal had been given in this case as the Judge  felt  it
    was arguable internal relocation had not been considered.

 9. I am satisfied that internal relocation was not an issue for the  Judge
    in this appeal.

10. The appellant came from the IKR region  and  his  fear  of  persecution
    arose from his conversion to Christianity,  the  threat  posed  by  his
    girlfriend's family who had links to the KDP and his PUK membership.

11.  During  the  original  hearing  the  Judge  recorded  the  appellant's
    representative's concession at paragraph [11] of his decision that  the
    appellant's conversion to Christianity would not pose  a  risk  to  him
    unless he went to live in Baghdad.  As  he  could  return  to  the  IKR
    internal relocation was not an issue for the Judge.

12. The appellant's fear of his girlfriend's family was dealt with  by  the
    Judge between paragraphs [29] and  [37]  of  his  decision.  The  Judge
    rejected his claim to have been in a relationship with S and he went on
    to find that he would not be of any interest to  her  family  who  were
    members/supporters of the KDP. He could therefore live in the IKR. This
    finding was not appealed  and  the  issue  of  internal  relocation  is
    therefore not an issue.

13. The final issue surrounded his own membership of the PUK. The Judge had
    accepted he was a member of the PUK but as return would be to  the  IKR
    there was no risk.

14. The granting of permission appears misconceived and whilst I noted  the
    appellant maintains he would be at risk I am  satisfied  there  was  no
    error in law.

    DECISION

15. There was no error in law and the original decision shall stand.



Signed                              Date     June 30, 2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal

Signed                              Date     June 30, 2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
