
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07527/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 24 September 2019                 |On 14 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                   Mr W I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Aziz, Solicitor, Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors
(Renshaw House)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Sudan, has permission to challenge the
decision of Judge Shergill of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on 1
August 2018 dismissing his appeal against the decision made by the
respondent on 30 May 2018 refusing his protection claim.  The respondent
had accepted that (1) the appellant is a national of Sudan; (2) is a member
of the Tama tribe (and so a non-Arab Darfuri); and (3) that his village had
been attacked by the Janjaweed on two occasions, in 2008 and 2014.
However, the respondent did not accept that he had a well-founded fear of
persecution because he would be able to relocate safely and reasonably to
Khartoum.

2.   In the respondent's decision of May 2018 the respondent considered
that since the Tribunal had issued its country guidance in 2009 (in AA (Non-
Arab Darfuris - relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 0005) and 2015 (in MM
(Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010), there had been a significant change
of circumstances such that it was no longer the case that non-Arab Darfuris
would face adverse treatment in Khartoum based on ethnicity.  In this
regard the respondent relied heavily on its CIPIN Sudan: Non-Arab Darfuris,
August 2017.

3.   When the appellant' appeal came before Judge Shergill the judge stated
that he took no specific issue as to credibility. He nevertheless concluded
that during the 2008 and 2014 attacks by the Janjaweed the appellant had
not been specifically identified or targeted but "was one of a group
subjected to a broad-brush attack, as happened/happens in Darfur"
(paragraph 12).  To this point, the only issue so far as the judge was
concerned was whether or not to follow the country guidance decisions of
the Upper Tribunal in MM and AA.  The judge recognised that in order to
depart from a CG case there had to be "very strong grounds supported by
cogent evidence" (citing SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940).  Having considered
other leading cases dealing with the issue of when it was appropriate or
not to depart from country guidance (the judge cited TM (Zimbabwe) [2010]
EWCA Civ 916, SA (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 683, DSG & Others (Afghan
Sikhs: departure from CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 000148 (IAC) and FA
(Libya: art 15(c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT 413), the judge concluded that
there was cogent evidence for so departing.  His reasons averred that:
these case are quite dated and based "in essence on the respondent's OGN
from 2009"; unlike the situation when MM was decided, there was now new
country information being relied on in the CIPIN Sudan, Non-Arab Darfuris,
Version 1.0, August 2017; the appellant had not sought to rebut the
respondent's evidence with an expert report; the appellant's background
evidence was of limited value (we shall return to this matter below); and
the CIPIN Report of 2017 was based on three different sets of sources - the
Joint Report of the Danish Immigration Service and UK Home Office Fact-
Finding Missions to Khartoum, Kampala and Nairobi conducted February -
March 2016, an Australian Report, 2016 (DFAT) and a British Embassy letter;
and that there were no obvious concerns about bias or methodological flaws
in the CIPIN Report.  At paragraphs 36 - 38 the judge concluded:

"36. The appellant has no political profile and was not 'targeted'
personally, he was not recognised or identifiable given it was dark and it
is implausible to the lower standard given the nature of the 2016 attack
that the Janjaweed could have seen him sufficiently well to be able to
identify him then or in the future.  He cannot properly be said to have had
'prior adverse attention'.  The only relevance of political perception in
his case is only because there are suggestions that being Darfurian per se
indicated you were opposed to the regime.  However, physical
characteristics were seemingly less significant given the exposition in IM
[IM and AI (Risks-membership of Beja Tribe, Beja Congress and JFM): Sudan
(CG) [2016] UKUT 188 (IAC)] at paragraphs 177 to 222.  I have reviewed the
key risk themes in the DFAT Report and the conclusions are broadly
consistent with the matters set out in the Joint Report.  I note what was
said at:

'3.41    Overall, DFAT assesses that low-profile members of the unarmed
opposition are at a low risk of official discrimination and violence.
Supporters of the unarmed opposition who present a direct threat to the
Government's authority by speaking openly about political transition or
overthrowing Bashir and the NCP face a moderate risk of discrimination and
low risk of violence.

...

4.13 DFAT assesses that those who are perceived to directly threaten the
authority of the Government may face risk of torture.  This is likely to
affect those who are outspoken. DFAT is also aware of some examples of
civilians who are not outspoken being exposed to torture.  DFAT is unable
to prescribe a particular risk to an individual's potential to experience
torture or comment on the general incidence of torture.

...

4.16 Overall, DFAT assesses that arbitrary arrest and detention are
commonly used by the Government, particularly against individuals that are
or are perceived to be outspokenly critical of the Government...'

37.  Looking at all of this evidence in the round, it is abundantly clear
that the situation in Khartoum has markedly changed from that set out in
the 2009 OGN which underpinned AA.  Whilst there may have been some updated
evidence before the tribunal in MM, clearly that 2009 OGN was a key
constituent in the decision making.  The tribunal in IM did not expressly
deal with the situation for non-Arab Darfuris so the situation has not been
recently visited with up-to-date evidence.  I have no concerns about the
methodology used in the two reports that underpin the 2017 CPIN.  The
tribunal has held that diplomatic evidence in that case was reliable; and I
see no basis for the assertions that somehow it is tainted or unreliable.
There is a very clear theme emerging from the three sources of evidence
synthesised in the CPIN that there are many tens if not hundreds of
thousands of Darfuri people in Khartoum; a city which is stable.  There may
be a risk to non-Arab Darfuri people but that is not in a generalised way
as the country guidance had previously endorsed.  I consider that the
evidence relied on by the respondent in the CPIN, as underpinned by the
three sources of evidence does show 'very strong grounds supported by
cogent evidence' that the country guidance in AA and MM can be departed
from.

38.  The appellant has not provided satisfactory evidence to dissuade me to
depart and I was not persuaded by the submissions either.  I remained of
the view that the CPIN evidence was very strong evidence which was cogent;
and sufficient to depart from country guidance as it relates to relocation
to Khartoum of non-Arab Darfuris with no political profile/no prior adverse
attention (in this case not being individually targeted or
identified/identifiable) as I have found in this appellant's case."

4.   The judge then turned to consider the appellant's individual
circumstances, including that he would not be at risk on return and that he
would be able to relocate to Khartoum safely and reasonably, stating at
paragraph 42 that:

"42. The appellant is a fit and able young man who has managed to exchange
work for practical help in the past and been assisted by his countrymen
when fleeing.  He is from what he confirmed was a large tribe.  I see no
reason he cannot use these networking skills he has gained to carve out a
new life for himself.  He has clearly demonstrated the basic interpersonal
and practical skills needed to do so in comparable situations when he fled
Sudan.  I am satisfied he can at least undertake unskilled work.  Any
resettlement grants would ameliorate his transition to life back in his
homeland.  The informal economy employs significant numbers in Khartoum;
indeed, there has been a pull factor to Khartoum because of the improving
economic conditions (Joint Report at 4.6).  It is difficult to conclude
that in such a populous city, amongst so many of his own people, the
appellant going about his ordinary business will have a risk profile that
would put him at a real risk of harm.  Whilst the appellant has never lived
in Khartoum, I note he is still in touch with his family in Darfur.  I see
no reason he could not use any tribal connections he has through his family
to locate persons who might be able to ease his integration in the short
term in Khartoum.  In the worst-case scenario of his being a lone man with
no support, it is hard to consider someone who has shown such fortitude and
resilience given the hardships he has faced and efforts to come to the UK,
that he will simply wither on the vine.  It is more plausible he will
thrive amongst his people in the improving economic situation in Khartoum.
I am satisfied the CPIN is underpinned by cogent evidence from the Joint
Report, DFAT and British Embassy from a range of appropriate, recent and
relevant sources to show internal relocation is reasonable.  I am not
satisfied relocation for this appellant will be unreasonable, unduly harsh
or lead to a real risk of destitution."

5.   The appellant's grounds assail the judge's findings on three counts:
submitting that (1) the judge had been wrong to endorse the methodology of
the CIPIN Report, given the latter's heavy reliance on unidentified
sources; (2) that the judge failed to engage fully with the CIPIN document
of August 2017, which revealed significant levels of ongoing ethnicity-
based persecution of non-Arab Darfuris and which, in its treatment of the
issue of relocation in Khartoum, failed to rely on cogent evidence; and (3)
that the judge failed to engage with other relevant evidence, in particular
the reports contained in the appellant's bundle.

6.   Subsequent to the appellant's representatives sending this letter, the
case referred to has been reported as AAR & AA 2019] UKUT 282, 7 August
2019.

7.   In a further letter sent on 17 September 2019 the appellant's
solicitors observed that with respect to the situation in Sudan over the
last six - twelve months, there had been hearings before the Upper Tribunal
with a view to issuing new country guidance.  There was now a decision by
the Upper Tribunal dated 7 August 2019 which was enclosed.  The letter said
that in the new decision the respondent had accepted that the appeals had
to be allowed where the appellants' profiles as non-Arab Darfuris brought
them within the ratio of the country guidance cases.  "In light of the
above" the letter concluded, "we respectfully submit that the decision of
the FtT does contain material error of law". The decision they refer was
soon after reported as AAR & AA.

8.   At the hearing both representatives said it was their shared view that
the judge's decision should be set aside in light of the latest Tribunal
decision in AAR & AA.

9.   Ordinarily when both parties to an appeal agree that an FtT decision
should be set aside, the Upper Tribunal will adopt the same view and give
only brief reasons. There are also particularly strong pragmatic reasons
for taking such a course in a case of this kind, where the respondent
accepts that in the light of a reported Tribunal decision the appellant
stands to benefit from the existing country guidance (as set out in AA and
MM). However, a decision as to error of law must be principled, not simply
pragmatic. Here we are tasked with deciding whether the judge erred in law
in considering matters as they stood in August 2018, when he promulgated
his decision.  It cannot be an error of law for a judge to fail to take
into account a decision not yet promulgated or to fail to take stock of
evidence that was before a later tribunal.   Indeed, at the time Judge
Shergill heard the case, the government of Sudan was still in the hands of
President Omar al-Bashir.  He was not deposed until April 2019.  We
consider it necessary, therefore, to examine the appellant's grounds and
the parties' submissions in more detail.

10.  Mr Aziz, as already noted,  submitted that the fact that the Upper
Tribunal in AAR & AA, having sight of the country information going
backwards in time, concluded there was no sound basis to depart from
existing country guidance, indicated that this remained the case in August
2018, contrary to FtT Judge Shergill's assessment to the contrary.  Mr Tan
broadly supported this submission.

11.  We have difficulty accepting Mr Aziz's argument on this point.  In AAR
& AA, in a brief decision, the Upper Tribunal wrote:

         "Further Background

             18.  Both appeals were listed for hearing in mid-August 2018.
             However, very shortly after the error of law decisions, the
             respondent indicated that he intended to conduct a fact-
             finding mission to Sudan between 10 and 17 August 2018. The
             purpose of the mission was to gather information about the
             circumstances of Darfuris in Sudan, with a focus on Khartoum,
             and the treatment of returnees generally. That mission formed
             the basis of a report published in November 2018, entitled
             "Report of a fact-finding mission to Khartoum, Sudan". We
             refer to this report as the "FFR".

             19.  Having been served with the FFR, the appellants jointly
             instructed three experts to comment on it and provide their
             opinions on the question raised in these appeals. The Tribunal
             was provided with reports from Dame Rosalind Marsden, former
             British Ambassador to Sudan, from Ms Madeleine Crowther, Co-
             Executive Director of Waging Peace, an NGO focussing on Sudan,
             and Mr Peter Verney, an expert on Sudan who had provided
             reports in many Sudanese appeals.

             20.  The appeals were heard on 12-14 February 2019. In
             addition to hearing extensive oral evidence from the witnesses
             set out above, the Upper Tribunal also heard oral evidence via
             video link from Khartoum from a civil society activist in
             Sudan.

             21.  The witnesses provided evidence on the ongoing civil
             uprisings in Sudan which had begun in November 2018 and
             increased during the following months. It was uncontentious
             that the regime had attempted to supress the protests by
             violent means and had carried mass arrests with widespread
             reports of mistreatment of detainees.

             22.  The respondent submitted that the evidence on the
             protests and the government's response did not show a
             sufficient specific interest in Darfuris to impact on the
             question of a general risk on return for Darfuris who had no
             profile other than their ethnicity and having claimed asylum
             in the UK. The appellants argued that the behaviour of the
             Sudanese regime in the face of the civilian protests showed
             that there remained a risk on return for all Darfuris who had
             claimed asylum in the UK.

             23.  The Tribunal reserved its decision at the end of the
             proceedings on 14 February 2019.

             24.  The situation in Sudan remained volatile and, at times,
             deteriorated. President Bashir was ousted by the military on
             11 April 2019. The head of the notoriously abusive National
             Intelligence Service (NISS), Salah Gosh, resigned on 13 April
             2019. A state of emergency was then declared for 3 months by
             the Transitional Military Council (TMC). The TMC stated that
             it wanted to enter into a dialogue with civil society.
             Protestors remained on the streets whilst discussions took
             place.

             25.  Towards the end of May 2019 and in June 2019 there were a
             number of attacks on protestors across the country. The Rapid
             Support Forces (RSF), often referred to as the Janjaweed, were
             deployed in Khartoum. The worst incident appears to have been
             on 3 June 2019 when the main protest site in Khartoum was
             attacked and at least 40 bodies were recovered from the Nile,
             having been thrown there by the RSF. Protests intensified,
             reprisals continued and the internet was shut down.

             26.  The Tribunal reconvened for a Case Management Hearing on
             10 July 2019 to hear submissions from the parties on the
             appropriate way forward in light of the continuing upheaval in
             Sudan. The respondent provided a "Response to an Information
             Request - Country: Sudan" dated 17 June 2019 which detailed
             the events set out above.

             27.  The respondent submitted that the proceedings should be
             adjourned until September 2019 when the situation in Sudan
             might be clearer. In the week prior to the Case Management
             Hearing, for example, internet access had restarted and there
             were signs that an agreement between the TMC and the civilian
             opposition alliance would be reached.

             28.  The appellants maintained that the situation in Sudan
             remained unpredictable such that adjourning for a further 3
             months was not appropriate and submitted that the Tribunal
             should proceed to determine the appeals which had to be
             allowed where the situation in Sudan could not be said to
             amount to the "very strong grounds supported by cogent
             evidence" required for a Country Guidance case to be
             considered no longer authoritative and set aside or replaced;
             SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]
             EWCA Civ 940 considered.

             29.  After some discussion, in light of the volatility of the
             situation in Sudan, the absence of the cogent evidence needed
             to set aside existing Country Guidance and in light of AAR and
             AA having waited for an extensive period of time for a final
             determination of their protection claims, the respondent
             conceded that a further delay was not appropriate and that the
             appeals should be determined on the basis of the existing
             Country Guidance cases. The respondent accepted that this
             meant that the appeals had to be allowed where the appellant's
             profiles as Darfuris brought them within the ratio of AA
             (Sudan) and MM (Sudan). The Tribunal allows the asylum appeals
             of AAR and AA on that basis.

             30.  The answer to the Country Guidance question that was
             originally asked in these appeals is as follows. The situation
             in Sudan remains volatile after civil protests started in late
             2018 and the future is unpredictable. There is insufficient
             evidence currently available to show that the guidance given
             in AA (non-Arab Darfuris - relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT
             00056 and MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 10 (IAC) requires
             revision. Those cases should still be followed."

12.  Put shortly, the principal basis for the decision of UTJs Pitt and
Blum was that as a result of the fall of the al-Bashir regime, the
situation in Sudan was highly volatile, and the future unpredictable and
there was insufficient evidence to warrant country guidance revision. In
terms of recent evidence, they refer, it is true, to the November 2018
"Report of a fact-finding mission to Khartoum, Sudan" which had been
published. However, they also refer to receiving reports and hearing oral
evidence in February 2019 from several experts from Dame Rosalind Marsden,
former British Ambassador to Sudan, from Ms Madeleine Crowther, Co-
Executive Director of Waging Peace, an NGO focussing on Sudan, and Mr Peter
Verney, an expert on Sudan who has provided reports in many Sudanese
appeals. However, they do not in terms make any findings on any of this
evidence.  We do not know whether the Tribunal considered this body of
evidence insufficient or whether what principally concerned them was the
volatility of the situation in February 2019 up until they promulgated
their decision in August 2019. Further, the decision is not a country
guidance decision. There is certainly not enough stated in this decision to
identify or infer a definite view on the quality the evidence before them
as to the issue that had been set down for them to decide as country
guidance. Nor do we know what they thought about the state of the evidence
as at 1 August 2018, when the FtT judge in this case sought to depart from
existing country guidance.

13.  We consider nevertheless that the FtT decision is legally flawed for
other reasons.



Reliance on unidentified/anonymous sources

14.  Addressing first the three grounds of appeal, we do not consider
ground (1) is made out, since the judge gave careful consideration to the
methodology of the CIPIN Report and specifically addressed the issue of
what weight could be given to unidentified sources and informants, stating
at paragraphs 26 - 28:

"26. Ms Patel criticised the anonymised sources in the CPIN.  However,
broadly speaking the underlying Joint Report is well sourced so this is not
a fundamental flaw.  Both the Joint Report and DFAT rely on a number of
different sources which reassures me that there has been some wide
consultation.  These include governmental and non-governmental sources;
some of them based in or with connections to Sudan, others less directly
placed.  There were also human rights activists and lawyers consulted.

27.  I take no issue with the reliance on diplomatic sources or the lack of
an NGO presence going to weight in the Joint Report.  I note that there is
a British Embassy letter in the CPIN.  Such issues have been
comprehensively dealt with in IM and AI (Risks - membership of Beja Tribe,
Beja Congress and JEM: Sudan) (CG) [2016] UKUT 00188:

'199.    The Embassy letters based upon information from UNHCR in Khartoum,
the German and Netherlands Embassies and other EU governments are a useful
source of material.  We would not regard their assessment as biased in
favour of the respondent but as a professional examination of the material
it has extracted from its informants.  Any assessment must involve the
exercise of caution because most, if not all, of the organisations
approached do not have a monitoring capability.  That said, monitoring is
not the only method of collecting information and the level of interest in
seeking out information about the risk faced by returnees is such that we
would expect adverse consequence to filter through into the public domain.'

28.  There is nothing fundamentally wrong with relying on either diplomatic
sources or NGO's who do not have a presence in Sudan, particularly given
the difficulties NGOs face there.  I do not consider these issues are
fundamental flaws or reduce weight."

15.  In our view, the judge's treatment of this feature of the 2017 CIPIN
report was within the range of reasonable responses. The judge's reasons
for attaching weight to anonymous sources were properly based on existing
caselaw principles.

Failure to engage with other relevant evidence, in particular the reports
contained in the appellant's bundle

16.  It is convenient to take next the appellant's ground (3), which
alleges failure to engage with other relevant evidence.  Insofar as this
ground suggests that the judge overlooked relevant evidence in the
appellant's bundle, we consider it has merit.  At paragraph 23 the judge
purported to address the evidence in the appellant's bundle, stating that:

"23. The generalised evidence in the appellant's bundle relates to a
different risk profile to the appellant e.g. the 'Belgium returnees';
students; journalists; those with political profiles; and those being
returned to Darfur.  These different groups and scenarios are markedly
different from the appellants' situation and are not persuasive as to the
specific circumstances he may face on return.  The specific reference in
submission to Mr Plaut's blog is not persuasive given the campaigning
stance he comes from, and criticisms he makes including of the previous
country guidance law.  It is not case specific evidence and is hardly
objective evidence.  I attach little weight to it."

17.  However (leaving aside the lack of clarity about what the judge meant
to identify as "generalised evidence"), the impression conveyed by this
paragraph is that the appellant's bundle comprised two sets of materials
only: (i) those dealing with specific risk profiles and "different groups
and scenarios ... markedly different from the appellants' situation"; and
(ii) Mr Plaut's blog.  That is simply not a correct description of the
content of this bundle which, in addition to specific news stories,
contained excerpts from the U.S. State Department Report for Sudan dated 3
March 2017 and extracts from the Human Rights Watch and Amnesty
International Reports which at least arguably took a different view of risk
to non-Arab Darfuris than that taken in the CIPIN 2017.  Given that the
judge had decided he had a sufficiently broad factual matrix of sources to
justify departure from country guidance, there was a need to address the
corpus of the materials in the appellant's bundle more carefully.

Failure to engage fully with the CIPIN document of August 2017

18.  We now turn back to the appellant's ground (2), which contends that
the judge failed to note that the 2017 CIPIN Report contained passages
supporting the view that non-Arab Darfuris are still at risk of
persecution.  We consider this ground to also have force.  In relation to
risk to non-Arab Darfuris in Darfur, the CIPIN Report reconfirmed that this
remained a generalised risk.  At 2.3.4 the CIPIN states that "Non-Arab
Darfuris continue to face serious human rights violations in Darfur at the
hands of various actors which are likely to amount to persecution or
serious harm" and the only specific disagreement with Tribunal country
guidance that is addressed in paras 2.3.6 (which commences with the sub-
head 'Khartoum') onwards is confined to the situation of non-Arab Darfuris
in Khartoum.  In this context, it is exceedingly difficult to follow the
basis on which the judge assessed that the appellant would be of no
interest upon return and would not be sought by the authorities (see
paragraphs 12 and 40).

19.  This is more than a careless elision of findings on risk in Darfur
with findings on risk in Khartoum.  The burden of most of the judge's
assessment related to internal relocation and as a matter of logic,
internal relocation only arises as a test an appellant has to satisfy if it
has been found he has a well-founded fear of persecution in his home area.
Further, if there is an acceptance that a person has been persecuted in the
past, it becomes necessary for good reasons to be shown why he would not
face a repetition of such persecution (para 339K of the Immigration Rules).

20.  In this regard, the judge's findings on the appellant's experiences in
his home area are problematic in any event.  What he describes as "broad-
brush attack(s), as happened/happens in Darfur" (paragraph 12) is
effectively accepted by the same CIPIN on which the judge relies, to amount
to persecution.  The fact that the Janjaweed attacked his village
collectively and did not target him specifically does not mean that he and
his fellow villagers (or on the second occasion, the other young men) were
not victims of persecution. The appellant's evidence (which the judge did
not dispute) was that the 2008 attack by the Janjaweed was a "race issue.
They say to us you are a negro". (q49). The appellant said about the 2014
attack that "[t]hey come from time to time to detain the young men and
accusing them of supporting the oppositions or working for the
oppositions". (q64). The DFAT report of April 2016, on which the judge
sought to rely in part, was cited in the 2017 CIPIN at 4.5.2 as stating
that "[t]he UN Panel of Experts on Sunday [sic, Sudan] characterised the
current Government strategy in Darfur as one of collective punishment of
villages and communities from which the armed opposition are belief to come
from or operate."

21.  In relation to the judge's treatment of the issue of internal
relocation, the judge did deal with this issue both in terms of safety and
reasonableness.  However, in relation to reasonableness, his findings
appear to rely heavily on sources in the CIPIN making reference to the fact
that there is a large Darfuri population in Khartoum and that there is an
"improving economic situation".  We agree with the appellant's grounds that
this amounts to a one-sided appraisal of the CIPIN Report.  This report
also noted grave concerns about the welfare of non-Arab Darfuris, lack of
humanitarian assistance, lack of IDP facilities and the risk that they
would simply become internally displaced persons without access to
humanitarian assistance (see e.g.  6.6.1 and 6.7). At 5.2.11 the CIPIN
noted one source stating that "Livelihood challenges would likely hamper
opportunities for internal relocation in Sudan. The informal nature of the
economy (particularly outside of Khartoum), the significant reliance on
humanitarian assistance in conflict- affected areas and reduction in
informal and low-skilled employment opportunities due to the influx of
refugees from neighbouring countries means that individuals would likely
face economic hardship if relocating. In addition, the Government does not
recognise internally displaced people in Khartoum, meaning that individuals
relocating from conflict affected areas do not have access to humanitarian
assistance in Khartoum."

22.  Particularly bearing in mind that in assessing internal relocation the
judge was obliged not simply to ask whether the CIPIN material before him
provided a sufficient evidential support for his conclusion, but also to
ask if  (together with other materials)  it constituted "cogent reasons"
for departing from country guidance (which takes a much less sanguine
view), we consider ground (2) is also made out. The judge's assessment of
reasonableness did not address all relevant matters.

23.  As presaged at the hearing, the above represents our reasons in detail
for our conclusion (announced at the hearing) that the decision of the FtT
Judge is set aside for material error of law.

24.  We discussed with the parties how we should proceed in order to
dispose of the appeal.  Both were in agreement that the decision we re-make
should be governed by the recent case of AAR & AA and that this decision
established that there were still no cogent reasons to depart from the
existing country guidance stating that non-Arab Darfuris are at risk on
return of persecution for a Convention reason. In the context of re-making
the decision, we must assess the appellant's situation as at today's date.
We note that even though this is not a country guidance, it confirms that
previous country guidance cases remain valid. Accordingly we agree with the
position of the parties.

25.  Given that it is accepted that the appellant is a non-Arab Darfuri,
the decision we re-make in this appeal can thus only be to allow it on
asylum grounds.

26.  To conclude:

The decision of the judge is set aside for material error of law.

The decision we re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal on asylum
grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:  Date: 9 October 2019


     [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

