
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07929/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 June 2019                       |On 17 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                  M B P R W
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Wilcox, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 15 October 1983.  He
appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the respondent
to refuse the appellant's application, that decision being dated 15 June
2018.  In a decision promulgated on 29 March 2019, Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal I Howard dismissed the appellant's protection claim.

The appellant appeals with permission on the following grounds:

Ground 1:

Failure to make findings on material issues, notably in respect of the
guidance given in PJ (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 and an alleged failure by the judge to
decide whether or not there was an obligation on the Secretary of State to
undertake particular enquiries in this case and if he decided that
requirement existed, what consequences arose as a result of the Secretary
of State's failure to discharge that obligation;

Ground 2:

Insufficient reasons in relation to the rejection of the documents provided
on behalf of the appellant;

Ground 3:

Failure to have regard to the objective evidence including in relation to
the significant change in the country situation in Sri Lanka and the
intervening period between when the appellant fled in 2009 and when he
returned in 2011 to marry, it being argued that the judge failed to give
adequate reasons for finding this return inconsistent, given that the Sri
Lankan government's concern changed following the conclusion of the war in
May 2009.

Decision on Error of Law

It was Mr Wilcox's submission that the judge failed to engage with the
guidance in PJ despite the fact that this formed part of the appellant's
case, including as recorded at paragraphs 7 to 9 of the appellant's
skeleton argument.  Mr Wilcox relied on the documents submitted to the
First-tier Tribunal, which included a letter from the mother of the person
in question that the appellant claimed to have helped together with a
receipt from the LRRC.  More significantly, Mr Wilcox submitted that the
judge failed to engage with any of the documents at pages 49 to 55 of the
appellant's bundle, which included an arrest warrant and Magistrates'
documents and a letter from the appellant's attorney in Sri Lanka together
with his Bar Association identity card and a national identity card.  It
was Mr Wilcox's submission that in terms of what was said in PJ (Sri Lanka)
these documents in particular went to the heart of the appellant's case and
were easily verifiable by the respondent.

PJ (Sri Lanka) provides including as follows:

         "30. Therefore, simply because a relevant document is potentially
             capable of being verified does not mean that the national
             authorities have an obligation to take this step. Instead, it
             may be necessary to make an enquiry in order to verify the
             authenticity and reliability of a document - depending always
             on the particular facts of the case - when it is at the centre
             of the request for protection, and when a simple process of
             enquiry will conclusively resolve its authenticity and
             reliability (see Singh v Belgium [101] - [105]). I do not
             consider that there is any material difference in approach
             between the decisions in Tanveer Ahmed and Singh v Belgium, in
             that in the latter case the Strasbourg court simply addressed
             one of the exceptional situations when national authorities
             should undertake a process of verification.


          1. In my view, the consequence of a decision that the national
             authorities are in breach of their obligations to undertake a
             proper process of verification is that the Secretary of State
             is unable thereafter to mount an argument challenging the
             authenticity of the relevant documents unless and until the
             breach is rectified by a proper enquiry. It follows that if a
             decision of the Secretary of State is overturned on appeal on
             this basis, absent a suitable investigation it will not open
             to her to suggest that the document or documents are forged or
             otherwise are not authentic.


          1. Finally, in this context it is to be emphasised that the
             courts are not required to order the Secretary of State to
             investigate particular areas of evidence or otherwise to
             direct her enquiries. Instead, on an appeal from a decision of
             the Secretary of State it is for the court to decide whether
             there was an obligation on her to undertake particular
             enquiries, and if the court concludes this requirement
             existed, it will resolve whether the Secretary of State
             sustainably discharged her obligation (see NA (UT rule 45:
             Singh V Belgium) [2014] UKUT 00205 IAC). If court finds there
             was such an obligation and that it was not discharged, it must
             assess the consequences for the case."


It seems to me that at least a number of the documents including the
warrant issued against the appellant and the report filed against the
appellant by the Terrorist Investigation Division together with the letter
from his lawyer are central to the appellant's case, and if they are
genuine the appellant would be at risk if returned to Sri Lanka.  Such was
confirmed at paragraph 7(d) of the headnote to GJ and others (Sri Lanka)
[2013] UKUT 319 (IAC), which confirms that if an extant court order or
arrest warrant are in force, then the individuals in question will be on a
computerised stop list.

There is some force therefore in the argument that the First-tier Tribunal
at least needed to engage with the arguments in PJ (Sri Lanka) as to
whether the respondent ought to have undertaken such verification.

Equally, I agree with Mr Wilcox that the judge failed to give adequate
reasons why he rejected the documents provided by the appellant, the judge
relying simply on the assertion that the documents were produced in
suspicious circumstances and therefore were not capable of corroborating
the appellant's account.  That would appear to fail to approach the
documents and all the evidence in the round as the First-tier Tribunal only
addressed the documents after reaching the conclusions that the appellant
was not credible (see including Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 36).

Although Mr McGirr submitted that the judge had concluded that the
appellant was not credible and therefore did not need to go any further in
relation to the documents, that is to fall squarely into the Mibanga trap
of rejecting the documents because the appellant was considered not
credible rather than considering all of the evidence in the round including
whether the documents were capable of supporting the appellant's account
and if not, the judge was required to give reasons why this was the case
(MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC).

In respect of ground 3 and the alleged failure to have regard to the
objective evidence, again, there is merit in the appellant's argument that
the judge failed to adequately explain why it was inconsistent for the
appellant to have returned to Sri Lanka when he did to get married, given
his earlier claimed problems, despite the fact that the background country
evidence indicated a change of approach of the authorities following the
end of the civil war in May 2009 (see including GJ and others (post-civil
war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)); it being argued on
behalf of the appellant that his approach and evidence was in keeping with
the objective evidence, including that he had been able to leave Sri Lanka
without issue under his own identity on 22 July 2009 after the ceasefire.

Although in response to the third ground Mr McGirr addressed the judge's
findings about the apparent 'sea change in the attitude of the authorities'
to the appellant after 2011, that is to misunderstand the grounds, which
were in relation to the change of approach of the Sri Lankan authorities in
general following the civil war which, it was argued and I accept, the
judge failed to take into consideration in reaching his credibility
findings (whereas the judge's findings at [29] were in relation to the
judge's rejection of why and how the documents had been produced).

I am of the view that the First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate
reasons as to why the appellant's account was rejected in light of the
background country information, which is potentially supportive of such a
narrative.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is set
aside.  As the errors in question go to the heart of the appellant's
account, including the findings on credibility and in relation to the
documents, no findings are preserved.  Given the nature and extent of the
fact-finding required therefore, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal for a hearing de novo, other than before Judge Howard.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 12 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid and therefore no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  12 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


