
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/07065/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                    |        Decision & Reasons        |
|                                    |Promulgated                       |
|On 28 April 2017                    |        On 3 May 2017             |
|                                    |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                              REBAZ OMAR TOFIQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr E MacKay of McGlashan MacKay, solicitors
For the Respondent:       Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. No anonymity direction was made previously in respect of this  Appellant.
Having considered all the circumstances and evidence I do  not  consider  it
necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Moran promulgated on 24 November 2016,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


2. The Appellant was born on 2 December 1990 and is a national of  Iraq.  On
7 January 2016 the Appellant entered the UK and claimed asylum. On  24  June
2016 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's application.


The Judge's Decision

3. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Moran ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 7 March 2017  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Chalkley gave permission to appeal stating

      I believe that for the succinct reasons set out in paragraph 3 of  the
      grounds, it is properly arguable that the First-tier  Judge  may  have
      materially erred in law in his determination.

The Hearing

4. (a) Mr MacKay, for the appellant moved the grounds of appeal. He told  me
that the focus in this appeal is on internal  relocation,  and  argued  that
the Judge has failed to properly assess whether it is  safe  and  reasonable
for the appellant to relocate.  He  relied  on  AMM  and  others  (conflict;
humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011]UKUT 00445  (IAC)  and
Jasim v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 432. He told me that the Judge  had  failed  to
make any findings at all on the questions of travel to IKR from Baghdad.

(b) Mr Mackay told  me  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  consider  whether
internal relocation would be unduly harsh. He told me  that  the  Judge  has
not taken account of the factors listed at paragraph 15 of the head note  to
AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC). He told me that the  Judge
has not assessed the three factors set out in AA.

(c) Mr Mackay told me that the decision contains a  material  error  of  law
because the Judge draws the conclusion that the appellant can safely  go  to
IKR without making a full assessment  of  the  difficulties  that  would  be
faced by the appellant travelling within Iraq.  The  appellant  is  a  Sunni
Muslim Kurd from Diyala province. The appellant has not  lived  in  the  IKR
and so would be granted access to IKR for  10  days  only.  If  he  had  not
secured a job and accommodation within that ten-day period he would  not  be
allowed to stay. Mr Mackay told me that none of  those  factors  feature  in
the Judge's decision. He urged me to set the decision aside and to remit  it
to the First-tier to be determined of new.

6. For the respondent, Mr Govan relied on the rule 24 notice dated 24  March
2017. He told me that the decision does not contain errors of law,  material
or otherwise. He reminded me that the appellant is a Kurdish, single,  male.
He told me that the appellant circumstances are  similar  to  those  of  the
appellant in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC).  He  told  me
that it is for the appellant to establish why he cannot relocate,  and  that
that evidence was not before the First-tier. He told me  that  the  decision
contains a careful  analysis  of  the  appellant's  circumstances  and  that
between [22] and [26]  the  Judge  considers  relocation  and  explains  why
internal relocation is a viable option for the appellant.  He  urged  me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7. In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) it was held that  (i)
Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will be to  the
IKR and all other Iraqis will be to  Baghdad.  The  Iraqi  authorities  will
allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United Kingdom to enter Iraq  only  if  P
is in possession of a current or expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or  a
laissez passer; (ii) No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if  not
in possession of one of these documents; (iii)  In the light  of  the  Court
of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq) and Others v Secretary of  State  for  the
Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  1276,  an  international  protection  claim
made by P cannot succeed by reference to any alleged risk  of  harm  arising
from an absence of  Iraqi  identification  documentation,  if  the  Tribunal
finds that P's return is not currently feasible, given what is  known  about
the state of P's documentation.

8. In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544  (IAC)  it  was  also  held
that (i) It will only be where the Tribunal is satisfied that the return  of
an Iraqi national (P) to Iraq is feasible that the issue of alleged risk  of
harm arising from an absence  of  Iraqi  identification  documentation  will
require  judicial  determination;  (ii)  Having  a  Civil  Status   Identity
Document (CSID) is one of the ways in which it  is  possible  for  an  Iraqi
national in the United Kingdom to obtain a passport  or  a  laissez  passer.
Where the Secretary of State proposes to remove P by means of a passport  or
laissez passer, she will be expected to demonstrate to  the  Tribunal  what,
if any, identification documentation led the Iraqi authorities  to  issue  P
with the passport or laissez passer (or to  signal  their  intention  to  do
so); (iii) Where P is returned to  Iraq  on  a  laissez  passer  or  expired
passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at the  point  of  return  by
reason of not having a current passport  or  other  current  form  of  Iraqi
identification document; (iv) Where P's return  to  Iraq  is  found  by  the
Tribunal to be feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide whether  P
has a CSID, or will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival  in
Iraq. A CSID  is  generally  required  in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access
financial assistance from the authorities; employment;  education;  housing;
and medical treatment.  If P shows there are  no  family  or  other  members
likely to be able to provide means of support, P is  in  general  likely  to
face a real risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by the  time
any funds provided to P by the Secretary of State or her  agents  to  assist
P's return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that  P  will  still
have no CSID; (v) Where return is feasible but P does not  have  a  CSID,  P
should as a general matter be able to  obtain  one  from  the  Civil  Status
Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using an  Iraqi  passport  (whether
current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such a  passport,  P's
ability to obtain a CSID may depend on whether P knows the page  and  volume
number of the book holding P's information (and that  of  P's  family).  P's
ability to persuade the  officials  that  P  is  the  person  named  on  the
relevant page is likely to depend on whether P has family members  or  other
individuals who are prepared to vouch for P; (v) P's  ability  to  obtain  a
CSID is likely to be severely hampered if P is unable to  go  to  the  Civil
Status Affairs Office of P's Governorate because it  is  in  an  area  where
Article 15(c) serious harm is  occurring.  As  a  result  of  the  violence,
alternative  CSA  Offices  for  Mosul,  Anbar  and  Saluhaddin   have   been
established in Baghdad and Kerbala.  The evidence does not demonstrate  that
the "Central Archive", which exists in  Baghdad,  is  in  practice  able  to
provide CSIDs to those in need  of  them.  There  is,  however,  a  National
Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for  formal  recognition  of
identity. The precise operation of this court is, however, unclear.


9. In BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC) it was held that
(i) The level of general violence in Baghdad city remains significant,  but
the current evidence does not justify departing from the conclusion of  the
Tribunal in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC).  (ii)  The
evidence shows that those who worked for non-security  related  Western  or
international companies, or any other categories of  people  who  would  be
perceived as having collaborated with foreign coalition forces,  are  still
likely to be at risk in areas which are under ISIL  control  or  have  high
levels of insurgent activity. At the current time the  risk  is  likely  to
emanate from Sunni insurgent groups  who  continue  to  target  Western  or
international companies as well as those who are perceived  to  collaborate
with the Government of Iraq. (iii) The current evidence indicates that  the
risk in Baghdad to those who worked for  non-security  related  Western  or
international companies is low although there  is  evidence  to  show  that
insurgent groups such as ISIL  are  active  and  capable  of  carrying  out
attacks in the city. In so far as there may be a low  level  of  risk  from
such groups in Baghdad it is not sufficient to show a real risk solely as a
perceived  collaborator.  (iv)  Kidnapping  has  been,   and   remains,   a
significant and persistent problem contributing to the breakdown of law and
order in Iraq. Incidents of kidnapping  are  likely  to  be  underreported.
Kidnappings might be linked to  a  political  or  sectarian  motive;  other
kidnappings are rooted in criminal activity for a purely financial  motive.
Whether a returnee from the West is likely to be perceived as  a  potential
target for kidnapping in Baghdad may depend on how long he or she has  been
away from Iraq. Each case will be fact sensitive,  but  in  principle,  the
longer a person has  spent  abroad  the  greater  the  risk.  However,  the
evidence does not show a real risk to a returnee in Baghdad on this  ground
alone. (v) Sectarian violence has increased since the withdrawal of  US-led
coalition forces in 2012, but is not at the levels  seen  in  2006-2007.  A
Shia dominated government is supported by Shia  militias  in  Baghdad.  The
evidence indicates that Sunni  men  are  more  likely  to  be  targeted  as
suspected supporters of Sunni extremist groups such as ISIL. However, Sunni
identity alone is not sufficient to give rise to a  real  risk  of  serious
harm. (vi) Individual characteristics, which do not in themselves create  a
real risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might amount to a real risk
for  the  purpose  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  Article  15(c)   of   the
Qualification Directive  or  Article  3  of  the  ECHR  if  assessed  on  a
cumulative basis. The assessment will depend on the  facts  of  each  case.
(vii) In general, the authorities in Baghdad are unable, and in the case of
Sunni complainants, are  likely  to  be  unwilling  to  provide  sufficient
protection.

10. What is not in dispute in this case is that the appellant is a Kurd;  he
is a Sunni Muslim; the appellant does not speak Arabic,  and  the  appellant
has no family in Iraq.

11. At [22] the Judge finds that the appellant will be at risk in  his  home
area. At [23] the Judge finds that relocating to IKR

      .... Presents various challenges

The Judge goes on to find that the appellant will  be  returned  to  Baghdad
because he is not a former resident of the IKR.

12. The Judge finds at [24] that the burden of proof is  on  the  appellant,
and then, at [25], finds that the appellant is a Kurd  who  does  not  speak
Arabic and does not have any family in the IKR. The  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant does not have accommodation immediately available to him.

13. Having made those findings, all of which represent the

      ........various challenges

that the appellant would face, the  Judge  declares  at  [26]  that  he  has
balanced those considerations & find the appellant "is capable of rising  to
the challenge". On that basis finds that relocation is not unduly harsh.

14. Nowhere in the  decision  does  the  Judge  ask  whether  relocation  is
reasonable or safe. Although the Judge considers the difficulties  that  the
appellant would face, the Judge does not carry  out  adequate  consideration
of what faces the appellant in Baghdad or how he will  travel  from  Baghdad
to IKR

15. BA tells me that the authorities are likely to be disinterested  in  the
plight of a Sunni Kurd in Baghdad. The background  materials  tell  me  that
the appellant will be allowed to visit IKR 10  days.  The  Judge's  decision
contains no realistic consideration of what  is  likely  to  happen  to  the
appellant at the end of that 10 day period. The Judge  has  found  that  the
appellant is returning as a single man with no support and  does  not  speak
the dominant language in Baghdad. Those  findings  have  not  been  factored
into consideration of whether it is safe and reasonable  for  the  appellant
to return to an area of Iraq other than his home area.

16.  In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

17.  I therefore find that the decision is tainted  by  material  errors  of
law because the Judge, having found that the appellant will not be  safe  in
his home area, the Judge  does  not  go  on  to  consider  whether  internal
relocation is safe  and  reasonable  for  this  appellant.   A  fuller  fact
finding exercise might have resulted in a different outcome to this  appeal.
I must, therefore,  set  the  decision  promulgated  on  promulgated  on  24
November 2016 aside.

18. I have already found material errors of law in the fact-finding  process
carried out by the First-tier in the decision  promulgated  on  24  November
2016. I therefore find that I cannot substitute my own decision  because  of
the extent of the fact-finding exercise required to reach  a  just  decision
in this appeal.


Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

19. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

21. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Glasgow  to  be
heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Moran.

Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

23. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 26  November  2016.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 1 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
