
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07937/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 07 December 2018                          |On 18 December 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                 mohamed [s]
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A. Sehra, Counsel instructed by Nag law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge  A.  K.  Hussain  sitting  at  Birmingham  on  14  August  2018)
    dismissing his  appeal  from  the  decision  of  the  respondent  ("the
    Department") to refuse his fresh asylum claim which he advanced on  the
    basis that he had recently been able  to  obtain  documentary  evidence
    from Sri Lanka to prove that he had been (wrongly) accused by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities of being involved in a bombing linked  to  the  LTTE
    and that there was an extant warrant for  his  arrest.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and the appellant did not
    apply for anonymity for this appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose date of  birth  is  [~]
    1984.  On 12 October 2010 he was granted entry clearance as a  student,
    on a visa which was valid until 1 January 2013. The appellant became an
    overstayer on 13 July 2014. He sought to regularise his status later in
    2014 on family/private life grounds. His application was refused on  26
    February 2015, and he first claimed asylum on 28 May 2015.  His  asylum
    claim was refused on 19 November 2015, and his appeal came before Judge
    Housego at Hatton Cross on 28 April 2016.

 3. The appellant represented himself. The appellant claimed  that  he  had
    been arrested, detained and tortured. He said there was an open warrant
    for arrest and that in February 2015 his mother had  told  him  that  a
    person with the same name had been arrested instead of him in a case of
    mistaken identity. The Judge asked him what proof he had. He  said  his
    brother had been trying to get proof with the assistance of  a  lawyer,
    but he needed more time. In his subsequent decision,  the  Judge  found
    that the appellant's claim  was  wholly  lacking  in  credibility.  The
    appellant did not appeal against Judge Housego's  decision,  which  was
    promulgated on 14 April 2016.

 4. On 15 May 2018 Nag Law submitted  a  fresh  claim  for  asylum  on  the
    appellant's behalf relying on various documents  which  had  been  sent
    from Sri Lanka. On 13 June 2018 the Department refused the fresh asylum
    claim.

 5. At the appeal before Judge Hussain, the appellant  was  represented  by
    Counsel. In his subsequent decision, the Judge held at  paragraph  [20]
    that the appellant had not given a credible explanation for the failure
    to produce the documents  at  the  hearing  before  Judge  Housego.  At
    Paragraph [23] he said that he attached  little  weight  to  the  court
    documents due to the delay in their production and the  fact  that  the
    Department could not  have  conclusively  established  that  they  were
    authentic or reliable, even if it had tried.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 6. On 18  October  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "It is arguable  that  the  Judge  may  have  materially  erred  in
         relation to the documents produced and reasons  for  the  delay  in
         their production, and [as] regards his  reasons  for  rejecting  as
         lacking in credibility aspects of his account as  set  out  in  the
         application."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 7. There was no Rule 24 response from the Specialist Appeals team. At  the
    error of law hearing, Mr Bramble conceded at the outset that  Ground  1
    (Delay in Producing Documents) was made out, and, upon further enquiry,
    he conceded that the  error  had  a  knock-on  effect  on  the  Judge's
    findings on the probative value of the documents, such that his overall
    findings on the credibility of the core claim were  unsafe.  He  agreed
    with Miss Seehra that the decision should be set aside, and the  appeal
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Discussion

 8. Ground 1 is that the Judge did not take into account  all  the  reasons
    given by the appellant for the delay in producing documents to  support
    his claim, and so his starting  point  of  treating  all  the  recently
    produced  documents  with  suspicion  and  as  inherently  lacking   in
    credibility was inadequately reasoned. While the contrary is  arguable,
    I  do  not  consider  that  Mr  Bramble's   concession   is   perverse.
    Accordingly, I find that an error of law is made out as set out  above.
    Since the credibility of  the  recently  produced  court  documents  is
    central to the fresh claim, the upshot  is  that  the  Judge's  adverse
    credibility findings are unsafe, and the decision must be set aside and
    remade.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law  such
    that the decision must be set aside and remade.

Directions

10. The appellant's appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    Birmingham for a de novo hearing on all issues  before  a  Judge  other
    than Judge A.K. Hussain.


Signed                              Date 11 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

