
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07535/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th October 2018                          |On 9th November 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                                    [p t]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Benfield of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  He was born on [  ~  ]  1994.
    His appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  28  July  2017
    refusing his claim for asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  on  human
    rights grounds was dismissed by Judge Ripley (the judge) in a  decision
    promulgated on 24 May 2018.

 2. The grounds claim the judge erred in failing to give  adequate  reasons
    for rejecting  evidence,  failure  to  give  consideration  to  medical
    evidence,  insufficient  reasons  for  rejecting  evidence   from   the
    appellant's witnesses and  failure  to  take  account  of  the  country
    guidance with regard to sur place activities.

 3. Judge Lever refused permission to appeal on  12  June  2018.   He  said
    inter alia as follows:

         "3.  The judge had set out fully the evidence and  the  submissions
             in this case.  At [35] he had noted that he had considered all
             the  documentary  and  oral   evidence   together   with   the
             submissions.  He had looked at the psychiatric evidence  first
             and had noted  that  he  had  taken  that  into  account  when
             assessing the evidence.  At [40] the judge made an  assessment
             of the Appellant's mental health as part of  the  evidence  in
             the round and reached findings that were available to him.  In
             that same paragraph  he  had  made  reference  to  the  aunt's
             evidence and he was clearly aware of that evidence.   In  like
             manner the judge had referred to the letter from a lawyer  and
             had made findings  in  relation  to  that  evidence.   He  was
             entitled to reach those findings.  He had looked carefully  at
             the risk on return in  light  of  the  country  guidance  case
             relating to sur  place  activities  and  generally.   He  gave
             reasons for his finding that there was no real risk on return.
              This was a case that had been dealt with in detail  and  with
             care where there were a number  of  credibility  issues.   The
             lengthy grounds of appeal  are  in  reality  no  more  than  a
             disagreement with the judge's findings which were open to  him
             on the evidence."

 4. The grounds were renewed to the Upper Tribunal.  It was argued that  in
    refusing permission to appeal, Judge  Lever  failed  to  give  detailed
    consideration to the grounds of appeal as drafted:

         "The FtTJ refuses permission on the grounds that Judge  Ripley  did
         consider the evidence (namely from the attorney and the appellant's
         aunt) and did consider the country  guidance  in  relation  to  sur
         place activities.  The appellant contends that merely referring  to
         evidence does not amount to an engagement with that evidence  which
         accords with the Tribunal's duty to consider the claim with anxious
         scrutiny.  With respect to FtTJ Ripley, it cannot be said that  the
         conclusions  on  risk  arising  from  sur   place   activities   is
         sustainable, and on that basis, permission is sought."

 5. Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman granted permission on 19  September  2018.
    He said  inter  alia,  "The  renewed  grounds  are  about  the  judge's
    treatment of various sources of evidence.  There is an  arguable  point
    on  how  she  dealt  with  the  consultant  psychiatrist's  opinion  on
    causation of the appellant's PTSD and  the  others  may  be  argued  if
    necessary."

Submissions on Error of Law

 6. Ms Benfield relied upon the grounds.

 7. Ms Kiss acknowledged the judge materially  erred  in  failing  to  give
    adequate reasons for rejecting evidence.  Nevertheless, Ms  Kiss  asked
    me to preserve the judge's findings at [10] - [22] of the decision.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 8. I find the judge materially erred  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the
    grounds and conceded by Ms Kiss with regard to ground 1 that there  was
    a failure to give adequate reasons for rejecting evidence.

 9. Given the issues with regard to interpretation and also given the  fact
    that the judge accepted that the appellant was a vulnerable witness,  I
    find it inappropriate to preserve any of the findings.

Decision

The decision is set aside in  its  entirety  and  will  be  remade  de  novo
following a new hearing before a different Tribunal in the First-tier.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 2 November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart


