
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA077112016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                |Decision Promulgated            |
|On 27 June 2017                       |On 3 July 2017                  |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                     V L
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms M Cleghorn (counsel) instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, preserving  the  anonymity  direction  made  by  the
First-tier Tribunal.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hindson promulgated on 23 December 2016, which dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1989 and is a national of  Albania.  On  11
July 2016, the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Hindson ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 17 March  2017  Deputy  Upper
Tribunal Judge Davey gave permission to appeal stating

      "The renewed grounds seeking permission to appeal the decision [D]  of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge Hindson (the Judge)  promulgated  on  23
      December 2016 disclose material arguable errors of law.


      Grounds 1 - 4 do not add to the original  grounds.  Time  is  extended
      because of the issues raised.


      Grounds 6 - 16 raise arguable errors of law in the Judge's approach to
      the evidence and sufficiency of reasons not least in the light of  the
      country guidance case of AM & BM [2010]  and  TD  &  AD  [2016]  of  9
      February 2016."


The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellant, Ms Cleghorn moved the grounds of appeal. She  told
me  that  the  Judge's  decision  is  devoid  of  reference  to   background
materials, and does not mentioned country guidance cases. She told  me  that
the decision makes no reference to either TD and AD  (Trafficked  women)  CG
[2016] UKUT 92 (IAC)  or AM & BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG  [2010]  UKUT
80 (IAC)

(b) Ms Cleghorn took me to [21] of the  decision,  where  she  told  me  the
Judge superficially acknowledges that trafficking of  Albanian  women  is  a
recognised problem, but then told  me  that  the  Judge  proceeded  to  make
findings of fact in a vacuum. Told me that the Judge's  only  real  findings
of fact are at [22] and [23] of the decision. She reminded me  that  amongst
the documentary evidence before the Judge there was an expert report  and  a
letter from an outreach worker (from Shiana Sheffield Ltd) dated 14  January
2016. Those two pieces of evidence are referred to by the Judge  at  [27]  &
[28] of the decision, where  the  Judge  (it  is  argued)  gives  inadequate
reasons for placing little weight on the two pieces of evidence.

(c) Ms Cleghorn told me  that  the  decision  lacks  reasoned  findings  and
contains inadequate analysis of the evidence placed before  the  court.  She
told me that the Judge materially erred in law because of an  inadequacy  in
reasoning and because the Judge fails to follow country guidance cases.  She
told me that the Judge's treatment of expert evidence was wanting, and as  a
result the fact-finding exercise is flawed. Ms Cleghorn urged me to set  the
decision aside  and  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
determined of new.

6. Mr Diwnycz adopted the terms of the rule 24 note, but  told  me  that  he
could not vigourously defend this decision. He told  me  that  the  decision
contains an inadequacy of reasoning, and  is  flawed  because  there  is  no
reference to the country guidance caselaw. He told me that the  decision  is
not safe, and that he would not try to defend it further.

Analysis

7.    In TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 92 (IAC)  it  was  held
that much of the guidance given in AM & BM  (Trafficked  women)  Albania  CG
[2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) is maintained. Where that guidance has been amended  or
supplemented by this decision it is in italics: (i) It is  not  possible  to
set out a typical profile  of  trafficked  women  from  Albania:  trafficked
women  come  from  all  areas  of  the  country  and  from   varied   social
backgrounds; (ii) Much of Albanian society is governed by a strict  code  of
honour  which  not  only  means  that  trafficked  women  would  have   very
considerable difficulty in reintegrating into their  home  areas  on  return
but also will affect their ability to relocate internally.  Those  who  have
children outside marriage are particularly vulnerable. In extreme cases  the
close relatives of the trafficked woman may refuse to  have  the  trafficked
woman's child return with her and could force  her  to  abandon  the  child:
(iii) Some  women  are  lured  to  leave  Albania  with  false  promises  of
relationships  or  work.  Others  may  seek  out  traffickers  in  order  to
facilitate  their  departure  from  Albania  and  their   establishment   in
prostitution abroad. Although  such  women  cannot  be  said  to  have  left
Albania against their will, where they have  fallen  under  the  control  of
traffickers  for  the  purpose  of  exploitation  there  is  likely  to   be
considerable violence within the relationships and a lack of  freedom:  such
women are victims of trafficking; (iv) In the past few  years  the  Albanian
government  has  made  significant  efforts  to  improve  its  response   to
trafficking. This includes widening the  scope  of  legislation,  publishing
the  Standard  Operating  Procedures,  implementing  an  effective  National
Referral Mechanism, appointing  a  new  Anti-trafficking  Co-ordinator,  and
providing training to law enforcement  officials.  There  is  in  general  a
Horvath-standard sufficiency of protection, but it will not be effective  in
every case. When considering whether  or  not  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
protection for a victim of trafficking her particular circumstances must  be
considered; (v)  There  is  now  in  place  a  reception  and  reintegration
programme for victims of trafficking. Returning victims of  trafficking  are
able to stay in a shelter on arrival, and in 'heavy cases' may  be  able  to
stay there for up to 2  years.  During  this  initial  period  after  return
victims of trafficking are supported and protected.  Unless  the  individual
has particular vulnerabilities such as physical  or  mental  health  issues,
this option cannot generally be said to be unreasonable; whether it is  must
be determined on a case by case basis;(vi) Once asked to leave  the  shelter
a victim of trafficking can live on her own.  In  doing  so  she  will  face
significant challenges including, but not  limited  to,  stigma,  isolation,
financial hardship and uncertainty, a sense of physical insecurity  and  the
subjective  fear  of  being  found  either  by  their  families  or   former
traffickers.  Some  women  will  have  the  capacity  to   negotiate   these
challenges  without  undue  hardship.  There  will  however  be  victims  of
trafficking with characteristics, such as mental  illness  or  psychological
scarring, for  whom  living  alone  in  these  circumstances  would  not  be
reasonable. Whether a particular appellant falls  into  that  category  will
call  for  a  careful  assessment  of  all  the  circumstances;  (vii)   Re-
trafficking is a  reality.  Whether  that  risk  exists  for  an  individual
claimant will  turn  in  part  on  the  factors  that  led  to  the  initial
trafficking, and on her personal circumstances,  including  her  background,
age, and her willingness and ability to seek help from the authorities.  For
a proportion of victims of trafficking, their situations may mean that  they
are especially vulnerable to re-trafficking,  or  being  forced  into  other
exploitative situations; (viii) Trafficked women from Albania  may  well  be
members of a particular social group on that  account  alone.  Whether  they
are at risk of persecution on account of such membership  and  whether  they
will be able to access sufficiency of protection from the  authorities  will
depend upon their individual circumstances including but not limited to  the
following: (a) The social status and economic standing  of  her  family  (b)
The level of education of the victim of trafficking or her  family  (c)  The
victim of trafficking's state of health, particularly her mental health  (d)
The presence of an illegitimate child (e) The area of origin  (f)  Age   and
(g) What support network will be available.

8. Between  [10]  and  [17]  of  the  decision,  the  Judge  summarises  the
appellant's claim.  At  [20]  of  the  decision,  the  Judge  describes  the
exercise he must follow to assess credibility. In the  penultimate  sentence
of [20] he says that  he  does  not  accept  the  appellant  as  a  credible
witness. His reasons for rejecting the appellant's  evidence  are  contained
at [22] and [23] of the decision.

9. At both [22] and [23] of the decision  the  Judge  simply  says  that  he
rejects passages of the appellant's evidence. He suggests  that  he  rejects
evidence because he finds it to be implausible, but the  decision  does  not
contain an adequate analysis of the evidence, nowhere  in  the  decision  is
adequate  explanation  given  for  rejecting  passages  of   the   appellant
evidence. At [25]  of  the  decision  the  Judge  gives  voice  to  his  own
expectation. At [26] of the decision the Judge is critical of the  appellant
for not reporting rape to the police in the UK.

10. The Ministry of Justice's own statistics indicate that only  around  15%
of those who experience sexual violence choose to report it to  the  police.
The Judge's finding at [26] is unsafe. Effectively,  the  Judge  finds  that
because he doubts the appellant's credibility, she cannot fall into the  85%
majority who do not report sexual violence to the police.

11. It is clear from [27] to [28] of the decision that the Judge had  expert
evidence from Miranda Vickers, and a letter offering opinion  evidence  from
Shiana Sheffield Ltd.  All  the  Judge  says  about  those  two  sources  of
evidence is that he attaches little weight to each source of  evidence.  The
Judge does not adequately explain why he  attaches  little  weight  to  that
evidence, nor does he analyse the evidence contained in  the  expert  report
or the letter.

12. Although the Judge says that he takes account  of  background  materials
at [20] and [21] of the decision, there is no  analysis  of  that  evidence.
The Judge does not specify what that evidence is, nor does he  say  what  he
takes from the background materials. The Judge makes  no  reference  to  the
country guidance cases of TD and AD (Trafficked women)  CG  [2016]  UKUT  92
(IAC)  or AM & BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC)

13. In R and Others v SSHD (2005) EWCA civ 982 the Court of Appeal  endorsed
Practice Direction 18.4 which states that any failure  to  follow  a  clear,
apparently applicable country guidance case or  to  show  why  it  does  not
apply to the case in question is likely to  be  regarded  as  a  ground  for
review or appeal on a point of law.   The  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  it
represented a failure to take a material matter into account.

14. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

15. In this case, despite  devoting  seven  paragraphs  to  summarising  the
appellant's claim, the Judge's reasoning is condensed  into  two  paragraphs
(at [22] & [23] of the decision). The reasoning contained  in  the  decision
is inadequate. There is insufficient analysis of the evidence in this  case.
The Judge finds that the appellant is not a credible  witness  and  then  at
[27] and [28]  rejects  the  expert  evidence  (and  supporting  documentary
evidence) because he  has  found  that  the  appellant  is  not  a  credible
witness.

16. In M (DRC) 2003 UKIAT 00054 the Tribunal said that it was wrong to  make
adverse findings of credibility first and then dismiss an expert report.  In
Chengjie Miao v SSHD 2006 EWCA Civ 75 the Court of Appeal said that  in  the
absence of a good reason for doubting an expert's expertise or  the  logical
or factual foundation of his opinion, the Immigration  Judge  was  wrong  to
dismiss it because it was merely an opinion.

17. In FS (Treatment of Expert evidence)  Somalia  [2009]  UKAIT  00004  the
Tribunal held that Immigration Judges  have  a  duty  to  consider  all  the
evidence before them  when  reaching  a  decision  in  an  even  handed  and
impartial manner. In assessing the evidence before  them  they  must  attach
such weight as they  consider  appropriate  to  that  evidence.  It  may  on
occasions be appropriate to reject the conclusions  reached  by  an  expert.
What is crucial is that a reasoned explanation is given for so doing

18. I have to find that the decision is tainted by material errors  of  law.
No consideration has been given to the  country  guidance  cases.  There  is
inadequate analysis of each of the sources of  evidence.  The  rejection  of
the appellant's account is not adequately reasoned. I find  that  these  are
material errors of law. I must therefore set the decision aside.

19. I have already found material errors of law in the fact-finding  process
carried out by the First-tier in the decision  promulgated  on  23  December
2016. I therefore find that I cannot substitute my own decision  because  of
the extent of the fact-finding exercise required to reach  a  just  decision
in this appeal.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

20. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

21. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

22. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Bradford to  be
heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Hindson.

Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

24. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 23  December  2016.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 30 June2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle




