
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07942/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 December 2017                           |On 30 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    O.N.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Panagiotopolou, Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a national  of  Turkey.   He
    arrived in the UK in February 2017 and  claimed  asylum  the  following
    day.  The basis of his claim was that he was an Alevi Kurd who in  2015
    became a supporter of the People's Democratic Party (HDP).  He had been
    detained and ill-treated by the Turkish authorities who  suspected  him
    of involvement with the PKK.  After he was released and  continued  his
    minibus activities in support of the HDP, his minivan was stolen.  When
    he and his father went to the police they were thrown  out.   When  his
    father took him to a different town to stay with relatives,  the  place
    he was staying at was raided twice by the  police  who  threatened  his
    family.  His younger brother has since gone missing.  His  father  then
    arranged for his exit from Turkey.  He left Turkey  in  early  February
    2017.

2.   The appellant (hereafter the  Secretary  of  State  or  SSHD)  did  not
    accept that the claimant was an Alevi or a Kurd and considered that the
    account he gave of problems he had had  with  the  Turkish  authorities
    because of his support  for  and  involvement  with  the  HDP  was  not
    credible.

3.   The claimant's appeal came  before  Judge  McLaren  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT).  The judge heard the oral testimony of the claimant and
    then heard submissions.  The judge accepted he was an  Alevi  Kurd  and
    believed the  account  he  had  given  of  problems  with  the  Turkish
    authorities.

4.   The SSHD's grounds of appeal mentioned that the  judge's  decision  was
    legally flawed because he failed to give adequate reasons  for  finding
    the claimant's account credible and failed  to  then  engage  with  the
    HOPO's  submissions  identifying  a  number  of  shortcomings  in  that
    account.

5.   I heard  submissions  from  both  representatives.   Ms  Panagiotopolou
    submitted that the judge's acceptance  of  the  claimant's  account  in
    paragraphs 40-42 had to be read in the context of the determination  as
    a whole which featured a very detailed summary at paragraphs  31-38  of
    the SSHD's reasons  for  considering  the  claimant  had  not  given  a
    credible account as well as evaluative  observations  made  in  earlier
    paragraphs summarising the evidence.  Thus  the  judge's  statement  at
    paragraph 40 that the claimant demonstrated his  ability  to  read  and
    speak in  Kurdish dialect had to be read in conjunction with  paragraph
    18 where he  recorded that the claimant  had  been  able  to  translate
    words in a photograph from  Kurmanji  into  Turkish;  and  the  judge's
    findings at  paragraph  40  that  the  claimant  had  shown  sufficient
    knowledge of the Alevei religion had to be read together with paragraph
    14 where the judge noted that the claimant's statement that  there  was
    no Alevi education at school was "certainly consistent with the country
    guidance [by which the judge meant the Home Office Information Note] as
    was the information he  gave  about  his  belief  and  the  differences
    between these and other Muslims."  Paragraph 14 also shed light on  the
    issue  of  why  the  claimant  had  not  mentioned   "Alevi"   in   his
    identification card.  Similarly, she submitted the  judge's,  statement
    at 39 that he  had  considered  the  claimant's  account  "against  the
    country background evidence..." was reinforced by things he had said at
    paragraphs 9, 28, 29, 30 and 35.

6.   Despite Ms Panagiotopolou's well-formulated submissions I am  persuaded
    that the judge's treatment of the issue of the  claimant's  credibility
    was legally flawed.  Whilst the  judge  identified  the  SSHD's  points
    adverse to the claimant very fully at paragraphs 31-38, his own finding
    and reasons really only address issues concerning the claimant's ethnic
    origin and religion.  No reason is given in particular  as  to  why  he
    believed the claimant's account of becoming involved with the  HDP  and
    being targeted as a result.  It may just about  be  inferred  that  the
    judge considered the documentation and photographic  evidence  produced
    by the claimant to support his claim, but if so, he did not explain why
    and  did  not  engage  with  the  respondent's   concerns   about   the
    inconclusive nature of the photographic evidence, despite recording  at
    34 that the SSHD did not accept that he  photographic  evidence  showed
    bullet holes and  did  not  accept   that  the  claimant  had  provided
    sufficient evidence as to the date on which this happened.   The  judge
    left unaddressed the points raised  by  the  respondent  regarding  the
    implausibility of the authorities releasing him simply because he  said
    he did  not  work  for  the  PKK;  the  implausibility   of  them  only
    apprehending the claimant and not other party members on  his  minibus;
    the implausibility of the police firing on  his  minibus  when  he  had
    previously complied with a checkpoint search; and the implausibility of
    the authorities raiding his home when they had been  happy  to  release
    him with no conditions only a month earlier.  At paragraph 37 the judge
    summarised the HOPO's oral submission as follows

         "At the hearing the Home Office presenting officer  also  submitted
         that the omission of the events that occurred to  his  brother  and
         his father from the  witness  statement  affected  the  appellant's
         credibility.  He also submitted that the appellant  had  been  very
         unclear in his evidence when asked as to dates and when  he  became
         aware of things and who had told him this which also  affected  his
         credibility.  The respondent also relied upon  the  fact  that  the
         appellant produced more details about his brother's detention  then
         he had done before and this again was a credibility issue."

7.   Regarding these key conflicts in the evidence, the  judge  says  not  a
    word in his own findings.

8.   The judge's failure to engage with key discrepancies in the  claimant's
    evidence as identified by the SSHD in the refusal letter and  the  HOPO
    at the hearing amounted to a material error of law and his decision  is
    set aside for this reason.

9.   In light of the judge's failure to deal adequately with  the  issue  of
    credibility, the case is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal.   Whilst
    it will be a matter for the judge at the next hearing to decide, it may
    be thought that as  regards  his  ethnic  and  religious  identity  the
    claimant's evidence before the FtT judge went  a  considerable  way  to
    allaying the concerns expressed by the SSHD in the refusal letter.

    To summarise:


    The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.
    The case is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  before  Judge
    McLaren).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signe:        [pic]                 Date: 28 January 2018

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

