
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:   PA/07785/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 March 2020                              |On 28 April 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    M H B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Adejumobi, IAS (Manchester)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Birrell ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 3  October  2019,
    by which the appellant's appeal against the decision of the  respondent
    to refuse to grant him international protection was dismissed.

 2. Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

Anonymity

 3. The Judge did not issue an anonymity direction even though  this  is  a
    matter in which the appellant has sought international protection.

 4. I am mindful of Guidance Note 2013 No 1 concerning anonymity directions
    and I note that the  starting  point  for  consideration  of  anonymity
    directions in this chamber of the Upper Tribunal, as in all courts  and
    tribunals, is open justice. However, I  observe  paragraph  13  of  the
    Guidance Note where it is confirmed that it is the present practice  of
    both the First-tier  Tribunal  and  this  Tribunal  that  an  anonymity
    direction is made in all appeals raising asylum or other  international
    protection claims. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 I make an anonymity direction in  order  to  avoid
    the likelihood of serious  harm  arising  to  the  appellant  from  the
    contents of his protection claim becoming known to the wider public.

 5. The direction is detailed at the conclusion of this decision.

Background

 6. The appellant is a national of Ethiopia who is presently age 20. He  is
    ethnically Oromo. He states that his father  was  accused  of  being  a
    member of the Oromo Liberation Front ('the OLF') and  died  before  the
    appellant was born. The appellant details that he was introduced to the
    OLF by a friend and became active with the movement in or around  2014,
    initially handing out leaflets before rallies. He  was  arrested  at  a
    rally in April 2014 and accused of acting on behalf of the OLF. He  was
    subsequently released by the authorities on condition that he attend no
    more protests. He attended a rally three days later. In  February  2015
    he was arrested on his way home, having been handing out  leaflets.  He
    was detained for several months and during this time he turned  16.  He
    was released following the payment of a bribe by  his  family  and  was
    required to leave the country immediately as the  persons  involved  in
    taking the bribe did not want their corrupt practices to come to light.



 7. The appellant left Ethiopia in September 2015 and travelled to  Germany
    where he stayed for a year and then spent three months  in  France.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 August 2017 and claimed asylum. The
    respondent refused the asylum application by a decision dated  31  July
    2019.

Hearing Before the FTT

 8. The appeal came before the Judge sitting in Manchester on 27  September
    2019. At the beginning of the hearing, consequent to the  Judge  having
    admitted the late filing by the respondent  of  a  short  news  article
    authored by Al-Jazeera, Mr Adejumobi sought an adjournment on behalf of
    the appellant, which was considered by the  Judge  at  [5]-[6]  of  her
    decision:

         '5. At the start of the hearing there was an application on  behalf
            of the respondent to admit late evidence, which was not filed in
            accordance with directions,  specifically  an  article  from  Al
            Jazeera dated 15 September 2018 and which is  headed  'Thousands
            of Ethiopians hail return of  once  banned  Oromo  group.'  This
            article expands upon the information contained within  the  most
            up to date COIS report regarding  the  opposition  in  Ethiopia,
            'Ethiopia: Opposition to the  government'  version  3.0  (August
            2019). I agreed to consider the evidence as it was of  potential
            importance to the appeal and factually represented the  most  up
            to factual date position in relation to the legal status of  the
            OLF whether Mr Adejumobi was aware of it or not.


         6.  As a  result  of  my  decision  Mr  Adejumobi  applied  for  an
            adjournment on the ground that he had not  been  aware  that  in
            July 2018,  the  Ethiopian  government  removed  the  June  2011
            designation as terrorist organisations for  3  armed  opposition
            groups including the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF). He had relied
            entirely on the contents of the refusal letter which  was  based
            on a 2017 COIS and therefore was not based on the  OLF  being  a
            legal party. He applied for the opportunity to obtain an  expert
            report to show that the appellant was still at risk.'

 9. The Judge considered the application under rule 4(3)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014 and observed the guidance provided by  this  Tribunal  in  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment; fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC). The Judge refused  the
    application in the following terms:

         '11. I refused the application and gave brief oral reasons which  I
            expand and explain below.


             (a) The core issue in this case as  set  out  in  the  refusal
                letter was whether the appellant had demonstrated  that  he
                was a supporter of the OLF and had  been  detained  on  two
                occasions as being a supporter  alone  was  not  enough  by
                reference to the headnote MB (OLF and MTA - risk)  Ethiopia
                CG [2007] UKAIT 00030.


             (b) The information that the OLF  was  no  longer  an  illegal
                party had been in the public domain for some time  and  had
                been in the COIS report available prior to the date of  the
                hearing. This change in  the  legal  position  of  the  OLF
                requires a more nuanced approach to the assessment of  risk
                as it is not  determinative  of  the  appeal  and  this  is
                recognised in the COIS at 2.4.11 where it states: 'Ethiopia
                is  transitioning  through  a  period  of  significant  and
                fundamental  reform.   The  onus  is  on  the   person   to
                demonstrate  that,  based  on  their   profile,   political
                activities, past experiences including any arrests (and the
                timing  of  those  arrests),  they  will  be  at  risk   of
                persecution or serious harm on return.  Each case  must  be
                considered on its own facts.'


             (c) Mr Adejumobi had the opportunity in preparing this case to
                consult the most up to date material and it was always open
                to him to obtain an expert report to show that  his  client
                was not simply a  low  level  supporter  without  more  but
                someone whose history brought him within the risk  category
                set out at headnote (2) of MB and indeed  by  reference  to
                the most up to date COIS would put him at risk.


             (d) He also has the opportunity to include background material
                in his bundle that may have alerted him that there had been
                a change in the circumstances  in  Ethiopia  since  the  CG
                decision was promulgated.  There is no background  material
                relied on in his bundle.


             (e) He also had the opportunity to take instruction  from  his
                client whose case it was that he was at risk on return  and
                was of ongoing interest although the  appellant  was  aware
                that the OLF was no longer an illegal party but  apparently
                chose  not  to  share  that  information  with  his   legal
                representative.


             (f) The appellant has never been deprived of  the  opportunity
                for a fair hearing.'

10. Having considered the evidence before her,  including  the  appellant's
    evidence and objective country material, the Judge accepted at [49]  of
    her decision that the appellant was a supporter of the OLF in  Ethiopia
    having demonstrated sufficient  knowledge  of  the  history,  aims  and
    organisation of the movement to meet the evidential burden.

11. The Judge found the appellant to be incredible as to his detention  and
    as to his stated fear of persecution at  the  hands  of  the  Ethiopian
    authorities:

         '52. In assessing his general credibility, I am  entitled  to  take
            into account his  immigration  history  and  I  find  that  this
            significantly undermines his credibility.  While  the  appellant
            appears to have claimed asylum in both Italy and Germany, he did
            not await the outcome of the process in either country.  However
            more significantly the appellant accepts that he  gave  a  false
            date of birth both in the UK and in other countries (AI 266)  in
            order to be dealt with as a minor and he did this on the  advice
            of the agent. I find  therefore  that  he  knowingly  sought  to
            secure an immigration advantage both in  the  UK  and  in  other
            European countries by presenting a false picture of himself  and
            such dishonest behaviour undermines his general credibility.


         53. The appellant asserts that he is not only a  supporter  of  the
            OLF but that he was detained twice. However,  I  find  that  the
            credibility of this claim is not only undermined by his  general
            credibility and his failure to give Mr Belay the opportunity  to
            verify this aspect of his claim but by  inconsistencies  in  his
            account. Of particular concern is  that  in  explaining  why  he
            could not return at 4.1 of his [asylum interview] the  appellant
            only refers to one detention, the  one  in  2015  and  makes  no
            reference to the other claimed detention he  now  relies  on.  I
            find therefore that the appellant has embellished his  claim  by
            suggesting that he was detained on two occasions.


         54. I also find the appellant's general credibility  is  undermined
            by his failure, given  his  claim  that  he  is  an  active  and
            committed supporter of the OLF, to mention either in his [asylum
            interview] which took place on  July  2019  or  in  his  witness
            statement which was made on 12 September 2019 that  the  OLF  is
            now legal in Ethiopia. He asserted when asked by me that he knew
            that the OLF was no longer illegal but had been asked  to  focus
            on what was said in the refusal letter and that did not  mention
            this. I found his response to be  disingenuous  as  clearly  the
            change in the party's status had the  potential  to  affect  the
            risk he claimed he faced. Moreover it was in  fact  put  to  the
            appellant in the [asylum interview] at Q243 that  the  President
            was an Oromo (an error it is the PM) so the  appellant  had  the
            opportunity to specifically address the  changing  circumstances
            in Ethiopia and was either unaware  of  this  or  chose  not  to
            address the issue fully and openly.


         55. Looking therefore at the appellant's evidence in the round  and
            taking into account my findings as to  his  general  credibility
            while I accept that the appellant was  and  continues  to  be  a
            supporter of the OLF I  do  not  accept  that  he  has  given  a
            credible account of being  detained  twice  in  Ethiopia.  As  a
            supporter only I am satisfied that the appellant  did  not  come
            within the risk factors set out in MB as I am satisfied that  he
            was never come to the attention of the authorities.'

12. The Judge considered the matter in the alternative, noting the  country
    guidance of MB (OLF and MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 00030  and
    determined at [56] that  there  has  been  a  sufficiently  significant
    change in country circumstances so as to establish that if a  detention
    and release on payment of a bribe were accepted the appellant would not
    be at risk on return. Reliance was placed  upon  the  OLF  having  been
    permitted to  be  a  lawful  political  party,  the  release  of  Oromo
    political prisoners and that the  'President  of  Ethiopia'  is  ethnic
    Oromo. I observe this  reference  relates  to  the  Prime  Minister  of
    Ethiopia, Abiy Ahmed, appointed in 2018 and who is of mixed  Oromo  and
    Amhara heritage.

Grounds of Appeal

13. The grounds of appeal filed on  behalf  of  the  appellant  are  poorly
    drafted. They do not have a heading deigning to name the  appellant  or
    provide the relevant appeal number. They run to 21 paragraphs  with  no
    attempt to identify with the  requisite  particularity  the  individual
    ground or grounds underpinning the challenge.  The  contents  of  these
    grounds are not on occasion  easy  to  decipher.  As  observed  by  the
    Tribunal in Nixon (permission to appeal:  grounds)  [2014]  UKUT  00368
    (IAC), it is axiomatic that grounds of appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    should identify, clearly, and with all the necessary  particulars,  the
    error/s of law contended as arising in a decision.

14. Following discussion with Mr Adejumobi the primary challenge within the
    grounds is the refusal of the adjournment application, as  detailed  at
    paragraphs 3-4, 6-9, 10-12, which I detail below:

         '3.  At the hearing,  the  Presenting  Officer  accessed  the  COIS
            report (dated August 2019) in court and made,  as  part  of  his
            submissions,  the  fact  that  the  'article  expands  upon  the
            information contained within the most up  to  date  COIS  report
            regarding  the  opposition  in  Ethiopia:  Opposition   to   the
            government Version 3.0 August 2019' paragraph 5 of the decision.




         4. The COIS Report was not provided to the court at the hearing  by
            the Respondent. The application made by the PO  was  only  about
            the Article.


         ...


         6.  The application made by the respondent was  in  relation  to  a
            specific evidence - copy attached - referred to by the Judge  in
            paragraph 5 of the decision, not the COIS report, which was,  in
            any event, not provided to the court. The  application  made  by
            the PO was not about the COIS report.


         7.  The Judge stated that she 'agreed to consider the  evidence  as
            it was of potential importance to  the  appeal  ...  whether  Mr
            Adejumobi was aware of it or not' Paragraph 5 of the decision.


         8.  It is to be assumed that the Judge was referring to the Article
            dated 15 September 2018 by 'the  evidence'  as  the  application
            made was in relation to a specific evidence - the  Article.  The
            Judge has however  gone  beyond  the  Article  and  quoted  from
            extracts in the COIS report which was not provided to the court.




         ...


         10. The Judge stated that  she  agreed  to  consider  the  evidence
            'whether Mr Adejumobi was aware of it or not'.  The Judge failed
            to consider the fact that the Article  was  dated  15  September
            2018 and therefore pre-dated  the  Respondent's  Refusal  Letter
            dated 31 July 2019 and despite this, the Respondent chose not to
            refuse to it in the Refusal Letter or, at least, give  it  as  a
            reason for refusal, the fact that 'the legal status of the  OLF'
            had changed in Ethiopia.


         11. The judge's decision  to  reject  the  appellant's  adjournment
            request offends the basic principle of fairness as her  decision
            to agree to consider the evidence  must  also  have  been  taken
            regardless of whether the Respondent was aware of it or  not  at
            the time date of the Refusal Letter. As the Respondent  did  not
            (or chose not to) refer to the evidence in their refusal  letter
            and the Judge considered that 'it was of potential  significance
            to the appeal', the Judge should have given  the  appellant  the
            opportunity, by granting the adjournment request, to  deal  with
            that evidence especially as the respondent was  now  seeking  to
            rely on a ground of refusal not raised  in  the  Refusal  Letter
            which it could have done.


         12. It is submitted that the Judge relying  on  extracts  from  the
            COIS which the appellant was never served with in the  case,  as
            reasons for her decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal,
            amounts to an error of law.'

15. The second identifiable ground is a wide challenge to the point in time
    that  is  relevant  for  the  Tribunal's  consideration  of  risk.  The
    appellant contends that it is anchored at the date of the  respondent's
    decision and is limited to the express consideration undertaken by  the
    respondent:

         '14. It is submitted that Q243 AIR therefore makes  it  clear  that
            the Respondent was aware of the changed legal status of the  OLF
            Party in Ethiopia but chose not to make it an issue in the  case
            or put it forward as a basis of its case in the Refusal Letter.'


         15. We submit that the appellant can only meet the case put forward
            by the Respondent in the Refusal Letter. If, despite being aware
            of the change in the legal status of the OLF  in  Ethiopia,  the
            Respondent chooses not to make that an issue in the case in  the
            Refusal  Letter,  why  should  the  appellant  address  it?  The
            respondent could have at least served  the  appellant  with  the
            Article before the date of hearing but chose not do so.  It  was
            served on the appellant's legal representative in the court room
            -  at  the  hearing.   The  appellant  was   ambushed   by   the
            respondent.'

16. A third ground is  that  identified  at  paragraphs  5  and  9  and  is
    concerned with the Judge having read a document after the  hearing.  It
    is this ground that is expressly  addressed  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Sheridan in his grant of permission:

         '5. The Judge has quoted parts of the  COIS  report  in  paragraphs
            11(b), 45, 46 and 56  of  the  decision.  The  Judge  must  have
            accessed the COIS report after the hearing as the report  itself
            was not submitted to the court by the Respondent.   Please  find
            attached a copy  of  the  relevant  pages  of  the  COIS  Report
            accessed by the Judge.  A copy of the report was never served on
            the appellant.


         ...


         9.  The Judge noted at paragraph 18 of the decision that  'although
            Mr Cullen now relied on  the  August  2019  COIS'.  As  we  have
            already pointed out, the COIS was not submitted to the court  by
            the respondent. The PO only referred to it  his  submissions  in
            support of his application to the court to admit the Article. We
            should point out that the appellant was never served a  copy  of
            the COIS prior to, or at, the hearing.'

17. Confusingly, and a clear example of the poor preparation of the grounds
    of appeal, paragraph 13 of the grounds simply  sets  out  [54]  of  the
    Judge's decision, without more. Paragraph 14 asserts that a reading  of
    the interview record confirms that the  respondent  was  aware  of  the
    change in country situation but chose not to 'make it an issue  in  the
    case'. This  paragraph  appears  to  be  connected  to  the  contention
    subsequently advanced at paragraph 15 of the grounds, rather than  with
    the paragraph of the Judge's decision identified at paragraph 13, which
    is concerned with credibility and a failure by the appellant to address
    in his interview that the OLF is  now  a  lawful  political  party.  It
    proved difficult to ascertain from Mr Adejumobi as whether  the  simple
    reciting of a paragraph from the  Judge's  decision  at  paragraph  13,
    without more, was a ground of challenge in its own right or  linked  to
    ground 2. During the course of submissions Mr.  Adejumobi  relied  upon
    the appellant having addressed the change in political situation during
    his asylum interview, asserting that the Judge could not lawfully  have
    found at [54] that he  failed  to  mention  it.  I  have  proceeded  to
    consider this issue as ground 4 and in the following terms:  a  reasons
    challenge  to  the  finding  at  [54]  that  the  appellant's   general
    credibility is undermined by his failure to address recent  changes  in
    his asylum interview and witness statement.

18. In granting permission to appeal UTJ Sheridan reasoned, inter alia:

         'It was arguably procedurally unfair  for  the  judge  to  rely  on
         evidence (the COIS report dated August 2019) that was not  provided
         to the Tribunal by either  party  without  giving  the  parties  an
         opportunity to consider and make submissions on, that evidence.'

19. No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.

Decision on Error of Law

20. Before  considering  Mr.  Adejumobi's  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant it is appropriate to note  several  uncontested  facts.  Abiy
    Ahmed was  sworn  in  as  Ethiopia's  Prime  Minister  in  April  2018.
    Following his appointment, the Ethiopian Parliament lifted the  ban  on
    the OLF and in May 2018 the Oromia regional state pardoned  over  7,600
    prisoners, some of whom were political  prisoners.  In  August  2018  a
    peace agreement was reached between the Ethiopian  government  and  the
    OLF.  Prime  Minister  Ahmed  subsequently  met  former  OLF   leaders,
    including a founder member Lencho Letta who is now leader of the  Oromo
    Democratic Front. The appellant refers to  Mr  Letta  at  Q164  of  his
    interview. In February 2019 over 1,000 Oromo fighters laid  down  their
    weapons. The appellant was interviewed by  the  respondent  as  to  his
    asylum claim on 1 July 2019 and a decision letter was issued on 31 July
    2019. Consequent to this decision, the appellant appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal and in the meantime the Home Office issued in August 2019
    a CPIN entitled 'Ethiopia: Opposition to Government' version 3.

21.  The  respondent's  decision  can  reasonably  be  criticised  for  not
    addressing the changes in Ethiopia's political landscape as to a  peace
    agreement between the Government and the OLF, in part,  it  appears  to
    me, because significant reliance was placed by the decision-maker up an
    out-of-date CPIN concerned with the Oromos dated November 2017.

22. I consider ground 4 first, as it can be addressed briefly. Mr Adejumobi
    observed that the appellant had addressed the 'unbanning' of  the  OLF,
    or at the very least in similar terms, in his asylum interview. I  note
    that there is a brief reference to the OLF being 'banned at  the  time'
    at Q165 of the interview and recognition of the  appointment  of  Prime
    Minister Ahmed at Q242, but much of the interview is concerned with the
    appellant's personal history. The appellant does not expressly  address
    the peace process, nor does he seek to identify as to why he remains at
    real risk of persecution following the establishment of the  OLF  as  a
    lawful political party in Ethiopia. Indeed, as to the election of Prime
    Minister Ahmed in April 2018 the appellant pointedly remarked  at  Q243
    that he was the chief of security for the  previous  regime,  the  same
    group remains in power and the  election  was  '...  for  international
    consumption, not for basic individuals for myself ...'  The  Judge  was
    lawfully entitled at [54] to observe that the appellant had  failed  to
    address key changes in Ethiopia that directly impacted upon  his  claim
    for international protection, either at his interview or in his witness
    statement. The appellant is simply unable to  sustain  a  challenge  to
    this element of the Judge's decision on reasons or perversity grounds.

23. As to ground 2, Mr Adejumobi was clearly exorcised  before  me  by  the
    failings of the respondent's decision letter the contents of which,  he
    asserted, did not enable him or the appellant to be  ready  to  address
    the current situation in Ethiopia  before  the  Judge  as  it  did  not
    expressly address the change in country situation from the late  spring
    of 2018 onwards.

24. During the course of the hearing, I sought to establish key issues with
    Mr. Adejumobi. He was insistent, on several occasions, that by the date
    of the hearing before the Judge he had previously  represented  several
    Oromo clients and so was well aware as to the  change  in  the  country
    situation. This contention sits ill at ease with  both  the  record  of
    proceedings and the Judge's  decision  which  records  the  adjournment
    application, in part, being founded upon Mr. Adejumobi stating that  he
    had been caught unawares as to the  change  in  country  situation,  as
    noted at [6]  of  the  decision.  I  am  not  required  to  decide  Mr.
    Adejumobi's state of knowledge at the hearing because the fact that  he
    was either aware of the change in the country situation as regards  the
    OLF, or not, does not impact upon my consideration of  the  grounds  of
    appeal before me. It is a neutral factor.

25. Mr Adejumobi addressed me, paragraph by paragraph, as to  the  relevant
    Al-Jazeera article and stated that nothing within it was unknown to him
    on the morning of the hearing before the Judge. This sits ill  at  ease
    with his contention at �15 of the grounds of appeal, which Mr Adejumobi
    confirmed to me at the hearing he had drafted, where he states that the
    appellant  was  'ambushed'  by  the  respondent's  reliance  upon  this
    article.

26. During the course of his submissions,  which  lasted  55  minutes,  Mr.
    Adejumobi continually referred back to paragraph 15 of the  grounds  of
    appeal, in particular:

         'We submit that the appellant can only meet the case put forward by
         the Respondent in the Refusal Letter. If, despite  being  aware  of
         the change in  the  legal  status  of  the  OLF  in  Ethiopia,  the
         Respondent chooses not to make that an issue in  the  case  in  the
         Refusal Letter, why should the appellant address it?'

27. As the hearing progressed Mr. Adejumobi confirmed  that  this  was  the
    primary ground  of  appeal  relied  upon.  He  submitted  that  if  the
    respondent wished to address issues known to her at  the  date  of  the
    decision, but not referred to, she was required to file  and  serve  an
    amended decision and could not  rely  upon  materials  adduced  on  the
    morning of the hearing. This was so even if, as Mr. Adejumobi contended
    before me, the appellant and  representative  were  aware  of  relevant
    changes to the country situation  at  the  date  of  the  hearing.  Mr.
    Adejumobi contended that fairness required that the respondent be  tied
    to her decision letter and  so  the  appellant  was  only  required  to
    address the issues raised within  the  letter.  Consequently,  a  Judge
    could not admit documents addressing the up-to-date situation  existing
    within a country without the respondent amending  her  decision  letter
    prior to such application. He further submitted that in the context  of
    this appeal, the Judge could not allow the respondent to rely upon  the
    Al Jazeera article, or the updated COIS, despite the article being some
    12 months old and the contents addressing facts known to  him,  because
    to permit the respondent to rely upon these documents was tantamount to
    permitting an ambush upon the appellant.

28. As observed above, the  respondent's  decision  letter  does  lack  the
    expected care as to detail expected in an examination of an application
    for international protection. There is a marked failure to consider the
    country situation existing as at the date  of  decision.  However,  Mr.
    Adejumobi's clear submission to me was that both he and his client were
    aware of the significant change in the Ethiopian government's  approach
    to the OLF. The appellant's case, as  advanced  by  Mr.  Adejumobi,  is
    encapsulated in paragraph 15 of the grounds detailed above.

29. I asked Mr. Adejumobi to address how his submission could be consistent
    with the seminal judgment on this issue, namely  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in Ravichandran & Others v. Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [1996] Imm AR 97. He  did  not  engage  with  this  judgment
    during his lengthy submissions, save for acknowledging  its  existence,
    and did not resile from his submission.

30. In Ravichandran the Court of Appeal was required to  consider  what  it
    acknowledged to be an important question, namely the date at which  the
    appellate authorities should assess  the  facts  in  asylum  cases.  On
    behalf of the appellants, the late Ian Macdonald QC sought  to  advance
    the proposition that appeals in asylum matters should be concerned with
    the factual situation existing at the date of decision. This submission
    was rejected by the Court of Appeal, with Simon Brown  LJ  stating,  at
    [112]-[113]:

         'With regard to immigration appeals generally  (which,  of  course,
         are by no means restricted to primary purposes cases) there  is  no
         doubt whatever that appeals have to be dealt with on the  basis  of
         the factual situation existing at the time of the original decision
         against which the appeal is brought. That was established  in  1982
         in R v IAT ex parte Weerasuriya (1983) 1 AER 195 and  R  v  IAT  ex
         parte Kotecha (1983) 2 AER 289, and the rule has  been  applied  in
         innumerable cases since. Does the reasoning in  those  cases  apply
         equally, as Mr. Macdonald submits, to asylum appeals?


         Although I confess to  finding  this  a  difficult  issue,  I  have
         concluded that the position is indeed different in asylum  appeals.
         It  is  true  that  to  a  substantial  extent  the  reasoning   in
         Weerasuriya and Kotecha relies as a matter of construction  on  the
         use of the past tense in section 19(1)(a)(i) and (ii)  (and  indeed
         in  section  19(2)),  but  the  court  relied   also   upon   other
         considerations which they found reinforced  their  construction  of
         section 19, principally the nature of the  appellate  structure  in
         immigration cases. As Webster, J. said in Weerasuriya in a  passage
         then approved by the Court of Appeal in Kotecha:


             '... it is, as it seems to  me,  necessary  to  look  at  that
             appellate structure in  order  to  ask  oneself  the  question
             whether that appellate structure has  to  be  regarded  as  an
             extension  of  the  original  administrative   decision-making
             function or whether it is to be regarded as simply  a  process
             for enabling that decision to be reviewed. It seems to  me  it
             falls into the latter category rather  than  into  the  former
             category.'


         I have reached the conclusion that in asylum  cases  the  appellate
         structure as applied by the 1993 Act is to be regarded rather as an
         extension of the decision-making process. I am, I  think,  entitled
         to reach that conclusion as a matter of construction on  the  basis
         that the prospective nature of the question posed by section  8  of
         the 1993  Act  over-rides  the  retrospective  approach  ordinarily
         required (implicitly) on a section 19 appeal. Section 8, after all,
         could, but does not, identify the ground of appeal  as  being  that
         the appellant's removal "would have been" (rather than "would  be")
         contrary to the United Kingdom's Convention obligations.  Moreover,
         section 8(1) refers to a particular class of appeals and section 19
         to appeals in general. It would be a strong thing to say  that  the
         general was to over-ride the particular.


         When it comes to the policy  considerations,  moreover,  there  are
         clearly good reasons for adopting a different  approach  in  asylum
         cases. Whereas all ordinary immigration cases are entirely specific
         to the individual applicant  and  ask  simply  whether  he  or  she
         qualifies  under  the  rules,  in  asylum  cases  are   necessarily
         concerned at least in part  with  the  situation  prevailing  in  a
         particular foreign country. Not only the  Secretary  of  State  but
         also the special adjudicators build up a body  of  knowledge  about
         that situation and it would be unfortunate indeed if they are bound
         to ignore all that  they  know  to  have  happened  after  a  given
         historical date, the date of the Secretary of  State's  refusal  of
         asylum. The situation might have changed for the better or it might
         have changed for the worse.  In  either  event,  if  the  appellate
         authorities were bound to ignore  such  changes,  it  would  render
         their decisions substantially less valuable. If the  situation  had
         improved but, because the appellate authorities had to ignore  such
         improvement, the appeal succeeded, the  Secretary  of  State  might
         nevertheless, in reliance upon Article 1C(5) of the 1951 Convention
         refuse the appellant refugee status. Article  1C(5)  provides  that
         the Convention ceases to apply if:


             '(5) He (the refugee) can no longer, because the circumstances
             in connection with which he has been recognised as  a  refugee
             have ceased  to  exist,  continue  to  avail  himself  of  the
             protection of the country of his nationality.'


         Equally, had the situation deteriorated but, because this had to be
         ignored, the appeal failed, the claimant could put a fresh case  to
         the Secretary of State. In either event, the appeal  process  could
         well have to start all over  again.  Lord  Lane,  C.J.  in  Kotecha
         concluded his judgment thus:


             '... were the submissions of counsel for the appellant  to  be
             accepted as  correct  [i.e.  were  the  appellant  authorities
             obliged to look at new developments] it would  mean  a  never-
             ending system of appeal, each court up the line being  obliged
             to review the facts in the light of events as they stood,  not
             at the time of the original decision but as they stood at each
             stage of the appellate system, and  the  system  would  become
             even more unmanageable than some people believe it  to  be  at
             present.'


         In asylum cases, that does not seem to me to hold true. It  follows
         that in my judgment this ground of appeal also fails.'

31. I observe that the decision in Ravichandran was approved by the Supreme
    Court in TN (Afghanistan) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2015] UKSC 40; [2015] 1 W.L.R. 3083, per  Lord  Toulson  at  [70]  and
    [73]:

         'In Ravichandran the court rightly held that on  an  asylum  appeal
         the question is one of present status: does the appellant meet  the
         criteria of the Refugee Convention or is he in need of humanitarian
         protection? ...'


         ...


         'I would hold  that  the  Ravichandran  principle  applies  on  the
         hearing of asylum appeals without exception ...'

32. I further observe that Mr.  Adejumobi  acknowledged  that  the  Supreme
    Court had upheld the principle espoused in  Ravichandran  but  did  not
    resile from his reliance on paragraph 15 of his  grounds  to  which  he
    returned on numerous  occasions  during  his  lengthy  submissions.  He
    provided no true explanation as to why the Ravichandran  principle  was
    not applicable in this matter, save  for  his  assertion  that  it  was
    wholly unfair that the respondent could rely upon the  present  country
    situation when it was not addressed in the decision letter. I  conclude
    that in seeking to advance a ground specifically rejected by the  Court
    of Appeal and Supreme Court, the former having given  seminal  guidance
    some 25 years ago, and in advancing  the  argument  with  knowledge  of
    these judgments, Mr. Adejumobi temporarily lost sight of his obligation
    to this Tribunal not to waste time and resources. There is no merit  in
    this ground.

33. As to ground 1,  the  core  paragraph  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  is
    paragraph 11:

         'The judge's decision to reject the appellant's adjournment request
         offends the basic principle of fairness as her decision to agree to
         consider the evidence must  also  have  been  taken  regardless  of
         whether the Respondent was aware of it or not at the time  date  of
         the Refusal Letter. As the Respondent did not  (or  chose  not  to)
         refer to the  evidence  in  their  refusal  letter  and  the  Judge
         considered that 'it was of potential significance to  the  appeal',
         the Judge should have  given  the  appellant  the  opportunity,  by
         granting the  adjournment  request,  to  deal  with  that  evidence
         especially as the respondent was now seeking to rely on a ground of
         refusal not raised in the Refusal Letter which it could have done.'

34. The appellant's case as to  ground  1  developed  markedly  during  the
    course of the hearing. The grounds of appeal suggest elsewhere that the
    appellant was 'ambushed' which  strongly  suggests  being  'caught  off
    guard' by new information. This initially  appeared  to  be  consistent
    with  the  Judge  recording  Mr  Adejumobi's   statement   during   his
    adjournment request that he was not aware of the relevant change in the
    political situation in Ethiopia as to the OLF.  However,  Mr  Adejumobi
    confirmed to me that he had been aware of such change, but he  was  not
    required to address any issue that did not arise  within  the  decision
    letter. Accepting that he was aware as to the developments in  Ethiopia
    during the course of the previously year, the approach adopted  by  Mr.
    Adejumobi in not preparing the appellant's appeal to address the up-to-
    date situation is strongly suggestive of a basic, and worrying, failure
    to abide by the Ravichandran principle. It  cannot  be  said  to  be  a
    breach of fairness or natural justice to refuse to grant an adjournment
    in such circumstances where the failure to be prepared lies  wholly  at
    the feet of the appellant's legal representative.

35. In the alternative, if Mr. Adejumobi had not been aware of developments
    between the Ethiopian government and the OLF,  the  issue  of  fairness
    arising from the respondent's reliance upon such events would  fall  to
    be considered on fairness grounds:  Nwaigwe.  A  judge  considering  an
    adjournment request  would  be  required  to  consider  the  overriding
    objective. However, in this matter the decision to remove  the  ban  on
    the OLF being a lawful political party had been taken almost 12  months
    prior to the hearing and there has been an ongoing process between  the
    parties since such time. A competent professional  lawyer  representing
    an appellant in an asylum appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  would
    be expected to have knowledge of the Ravichandran principle and prepare
    an appeal on the basis of situation prevailing at the date of  hearing,
    so that a judge can adequately consider the appellant's asserted  well-
    founded fear of persecution in light of the situation prevailing at the
    date of decision.  To  abrogate  such  professional  responsibility  by
    solely preparing on the basis of the country  situation  identified  at
    the date of decision is wholly inadequate. The Tribunal will  be  aware
    that fast-paced changes in a country may require a short adjournment so
    that a party can seek to address events following, for example, a  coup
    d'�tat or a bloody revolution. However, in this matter, I am  satisfied
    that a competent legal professional undertaking basic research  on  the
    position of the OLF would have quickly established the failings of  the
    decision letter in relation to the  current  prevailing  situation  and
    prepared accordingly. Again, it cannot  be  said  to  be  a  breach  of
    fairness or natural justice to refuse to grant an adjournment  in  such
    circumstances where the failure to be prepared lies wholly at the  feet
    of the appellant's legal representative.

36. Ground  3  raises  the  issue  that  UTJ  Sheridan  focused  upon  when
    considering whether the grounds advanced were arguable. Upon  carefully
    considering UTJ Sheridan's reasoning, I conclude that he understood the
    grounds being  advanced  as  contending  that  the  appellant  and  his
    representative had not been provided with the COIS  and,  in  addition,
    had been denied the opportunity to consider it or make submissions upon
    it.

37. Mr Adejumobi accepted before  me  that  the  respondent  had  expressly
    relied upon the recent COIS before the  Judge.  Although  no  copy  was
    handed to either the Mr. Adejumobi  or  to  the  Judge,  Mr.  Adejumobi
    accepted before me that it is fairly  common  practice  in  proceedings
    before the First-tier Tribunal that a CPIN or  a  COIS  report  can  be
    considered by a Judge after hearing if  it  is  has  been  relied  upon
    during the hearing. It is common  practice  for  parties  to  direct  a
    judge's attention to paragraphs of a CPIN or COIS  that  they  wish  to
    rely upon. I observe that  CPINs  and  COISs  are  documents  that  are
    regularly relied upon by practitioners and indeed operate  at  a  level
    where a meritorious challenge on error of law grounds could be made  if
    a judge failed to consider them. Further, Mr Adejumobi accepted that he
    had  not  sought  permission  to  rely  upon  written   representations
    addressing the COIS.

38. A competent  professional  representative  representing  in  an  asylum
    appeal should as a basic requirement of their competency be  up-to-date
    as to the present country situation and be expected to have either read
    or have accessed the relevant CPIN or  COIS  reports  relating  to  the
    country relevant to the appeal in which they represent. A judge will be
    mindful as to circumstances where a CPIN or COIS is relatively  new  as
    not to have been considered by a representative, and may  accede  to  a
    request for further time to read  it  that  day,  or  to  file  written
    submissions as to the document within a few days of the hearing.

39. The heart of Mr. Adejumobi's complaint on behalf of  the  appellant  is
    that he sought, and was denied, an adjournment of several weeks to read
    a COIS specifically relating to his client's appeal, that was published
    some six or so weeks before the hearing before the Judge.  This  is  in
    circumstances where he had been aware of the significant change to  the
    position of the OLF in Ethiopia, but contrary to  the  long-established
    Ravichandran principle had decided that he was not required to consider
    the current prevailing situation because it was not  addressed  by  the
    respondent's decision letter. I find that it cannot be  said  to  be  a
    breach of fairness or natural justice to refuse to grant an adjournment
    in such circumstances where the failure to be prepared lies  wholly  at
    the feet of the appellant's legal representative.

Notice of Decision

40. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

41. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld, and  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

42. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

43. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs  otherwise  no  report  of
    these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly  or
    indirectly identify the appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
    others, the appellant and the respondent. Any failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 6 April 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appellant has been dismissed, no fee award is made.

Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 6 April 2020

        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the  notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing  on  the  covering
letter or covering email


