
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07021/2019 (p)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing under rule |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|34                                   |                                     |
|On 9 September 2020                  |On 14 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    S O K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Saunders, instructed by ABSA Legal Limited
                    (written submissions)
For the Respondent:    No representative or submissions


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.   Neither  party
    invited me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to  rule  14
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698  as
    amended).



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 1 January 1998.   He
    is of Kurdish ethnicity and a Sunni Muslim  who  comes  from  Baquirte,
    close to the town of Makhmur in the Nineveh governorate.

 3. The appellant  arrived  clandestinely  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  22
    December 2016.  He was arrested by the police  and  claimed  asylum  on
    that day.

 4. On 11 July 2019, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights.

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 5 February 2002 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kelly) dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  ("the
    UT") which was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Brien) on 10
    March 2020.

 7. On 29 April 2020, the UT sent out directions in the light of the Covid-
    19 crisis indicating its provisional view that the issue of whether the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error  of  law
    and, if it did, whether the decision  should  be  set  aside  could  be
    decided  without  a  hearing.   The  parties  were  invited   to   make
    representations both in respect of the substantive error of  law  issue
    and on the issue of whether it was necessary for there to be a hearing.



 8. In response to those directions, on 14 May 2020 submissions were lodged
    with the UT on behalf of the  appellant.   In  those  submissions,  the
    appellant indicated that he was content that the appeal  be  determined
    on the papers.  Submissions were made on the substantive error  of  law
    issue and inviting the UT both to find an error  of  law  and,  in  the
    light of that error of law, to substitute its own decision allowing the
    appellant's appeal.

 9. No submissions were received from the respondent and no rule  24  reply
    was filed in response to the initial grant of permission to appeal.

10. In the light of the submissions  made  and  the  issues  raised,  I  am
    satisfied that it is in the  interests  of  justice  to  determine  the
    appeal without a hearing under rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

The Judge's Decision

11. Before Judge Kelly, the appellant claimed that he was at risk on return
    to Iraq of being targeted by Daesh because his  father  and  uncle  had
    been members of the Peshmerga.

12. At para 33, the judge accepted the "primary facts" of  the  appellant's
    claim.  He found the appellant to be a credible witness and that  there
    was "at least a reasonable degree of likelihood that his account of the
    primary facts (events) is true".

13. However, at para 34 the judge went on to find that,  despite  accepting
    the appellant's account, he was not satisfied that the appellant  would
    be at real risk on return.  He observed that  the  appellant  had  left
    Iraq nearly five years earlier and the current situation of his  father
    and uncle was unknown.  The judge also noted that it was  not  part  of
    the appellant's case that he had ever  individually  been  targeted  by
    Daesh in the past and, although accepting that the  appellant's  sister
    had been killed, there was no known reason for that.  Further, he  took
    into account an expert report that "Daesh continue to be active in  the
    appellant's area, they are no longer in overall control of it".   As  a
    result the judge concluded ([34]):

         "There is thus no reason to suppose that they  would  know  of  the
         appellant's return to Iraq or of his familial  connections  to  the
         Peshmerga (to which he does not claim any personal affiliation) and
         therefore impute him with its political  opinions.   ...  Moreover,
         ... I am not satisfied that there is a real risk of  the  appellant
         being individually targeted  by  Hazhb  Al  Shaabi  or  other  Shia
         militia."

14. That finding is not challenged by the appellant either in  the  grounds
    of appeal or in the subsequent submissions.

15. Judge Kelly went on to consider whether the appellant, although not  at
    risk based on his account, would nevertheless  be  at  risk  under  Art
    15(c).  Having considered the country  guidance  decision  in  SMO  and
    Others (Art 15(c); identity documents) CG [2019] UKUT  0400  (IAC),  at
    paras 35-43 of his determination the judge went on  to  find  that  the
    appellant did not qualify for protection under Art 15(c).

16. That finding is also not challenged by the appellant in the grounds  of
    appeal or subsequent submissions.

17. The judge then went on to consider the final issue which  he  described
    (at para 43) as:

         "whether there is a real risk of him suffering serious harm due  to
         destitution and inability to travel to his  home  due  to  lack  of
         documentation".

18. At paras 44-46, the judge concluded that the appellant did not have  an
    Iraqi passport, a laissez passer or a Civil  Status  Identity  Document
    ("CSID") and would not, in practical terms, be able to obtain them.  At
    para 44 the judge said this:

         "It is the appellant's case which I accept, that he has never  been
         issued with an Iraqi passport or a Laissez Passer [see his reply to
         question 1.8 of his Screening Interview].  It  is  also  his  case,
         which I have already accepted, that he does not know if he has ever
         been issued with a CSID.  It is  not  therefore  reasonably  likely
         that he would  know  the  registration  details  that  it  will  be
         necessary for him to provide in  order  to  obtain  a  replacement.
         Finally, I have also already accepted  that  he  has  no  means  of
         communication with his close family members in Iraq  and  does  not
         therefore know whether any of them have survived.  He would thus be
         unable to call upon them for assistance in obtaining  his  original
         card (if it exists) or its replacement pending the outcome  of  the
         inquiries as instituted through  the  Red  Cross.   I  am  moreover
         satisfied that the appellant would face insuperable difficulties in
         obtaining either a CSID or a travel document.  This is  because  he
         would struggle to obtain one such document without the other.  I am
         thus  satisfied  that  returning  the  appellant  to  Iraq  is  not
         currently feasible.  I am however satisfied that there would  be  a
         real risk of him becoming destitute or suffering some other form of
         serious harm should his return ultimately prove possible.   I  have
         reached the latter conclusion for the following reasons."

    Then, at paras 45 to 46 the judge set out his reasons and conclusion as
    follows:

         "45. Given that the appellant is not a former resident of the  IKR,
             his hypothetical return to Iraq  would  be  via  Baghdad.   He
             would thus be at real risk of serious harm were he to  attempt
             to travel over land to his home area and would in any event be
             unable to cross the intervening checkpoints.  Furthermore,  he
             would be unable to take an internal flight to Erbil without  a
             CSID.

         46.  For all the above reasons, I am satisfied that the appellant's
             hypothetical return to Baghdad would breach his  rights  under
             Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive and Article 3  of
             the Human Rights Convention."

19. Thus  far,  it  would  seem,  the  judge  was  inclined  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 15(b) of the Qualification  Directive  and
    Art 3 of the ECHR because, without a CSID, he would be at real risk  of
    serious  harm  either  because  he  would  be  destitute  without  that
    essential document or because he would be at risk of physical  harm  in
    seeking to travel from Baghdad to his home area or the IKR.

20. However, in para 47 the  judge  went  on  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal.  The judge said this:

         "However, in the light of the Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  HF
         (Iraq) and Others v SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1276  (highlighted  at
         Section B of the headnote  to  SMO)  a  person's  Protection  Claim
         cannot succeed where (as I  have  found  is  the  case  here)  that
         person's return is not currently feasible on account of a  lack  of
         both a travel document and a Civil Status  Identity  Document.   It
         seems to me that the very same logic must  also  necessarily  apply
         when considering whether the appellant would face 'very significant
         obstacles'  to  his  integration  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
         Immigration  Rules  and  under  Article  8  of  the  Human   Rights
         Convention (there being no evidence to  suggest  that  he  has  any
         significant social or family links to the UK).  I thus appear to be
         left with no alternative but to dismiss his appeal in circumstances
         where I would otherwise have allowed  it  on  general  humanitarian
         grounds."

Discussion

21. The appellant's challenge is a straightforward one.  He  contends  that
    the judge has confused a CSID (which is an identity  document)  with  a
    passport or laissez passer (which are travel documents).  Applying  the
    relevant country guidance decision in SMO an individual  who  does  not
    have an CSID, nor is likely to obtain one within a reasonable period of
    time in Iraq,  is  likely  to  be  at  serious  risk  of  harm,  either
    destitution or physical harm seeking to travel from  Baghdad  to  their
    home area.  That, it is said, should have led the judge  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal on humanitarian protection grounds under Art  15(b).
    The judge, in seeking to apply the Court of  Appeal's  decision  in  HF
    (Iraq), misunderstood the relevance  to  an  individual  of  lacking  a
    travel document which makes his or her return  to  Iraq  not  feasible.
    All the Court of Appeal decided, it is contended, is that an individual
    cannot succeed in their international protection claim where they  lack
    a travel document which  makes  their  return  to  Iraq  not  currently
    feasible where, it is said, that they would be at risk in Iraq if  they
    lacked that travel document.  The CSID is not  a  travel  document  and
    does not fall within the approach of the Court of Appeal in HF  (Iraq).



22. I accept those submissions.  It is clear  that  the  judge  would  have
    allowed the appellant's appeal under Art  15(b)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive and Art 3 of the ECHR on the basis that he  was  at  risk  of
    serious harm falling within those provisions if  he  were  returned  to
    Iraq without a CSID.  In SMO and Others, the Upper  Tribunal  expressed
    the following view in relation to a person who lacked  a  CSID  or  the
    more recent Iraqi National Identity Card as summarised at paragraph  11
    of the headnote:

         "As a general matter, it is necessary for an individual to have one
         of these two documents in order to  live  and  travel  within  Iraq
         without encountering treatment or conditions which are contrary  to
         Art 3 ECHR.   Many of the checkpoints in the country are manned  by
         Shia militia who are not controlled by the GOI and are unlikely  to
         permit an individual without a CSID or an INID to pass."

23. Given the judge's unchallenged factual findings in paras 44 -  45,  his
    conclusion in para 46 that without the CSID the appellant would  be  at
    risk of serious  harm  contrary  to  Art  15(b)  of  the  Qualification
    Direction Art 3 of the ECHR is entirely sustainable.

24. That claim succeeded, on that basis, even if the  appellant  could  not
    presently be returned to Iraq - his return was not "feasible" - because
    he lacked an Iraqi passport or laissez  passer.   The  decision  in  HF
    (Iraq) was concerned with a claim based upon a  risk  on  return  which
    would arise from the absence of one of those travel documents  and  not
    because of the absence of a CSID which, unlike the travel documents, is
    not an identity document (see headnote para 12 of SMO and  Others).   A
    CSID does not make return not feasible.

25. The relevant issue in HF (Iraq) is identified in paras [86]-[105].   At
    [86], Elias LJ (with whom Maurice Kay and Fulford LJJ agreed) noted the
    substance of the appellant's claim in that case:

         "There  was  some  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  that  when  the
         individuals had been  returned  to  Baghdad  International  Airport
         without the appropriate documentation,  they  were  detained  in  a
         nearby  prison  pending  a  determination  of  their  identity,  in
         extremely poor conditions which at least arguably involved a breach
         of Art 3".

26. In that case the appellant argued that even  though  he  could  not  be
    returned, the Tribunal was required to consider what risk, if  any,  he
    would face if hypothetically  he  were  returned.   The  impediment  to
    return, because the travel documentation was  not  available,  did  not
    prevent a claim succeeding (see [95]).  By contrast, the  Secretary  of
    State contended that the Tribunal was only required to assess the  risk
    to the appellant on return if return was feasible, in other  words,  if
    they would be returned with the relevant  travel  documents  when  they
    would not be at risk (see [98] and [100]).

27. The Court of Appeal rejected the appellant's submissions  and  accepted
    those of the Secretary of State.  At [101], Elias LJ said this:

         "I accept ... that it would be necessary for the court to  consider
         whether the appellants would be at risk on return if  their  return
         was feasible, but I do not accept that  the  Tribunal  has  to  ask
         itself the hypothetical question what would  happen  on  return  if
         that is simply not possible for one reason or another."

28. The point is, of course,  that  once  an  individual's  return  becomes
    feasible - because they have either an Iraqi passport or laissez passer
    - the circumstances which, in HF (Iraq)  gave  rise  to  the  risk,  no
    longer exist.  Without such documents, return is not feasible  and  the
    Tribunal is not required to consider the  hypothetical  situation  (and
    risk) based on return without those documents.

29. That this is the proper understanding of HF (Iraq) was  made  clear  by
    the Upper Tribunal in SMO and Others.  At para 9 of the  headnote,  the
    UT summarised the position as follows:

        "In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)  and
        Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ
        1276, an international protection claim made by P cannot succeed  by
        reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence  of  a
        current or expired Iraqi  passport  or  a  Laissez  passer,  if  the
        Tribunal finds that P's return is not currently feasible on  account
        of a lack of any of those documents."

30. In this appeal, the appellant lacked both the travel documents and,  on
    the judge's findings, a CSID which he would not be able  to  reasonably
    obtain.  Had the appellant claimed that he would be at risk  on  return
    to Iraq because he lacked a passport or laissez passer  then,  applying
    HF (Iraq), he could not have succeeded.  However, he  claimed  that  he
    was at risk because he lacked a CSID.  Nothing in HF (Iraq)  prohibited
    the judge from considering (and reaching a finding on) the risk to  the
    appellant on return to Iraq if he lacked a CSID.

31. Following SMO  and  Others,  which  applied  earlier  country  guidance
    decisions, the lack of a CSID was a matter  which  created  a  risk  of
    serious harm to the appellant on return (see above).  The Secretary  of
    State has not sought to challenge  in  a  rule  24  reply  the  judge's
    findings that the appellant lacked (and could not obtain) a CSID  (para
    44) and that, as a result, the appellant established  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm on return (paras 45 and 46).  Those  findings,  therefore,
    stand unchallenged.  On the basis of those findings, there was only one
    proper outcome to the appeal: the judge should have allowed the  appeal
    under Art 15(b) of the Qualification Directive and Art 3 of  the  ECHR.
    The judge was wrong to conclude that in HF (Iraq)  precluded  him  from
    reaching that decision.

32. For these reasons, therefore, the judge erred in law in dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal on humanitarian protection grounds and under  Art  3
    of the ECHR.  That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

Re-Making the Decision

33. I have considered whether the decision can be re-made  without  further
    proceedings.  The Secretary of State has not filed a rule  24  response
    or submissions in reply to the UT's earlier directions.  The outcome of
    the appeal is inevitable.  Once the erroneous reasoning in para  47  is
    removed, the judge's unchallenged findings, as  I  have  already  said,
    should have led to the appeal being allowed on humanitarian  protection
    grounds (Art 15(b)) and under Art 3 of the ECHR.  I am satisfied  that,
    not only should the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  be  set  aside
    because of an error of law, but also that I should remake the  decision
    consistently with the judge's conclusion  in  para  46  and  allow  the
    appellant's appeal on humanitarian protection grounds and under  Art  3
    of the ECHR.



Decision

34. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law  and  I  set
    that decision aside.

35. I re-make the decision.  I preserve the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    appeal is  dismissed  on  asylum  grounds.   However,  I  substitute  a
    decision allowing the appeal on  humanitarian  protection  grounds  and
    under Art 3 of the ECHR.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            9 September 2020
