
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07970/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 May 2019                       |On 29 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    S. H.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Najah, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild &
Dyer
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant, a citizen of Iraq, entered the UK illegally in December 2017
and made a protection claim which was refused on 10 June 2018. The
Appellant's appeal against that decision was heard, and dismissed, by First-
tier Tribunal Judge Caskie, in a decision promulgated on 6 September 2018.
The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was granted by Upper
Tribunal Judge McGeachey on 1 February 2019 on all the grounds advanced.
The Respondent did not reply to that grant with a Rule 24 response.

The Appellant's case was that he had come to the adverse attention of the
authorities in the KRG as a result of his political activities, and that as
a result he faced a real risk of harm upon return to the KRG. As a Kurd he
said he could not be expected to relocate elsewhere in Iraq.

Before me both parties accept that the Judge's starting point in his self
directions was that the Respondent did not place in issue any part of the
Appellant's account [4]. That was incorrect. The refusal letter had
expressly placed in in issue whether the Appellant's account of his
experiences in Iraq was credible [67-8, 84, & 89]. It is accepted by the
Appellant that no concessions were made at the hearing to alter that
stance.

In the circumstances both parties agree that a fresh hearing is the only
pragmatic course open. I agree. None of the findings of fact made by the
Judge are safe, or can be preserved. In circumstances such as this, where
it would appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been considered
by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has been to
deprive the parties of the opportunity for their case to be properly
considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice
Statement of 13 November 2014. Moreover the extent of the judicial fact
finding exercise required is such that having regard to the over-riding
objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to the
First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 13
November 2014.

    To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other
    than First tier Tribunal Judge Caskie, at the North Shields Hearing
    Centre.

    A Kurdish Sorani interpreter is required.

    The remitted appeal is suitable for the short warned list. The parties
    should expect the appeal to called on for hearing at short notice after
    10 June 2019.



Notice of decision

 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing de novo, with the directions set out above.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
                                Date 24 May 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
