
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07079/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision and Reasons            |
|                                |Promulgated                     |
|On 13th October 2017            |On 10th November 2017           |
|                                |                                |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                  Ms D D W
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of China born on [ ] 1987 and she has a  one
    year old son.  She arrived in the UK in 2007 on a false passport.   She
    claimed asylum after her arrest in 2015 and that claim was  refused  by
    the Secretary of State on 20th June  2016.   Her  appeal  against  that
    refusal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Morgan  on  4th  January
    2017 and on 16th January 2017 he allowed the appeal on asylum and human
    rights grounds.

 2. The Secretary of State then applied for and was granted  permission  to
    appeal on the basis that the judge had misdirected himself in  law  and
    his reasoning  was  inadequate.    The  judge  failed  to  engage  with
    paragraph 14 of the head note of AX (family planning scheme)  China  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00097 which states

      (14) Where a real risk exists in the 'hukou' area, it may be  possible
      to avoid the risk by moving to a city. Millions  of  Chinese  internal
      migrants, male and female, live and work in cities where they  do  not
      hold an 'urban hukou'.  Internal migrant women are required to stay in
      touch with their  'hukou'  area  and  either  return  for  tri-monthly
      pregnancy tests or else send back test results.  The country  evidence
      does not indicate a real risk of effective pursuit of internal migrant
      women leading to forcible family planning  actions,  sterilisation  or
      termination,     taking     place      in      their      city      of
      migration. Therefore, internal relocation will, in almost all cases,
      avert the risk in the hukou area.  However,  internal  relocation  may
      not be safe where there is credible evidence of individual pursuit  of
      the returnee or her family, outside the 'hukou' area.  Whether  it  is
      unduly harsh to expect  an  individual  returnee  and  her  family  to
      relocate in this way will be a question of fact in each case.

 3. The second ground of challenge related to the analysis under  Paragraph
    276ADE (vi) which it was argued, was also deficient in that it  allowed
    the appeal 'for the same reasons' as the asylum claim.  As the analysis
    under the asylum claim was deficient so was this approach.

 4. As Mr Wilding indicated the risk to the appellant, as  decided  by  the
    judge, focussed on the risk from the local authorities and equated  the
    risk from the local government with the national authorities.  She  was
    found to be at risk in her own hukou area but there was no analysis  of
    the position 'outside the hukou area' merely a statement that she would
    not relocate.  There was no full analysis of why  the  appellant  could
    not relocate or whether  the  local  authorities  would  look  for  her
    outside  her  hukou  area.  The  local  government  and  the   national
    government could not be simply equated.   It was  also  submitted  that
    the judge failed  to  address  the  situation  regarding  foreign  born
    children which is addressed at paragraph 186 of AX and paragraphs  6  -
    10 of the head note with regard second children. Anxious  scrutiny  and
    analysis of the family,  the  support  and  the  conditions  she  would
    experience would be required.

 5. The Judge erred  materially  for  the  reasons  identified  and  whilst
    preserving the credibility findings and the findings in respect of risk
    in her home area of First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan but  I  set  aside
    the conclusion for want of further analysis.   The  appellant  did  not
    have representation before me and thus I directed that  the  matter  be
    adjourned to  give  the  appellant  a  further  opportunity  to  obtain
    assistance and to submit further information.

 6. I directed that evidence should be submitted by the  appellant  on  the
    following

    (i) why she is unable to relocate outside of her hukou area,

    (ii)her statement on and any evidence that the local government of  her
    hukou area, where relevant, is seeking her outside her area and

    (iii) details  of  the  family  support,  accommodation  and  financial
    support she might receive and/or employment she would gain on return to
    China should she relocate outside her hukou area.

 7.  The  appellant  returned  to  the  resumed  hearing  without   further
    representation because she stated solicitors asked for money which  she
    did not have but she did submit a further statement.

 8. Under cross examination the appellant confirmed that her parents  lived
    in the same area.  She had fallen pregnant in 2007 but  the  child  was
    miscarried. Her first child born in 2005 was given away by her  parents
    and she had no contact with her  daughter  who  was  given  away.   She
    stated that because of her difficulties her child born in 2016 would no
    be able to obtain a hukou.  She knew the  family  planning  or  village
    committee had visited her father because she had been in  contact  with
    her father and mother in the last two years.  She  added  that  if  she
    relocated she would have to return to her own hukou, where she  was  at
    risk from the snakeheads and the local committee would  have  her  name
    and she would be unable to transfer her hukou.  She had not only fallen
    foul of the family planning policy but  also  had  been  fined.   There
    would be contacts made between the current hukou and any outside hukou.
    She did not pay her debt in full.  She had tried to pay the interest to
    the snakeheads but would be at risk from them in her local  area.   The
    debt was not her father's debt but her own.

 9. Her father was angry  with  her  because  she  did  not  marry  thereby
    obtaining status but had had a child out of wedlock.   She  would  have
    difficulty working on return.  She had been absent from  China  for  10
    years and now had a small child.  In order to obtain education for  the
    child he would have to have a hukou.  Her  fear  was  that  her  father
    would send away her child as he done her daughter.  She was afraid that
    the village committee would indeed be able  to  track  her  down.   She
    would not be able to transfer her hukou in the  current  circumstances.
    She would first have to return to the area where she  was  at  risk  in
    order to arrange a transfer of documents.

Conclusions

10. As Judge Morgan found at [23] of his decision the appellant  gave  oral
    evidence which was subjected to lengthy and robust  cross  examination.
    She was credible and consistent.  She did not waiver from her  account.
    As pointed out it is the lower standard of  proof  which  is  relevant.
    Judge Morgan pointed out in his decision at [28] the reason she was not
    being hassled was that she had  paid  interest  on  the  loan  but  was
    expected to work to pay off the loan itself.  I accept  that  would  be
    difficult for her. Judge Morgan found that  the  appellant  had  indeed
    been threatened with forced sterilisation (she had one  child  and  had
    left whilst pregnant with another) and her first child was  given  away
    by her parents to pay off the debt. Some of this debt  to  the  Chinese
    authorities remained and there were still enquiries of her home  asking
    for  her  whereabouts.  She  still  owed  an  exorbitant  debt  to  the
    snakeheads, continued to risk forced sterilisation and neither she  nor
    her family would be in a position to pay  on  the  salaries  earned  in
    China.

11. Mr Walker in his submissions had relied  on  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    letter.  This considered that the appellant may be part of a particular
    social group further to AX as she had breached China's family  planning
    system but found she would be able to return to her home area.   It  is
    clear that the appellant (as found by Judge Morgan and I have no reason
    to depart from those findings) she had  been  persecuted  in  the  past
    because of her breach of the family planning laws, had been  fined  and
    had to flee  with  the  money  loaned  from  the  snakeheads  to  avoid
    sterilisation.

12. The appellant explained the authorities in China are linked and  it  is
    clear that the appellant cannot  approach  the  local  authorities  for
    assistance.  She is at risk not only of sterilisation, is being pursued
    by the snakeheads and also pursued for the fine.  It is this  authority
    to which she would have to return to arrange her transfer of her  hukou
    failing which she will not be able to  register  elsewhere.   For  this
    reason it is understandable that she would not approach the authorities
    in the area to protect her against the snakeheads whom I  accept  would
    seek her out should she return without further payment.   I  accept  on
    the salary that she would earn in China (if any) that  she  would  soon
    fall further  into  debt.    The  Secretary  of  State  considered  the
    appellant should seek protection from the snakeheads further to Horvath
    [2000] UKHL 37 but did not address the fact that she could  not  return
    to her home area and would need to return to secure her hukou transfer.



13.  AX  conceded  it  may  be  possible  to  avoid  the  risk  of   forced
    sterilisation by moving to a city and that millions of Chinese internal
    migrants do so without an urban hukou.

14.  As set out in AX

    (11)   In general, for female returnees,  there  is  no  real  risk  of
    forcible sterilisation or forcible termination in China. However, if  a
    female returnee who has already had her permitted quota of children  is
    being returned at a time when there is  a  crackdown  in  her   'hukou'
    area, accompanied by unlawful practices  such  as  forced  abortion  or
    sterilisation, such a returnee would  be  at  real   risk  of  forcible
    sterilisation  or,  if  she  is  pregnant  at  the  time,  of  forcible
    termination of an unauthorised pregnancy.  Outside of these times, such
    a female returnee  may  also  be  able  to  show  an  individual  risk,
    notwithstanding the absence of a general risk, where there is  credible
    evidence that she, or members of her family remaining  in  China,  have
    been threatened with, or have suffered, serious  adverse  ill-treatment
    by reason of her breach of the family planning scheme.

    (12)    Where  a  female  returnee  is  at  real   risk   of   forcible
    sterilisation or termination of pregnancy in  her  'hukou'  area,  such
    risk is of persecution, serious harm and Article 3  ill-treatment.  The
    respondent accepted that such risk would be  by  reason  of  a  Refugee
    Convention reason,  membership of a particular social group, 'women who
    gave birth in breach of China's family planning scheme'.

    (13)   Male returnees do not, in general, face a real risk of  forcible
    sterilisation, whether in their 'hukou' area or  elsewhere,  given  the
    very low rate of sterilisation of males overall,  and  the  even  lower
    rate of forcible sterilisation.

15. This is someone who has clearly had her permitted quota of children and
    I accept, because of the evidence that she  was  previously  fined  and
    threatened with sterilisation such that she fled  the  area,  that  the
    authority is active in its pursuit  of  transgresssors  in  that  area.
    There can be crackdowns which  can  entail  human  rights  abuses.    I
    accept therefore that she would be at risk for a convention  reason  in
    her own area.  The question is whether she can relocate  and  would  be
    unduly harsh for her to relocate? The appellant in her  own  statement,
    and I repeat that she was found to be credible, confirmed  that  before
    any transfer formalities the migrants needed to account to their  local
    police station. She believed that the police had access  to  her  files
    and as such migration to another city was  impossible.  In  effect  she
    would be tracked and I accept that.

16. Further as set out in AX,

           (6) Any second child, even if authorised, entails  the  loss  of
           the family's SCP certificate. Loss of a family's SCP results  in
           loss of privileged access to schools, housing, pensions and free
           medical  and  contraceptive  treatment.  Education  and  medical
           treatment remain available but are no longer free.

17. and

           (9) The financial consequences for a family of  losing  its  SCP
           (for having more than one child) and/or of  having  SUC  imposed
           (for   having   unauthorised    children)    and/or    suffering
           disadvantages  in  terms  of  access   to   education,   medical
           treatment, loss of employment, detriment  to  future  employment
           etc will not, in general, reach the severity threshold to amount
           to persecution or serious harm or treatment in breach of Article
           3.

18. In the particular circumstances I find that it would  be  unduly  harsh
    for her to relocate.  The September 2015 Guidance on  China  Background
    Information at Section 8 confirms that the law provides for freedom  of
    internal movement but the government generally did  not  respect  these
    rights.  Further the hukou registration system  retains  the  dichotomy
    between access to land for rural hukou holders and social  entitlements
    restricted to  urban  hukou  holders.   Although  migration  to  cities
    expanded, the Guidance at 8.2.2 cited from the US Department  of  State
    report which identified that  many  could  not  change  their  official
    residence or workplace within  the  country  and  although  there  were
    changes to the system, for example, 'Guangzhou issued a new  policy  to
    allow persons who were legally employed within the city  to  marry  and
    have a child without returning to the hometown listed on their 'hukou'.
     This rather underlines the enforcement of the hukou  system  based  on
    residence with its attendant benefits.  Section  8.2.  also  underlines
    the  difficulties  faced  by  'illegal  residents'  and  that  in  some
    localities authorities would not  issue  hukous  to  children  born  to
    single parents and as such children 'are left behind by  their  parents
    in the rural areas'.  As can be seen this is not  an  option  for  this
    appellant.

19. The appellant has a young child who  is  her  second  child.   She  was
    extremely distressed when recounting evidence that her  previous  child
    had been removed from her and that she was  at  risk  that  her  second
    child  would  be  removed  her  father.  She  was  also  at  risk  from
    sterilisation.  I accept her (indeed all else was found credible)  that
    her father was angry that she had brought shame on the family and  that
    her child would be removed if she contacted her parents.

20. The China: Country Policy and Guidance Notes: Contravention of national
    population  and  family-planning  laws,  China  at  2.5.2  [2017]  (the
    guidance referred to in AX has now been updated)

           Decision makers must give careful consideration to the relevance
           and reasonableness of  internal  relocation  on  a  case-by-case
           basis taking full account of the individual circumstances of the
           particular person. Decision makers must consider factors such as
           the  age,  gender,  health,   ethnicity,   religion,   financial
           circumstances and support network of the person, as well as  the
           security, human rights  and  socio-economic  conditions  in  the
           proposed area of relocation, including their ability to  sustain
           themselves.




21. She cannot therefore derive any form of support from her parents.   She
    will be a single mother returning with  a  very  young  child,  without
    support and I further accept that the local government authorities will
    be in contact with each other - at the very  least  she  will  need  to
    contact or return to her own hukou to obtain a registration in order to
    re-register.  Failing  this  she  will  be  unable  to  access  medical
    treatment, will experience detriment to future employment and education
    for her child.  This is someone who has been absent from China  for  10
    years, would be without any form of family support (or be  at  risk  of
    losing her second child).  Even if the snakeheads would not pursue  her
    because she had moved area, I am not persuaded that being someone  from
    a rural background with minimal education and the responsibilities of a
    small child to care for (or pay for  child  care)  and  without  family
    support that she would be able to maintain employment and  herself  and
    her child. As AX states at [14] internal migrant women are required  to
    stay in touch with their hukou area.  Each case was said in  AX  to  be
    fact sensitive and in these particular circumstances I  find  that  the
    appellant could not be expected to relocate as it would lead to  unduly
    harsh consequences.

22. Despite possible relaxation  on  birth  policies  the  current  country
    guidance sets out the evidence at paragraph [172] suggested  that  even
    employment might be jeopardised where women have more that one child

           172. ...Any  second  child,  even  authorised  (including  first
           pregnancies ending in a multiple birth, whether natural or  IVF-
           induced), will entail the loss of the family's SCP  Certificate,
           and affects the whole family,  including  children.  The  family
           loses its privileged access to schools, housing,  pensions,  and
           free medical and contraceptive treatment. SUC will  be  payable,
           albeit at a reasonable  rate,  where  the  additional  child  is
           authorised or results from a multiple birth.  If  the  child  is
           unauthorised, there are additional penalties. Those working  for
           emanations  of  the  state  will  be   dismissed;   in   private
           businesses, they may be demoted  or  dismissed  and  their  line
           managers penalised'.




23. The Country Guidance at 2.3.6 outlines that the 'relaxation' of China's
    child policies has not been realised

           Although the Chinese Communist Party announced a  new  exception
           to its population planning policy  in  November  2013  to  allow
           couples in which one parent was an only child to have  a  second
           child, this does not appear to have been  uniformly  implemented
           and  Chinese  officials  reportedly  have  not   relaxed   their
           enforcement  of  the  population  planning  policy,   and   have
           continued to use coercive measures such as forced  abortion  and
           sterilization. Since the announcement of the  policy  adjustment
           in November 2013, the Chinese Communist Party Central  Committee
           and  State  Council  jointly  instructed  local  authorities  to
           'strictly  control  noncompliant  births,   particularly   extra
           births,  [and]  seriously  investigate  and  deal  with  illegal
           births.' Chinese and international media reports have documented
           abuses, including: the authority's refusal to register  a  child
           whose mother did not want an intrauterine device (IUD); coercive
           IUD




24. The appellant has been fined and owes debts  to  the  local  government
    which are still outstanding.  AX identifies that the evidence confirmed
    women are sent back for regular tri-monthly pregnancy tests  even  when
    working away from their hukou area and further to [182]  'a  number  of
    provinces have returned to requiring physical testing because they  are
    concerned that many of the tests they receive are falsified' Thus  even
    if there may not be effective pursuit of  this  appellant  outside  her
    area by her own hukou I find that there is a significant risk that  she
    may have to return to her area where she is at risk  even  if  she  has
    relocated which in turn I  find  unduly  harsh.  Indeed  the  appellant
    maintained that she could and would be tracked outside  her  home  area
    because of her debts to the authorities.

25. When applying the Immigration Rules (paragraph 276ADE (vi)),  I do find
    that she would face significant obstacles to her return. She has  lived
    in the UK for 10 years, albeit illegally and she now has a small  child
    dependent on her as a single mother. As I have described she  would  be
    at real risk of being without accommodation and financial  support  for
    herself and her child.

26. When considering the compelling circumstances outside  the  Rules,  the
    appellant must after 10 years have  some  semblance  of  private  life.
    There is a low threshold for the engagement of such a protected  right.
    I  accept  that  immigration  control  is  a  legitimate  aim  for  the
    protection of rights and  freedoms  of  others  but  I  find  that  the
    Secretary of State has taken a decision which is  not  consistent  with
    her obligations under the Refugee Convention or under the Human  Rights
    Act. Even if I were wrong about that  I  turn  to  a  consideration  of
    proportionality with reference to Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11.

27. I take into account Section 117  of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and note I am enjoined to place little  weight  on  her
    private life in the UK because of the nature  of  its  institution  and
    development. No one came to assist or support her in court despite  and
    she was unrepresented.  Her command of English was limited and I do not
    accept that she would  be  financially  independent.  I  balance  those
    factors into the equation.

28.  Nevertheless  under  Section  55  of  the  Borders   Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009, I must consider the best interests of  the  child
    as a primary consideration and I note the factors in relation to Azimi-
    Moayed (decisions affecting children onward appeals)  [2013]  UKUT  197
    (IAC). The appellant's history demonstrates and I  accept  that  should
    this child be returned to the mother's home area that he  would  be  at
    risk of being removed as was his older sibling.  If she relocates to  a
    city she may be forced to leave him behind in  the  rural  areas.   His
    best interests are to remain with his mother.   Should  his  mother  be
    forced to relocate away  from  the  home  area  his  welfare  would  be
    severely compromised. Because of her length of absence from China, I do
    accept that her sources of support should she be removed to China would
    be negligible.  For all the reasons I have  given  above,  I  therefore
    allow the appeal of Ms DDW on all grounds (as I have allowed the matter
    on asylum grounds I  dismiss  the  matter  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds).



Notice of Decision

I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

I dismiss the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

I allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.  I   impose
this order because the appeal involves a minor.

Signed           Helen Rimington             Date  14th October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

