
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07920/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On: 5 March 2018                       |On: 9 March 2018                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     Y L
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Vencatachellum, Counsel instructed by Linga &
                    Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge  Wylie  promulgated  on  2  January  2018   ("the   Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 8  August  2017  refusing  his  asylum,  humanitarian
       protection and human rights claim.


    2. The Appellant  is  a  national  of  China.   He  applied  for  entry
       clearance to come to the UK from Beijing on 15 June 2016.  That  was
       refused on 29 June 2016 and the refusal maintained on 4  July  2016.
       The Appellant  arrived  in  the  UK  on  16  October  2016  using  a
       counterfeit Japanese passport.  He was  detained  and  then  claimed
       asylum.


    3. On 14 December 2016, the Appellant was convicted on  two  counts  of
       possession/control of identity documents with intent and  one  count
       of obtaining or seeking to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  by
       deception.  He was sentenced to eighteen months in  prison.   On  19
       January 2017 he was served with a stage one decision to deport.  His
       asylum interview was on the same day.  A deportation order was  made
       and served on 8 August 2017 along with the refusal of the protection
       claim.


    4. The Appellant's claim is based on a fear of the authorities stemming
       from his opposition to those authorities by a  refusal  to  give  up
       land on which the Appellant lived with  his  father  and  son.   The
       Appellant physically obstructed the demolition (in  June  2016)  and
       was injured in so doing.  He fled before the police arrived.


    5. The second part of the Appellant's claim centres on the way in which
       he says he left China and came to the UK.  He says that  his  father
       enlisted the help of a man known as  "the  boss".   The  Appellant's
       father agreed to pay "the boss" to help the Appellant  leave  China.
       It is said that the Appellant travelled with "the boss"  to  Austria
       and from there he travelled to the  UK.  The  Appellant  fears  "the
       boss" because his father did not pay the sums agreed.


    6. The Appellant also claims that after he left China, he was subjected
       to torture and made to engage in sex with  older  women  for  money.
       This was because "the boss" was demanding money which the  Appellant
       could not pay.  The Appellant relies  on  a  decision  made  by  the
       Competent Authority dated 14 September 2017 stating that  there  are
       reasonable grounds to believe that the  Appellant  is  a  victim  of
       trafficking.   There  is  no  Conclusive  Grounds   decision.    The
       Appellant also relies on a Rule 35 report showing that his  injuries
       are consistent with his claim of being tortured  and  on  a  medical
       report of Dr Suffling following a referral to Medical Justice  which
       is also said to support his claim to have been tortured.


    7. The Judge found the Appellant not to be credible.  In any event, the
       Judge did not accept that the evidence showed that  "the  boss"  had
       power throughout China and the Appellant could therefore relocate to
       another area if necessary.


    8. The Appellant's grounds seeking permission to  appeal  the  Decision
       are that the Judge  has  failed  to  take  account  of  the  medical
       evidence and the decision of the Competent  Authority  that  he  has
       been trafficked, all of which evidence is said to be  supportive  of
       his claim.  Ground one is in reality a recitation of the Appellant's
       case.  It is ground two which  forms  the  basis  of  the  grant  of
       permission by Designated Judge  Shaerf  on  17  January  2018  which
       states as follows (so far as relevant):-

           "...  The  grounds  are  lengthy  and  unfocused  and  at  parts
           expressed  in  language  which  at  best  can  be  described  as
           intemperate.   They  have  been   of   limited   assistance   in
           identifying whether the Judge's decision  contains  an  arguable
           error of law.  Out of the numerous repetitions  of  disagreement
           with the Judge, I have disentangled assertions  that  the  Judge
           did not or did not adequately address the finding on  reasonable
           grounds of the Competent Authority  that  the  Appellant  was  a
           victim of trafficking and the expert psychiatric evidence of  Dr
           Suffling and the physical medical evidence  represented  by  the
           Rule 35 report.


           At paras 5,  8  and  31  of  her  decision  the  Judge  referred
           variously to the positive  reasonable  grounds  finding  of  the
           Competent Authority and  Dr  Suffling's  report.   There  is  no
           mention of the Rule 35 report.  Crucially, in the  part  of  the
           decision in which the  Judge  made  her  findings  of  fact  and
           reached her conclusions she arguably failed to engage  with  any
           of  these  documents.   This  is  an  arguable  error  of   law.
           Additionally, I note that a DVD was submitted  in  evidence  but
           there is no reference to it  or  its  contents  in  the  Judge's
           decision.


           The Appellant may  wish  to  consider  providing  some  physical
           medical evidence.  The Rule 35 report  was  prepared  by  female
           doctore and the Appellant  has  made  claims  that  torture  was
           inflicted on his genitalia.  It may be that if such torture  was
           inflicted it happened so long ago that there would no longer  be
           any physical evidence.  If that is the case, the Tribunal  might
           be assisted  in  having  expert  medical  confirmation  on  this
           point."

    9. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law.  The parties were agreed that, if I found  an
       error of law, the appeal should be remitted  for  rehearing  to  the
       First-Tier Tribunal as the adverse  credibility  findings  would  be
       undermined if I accept that the Judge failed to have regard  to  the
       evidence.

      Decision and Reasons


   10. I can deal shortly with what Judge Shaerf says about the DVD.   That
       point did not form part of the Appellant's  grounds.   There  is  no
       complaint that the Judge has failed to have regard to this evidence.
        That is perhaps unsurprising since, when I asked Ms  Vencatachellum
       what the DVD is intended to show, she could not tell  me.   She  did
       not ask me to watch it.  There is no evidence stating what  is  said
       to be shown on that DVD.  There is nothing to show  that  the  Judge
       was invited to watch it or told what was on it. The Judge could  not
       therefore be expected to deal with it.


   11. I can also deal shortly  with  what  Judge  Shaerf  says  about  the
       potential  for  further  medical  evidence.   There  has   been   no
       application to adduce any further evidence in that regard.


   12. I turn then to the basis of the Appellant's ground two which is  the
       subject  of  the  permission  grant.   That  turns  on  the  Judge's
       consideration of the  decision  of  the  Competent  Authority  ("the
       Trafficking Decision"), the Rule 35 report  and  the  report  of  Dr
       Suffling.


   13. The Trafficking Decision finds mention at [5] of the Decision.   The
       Judge notes at [6]  of  the  Decision  that  there  is  no  positive
       Conclusive Grounds decision even though one ought to have been made,
       it appears, at some point after 28 October 2017.  Ms  Vencatachellum
       confirmed that, so far as she knew, no Conclusive  Grounds  decision
       had been made.  Mr Kotas likewise confirmed that there was  no  such
       decision on the Respondent's file.  Although an earlier  hearing  of
       the appeal was adjourned in order for  the  Competent  Authority  to
       complete its investigations, it is not said that the  Appellant  has
       challenged the failure of the Competent Authority to make a  further
       decision. He has taken no steps to produce any further evidence from
       that authority.


   14. The  Trafficking  Decision  itself  is  at  [AB/14]  of  the  bundle
       submitted on 18 September  2017.   It  asserts  that  the  Competent
       Authority has concluded that there are reasonable grounds to believe
       that the Appellant has been the  victim  of  modern  slavery  (human
       trafficking).  In the absence  of  a  Conclusive  Grounds  decision,
       however, there is no particularisation of the reasons on which  that
       conclusion was reached or the evidence which the Competent Authority
       had before it.


   15. The Rule 35 report and report of Dr Suffling first find  mention  at
       [8] of the Decision.  The Judge confirms at [9] of the Decision that
       she has had regard to all of the oral and documentary evidence  even
       when that is not specifically mentioned.  The same  applies  to  the
       Trafficking Decision.


   16. The Rule 35 report is to be found at [AB/16] of the bundle submitted
       on 18 September 2017.  It shows that the Appellant  reported  to  an
       official at the detention centre on or around 7 September 2017  that
       he has been a victim of torture.   He was interviewed by  Dr  Fowler
       via a telephone interpreter.  He claimed to have  been  beaten  with
       sticks containing metal in the course of the  protest  which  formed
       the first part of his protection claim.  He  also  claimed  to  have
       been beaten and subjected to cigarette burns as part of  the  second
       part of his claim, in particular the claim that he was  tortured  by
       "the boss".


   17. The Rule 35 report notes the following injuries:-

           "He has 7 circular scars  in  a  line  down  the  left  forearm,
           consistent  with  cigarette  burns.   There  are  several  small
           irregular scars around these on the forearm.  There is a  linear
           scar with evidence of suturing above the left elbow.  There is a
           diagonal linear scar on the right upper shin  with  evidence  of
           suturing."

   18. The report concludes that  "[h]e  has  a  history  of  torture  with
       scarring consistent with the history.  He has psychological symptoms
       following  this,  with  feeling  ashamed,  sad,  'dirty'  and   with
       subsequent nightmares.  He has not deteriorated in detention feeling
       supported by other detainees".


   19. Finally, the report of Dr Suffling who  examined  the  Appellant  on
       behalf of Medical Justice is dated 21 November 2017 and  appears  at
       [AB/6] of the supplementary bundle lodged on 14 December 2017.   The
       report is based on an interview of two  and  a  half  hours  via  an
       interpreter.  Dr Suffling had before him the documents  relating  to
       the Appellant's asylum claim, the Rule 35 report and the Trafficking
       Decision.


   20. The Appellant's account said  to  have  led  to  his  mental  health
       problems centres largely on the account of what occurred  whilst  he
       was en route to the UK (ie the second part of his claim).   Based on
       what Dr Suffling was told by the Appellant and his  observations  in
       interview, he concluded that the Appellant is suffering  from  Post-
       Traumatic Stress Disorder and Severe Depressive Episode.   He  noted
       that the Appellant had not received any  medication  previously  for
       his mental health problems and  that  the  Appellant  did  not  want
       sleeping tablets but would consider  taking  anti-depressants.    Dr
       Suffling also advocated that the Appellant undergo a brief course of
       cognitive behavioural therapy.  I pause to note  that  there  is  no
       application  to  adduce  further  medical  evidence  to  show   what
       treatment the Appellant has received since this report.


   21. Dr Suffling concluded that the  Appellant  would  be  able  to  give
       evidence although might experience anxiety if asked to  recount  his
       experiences and that the threat of  forced  return  to  China  would
       "significantly worsen" the Appellant's mental health problems, based
       of course on the Appellant's account  of  what  had  caused  him  to
       suffer the symptoms observed.


   22. Turning back then to the Decision, the Judge's findings in  relation
       to the credibility of the claim begin at [48] of the  Decision.   At
       [52] to [55] of the Decision, the Judge says this:-

           "[52] He had told the medical practitioner who had prepared  the
           psychiatric report on 20 November 2017 that he had been told  by
           the snakehead not to mention the conflict  with  the  government
           officials when applying for asylum.


           [53]  This does not explain why he described the conflict in his
           substantive  interview.   In  his  witness  statement  he  later
           claimed that the snakehead had told him not to tell the truth to
           the immigration officials else  his  father  and  son  would  be
           killed.  This seemed to refer to his claim about actions of  the
           snakehead.


           [54]  The appellant claimed that the scars on his body were  due
           to torture and ill-treatment by the snakehead and the  women  to
           whom he was required to provide sex services.  The linear  scars
           on the right upper shin and above the left elbow were  noted  to
           have been sutured.  He made  no  mention  of  medical  treatment
           being provided to him when in the hands of  the  snakehead.   He
           had previously said that he had sustained injury when the  local
           government officials had come to demolish his home, and had been
           taken to hospital when in hiding with his friends.


           [55]  These scars were therefore  not  suffered  by  reasons  of
           torture.  On the appellant's evidence the scars consistent  with
           cigarette burns would have been very recent at the date  of  his
           arrival in the United Kingdom.  There is no evidence  that  they
           were noted at his first detention on remand.  He  is  likely  to
           have been medically examined on admission to detention, and  was
           assessed by a prison nurse in HMP Bedford on 19 October 2016."

   23. I accept that the Judge does not say in terms whether she accepts Dr
       Suffling's diagnosis although she does note the diagnosis at [31] of
       the Decision and does not say that she does not accept it.  However,
       any error  in  that  regard  is  in  my  judgement  immaterial.   Dr
       Suffling's diagnosis is that the Appellant is suffering from  mental
       health problems.  That conclusion might be undermined to some extent
       by what is said at [60] of the Decision  to  which  I  refer  below.
       However, it was not necessary for the Judge to reach a finding about
       the  Appellant's  mental  health  problems  because  Dr   Suffling's
       conclusions as to  the  reason  for  those  mental  health  problems
       depends entirely on the Appellant's account.  It was for  the  Judge
       to consider that account and to make findings about the  credibility
       of it having regard to all the  evidence  including  inconsistencies
       and implausibility in that evidence.


   24. The Judge at [54] and [55] of the  Decision  quite  clearly  engages
       with the Rule 35 report.  Although the  doctor  making  that  report
       found the injuries "consistent" with the claim, that  was  only  one
       factor to be taken into account  in  the  Judge's  reasoning.    The
       Judge has provided reasons within those two paragraphs as to why she
       disagreed that this evidence supported the Appellant's account.


   25. Ms Vencatachellum took issue with the findings of the Judge in  this
       regard for two reasons.  First, she said that it was unfair  to  the
       Appellant to rely on evidence that the two scars had been sutured as
       being inconsistent with his case because  he  was  not  asked  about
       this.  Second, she  said  it  was  speculative  to  state  that  the
       cigarette burns  would  have  been  noted  by  the  nurse  when  the
       Appellant was first seen by health services when detained.


   26. Dealing with  the  first  point,  the  Appellant  has  been  legally
       represented throughout.  As such, his representatives would be aware
       of the evidence put forward and should have considered whether there
       were internal inconsistencies in that evidence.  Further, I  am  not
       clear that the scarring noted in fact relates to the second part  of
       the Appellant's claim as opposed to the first  (although  the  Judge
       obviously understood that it related  to  the  second  part).   That
       makes no difference to the Judge's finding that  the  Appellant  had
       not said that he was treated for any of the  injuries  which  he  is
       said to have suffered.  In any event, that does  not  undermine  the
       other findings made as to the credibility of the first part  of  the
       Appellant's claim which was not  believed  due  to  the  Appellant's
       failure to mention it initially (for the reasons stated at  [51]  to
       [53] of the Decision).


   27. As to the second point, it is not  speculative  to  suggest  that  a
       medical practitioner might have noticed injuries on examination.  Of
       greater moment, in any event, is the fact that the Appellant did not
       himself refer to  the  injuries  (see  in  particular  [60]  of  the
       Decision as cited below).


   28. For those reasons, the Judge did not fail to take into  account  the
       medical evidence.  Also of  relevance  to  that  submission  is  the
       Judge's treatment of the Appellant's claim to have  been  trafficked
       which takes into account also the  Trafficking  Decision.   That  is
       dealt with at [59] to [60] of the Decision as follows:-

           "[59] At a very late stage, after his asylum claim based on  his
           fear of persecution from the authorities had been rejected,  the
           appellant  made  a  claim  that  he  was  the  victim  of  human
           trafficking.  This claim had been made after spending some  nine
           months in prison and some weeks in immigration detention.


           [60]  Prior to this he had had the benefit of legal  advice  and
           representation  in   the   criminal   court,   and   had   legal
           representation in his asylum claim prior  to  this  claim  being
           made.  He had been referred to mental health services just after
           his admission on remand, and assessed by a mental  health  nurse
           in January 2017  when  he  was  discharged  from  mental  health
           services.  He made no mention of his claim of human  trafficking
           to any of the legal or medical professionals.  He had  not  been
           diagnosed with any mental health condition although initially he
           had been observed to have been of low mood."

   29. That passage also has to be read with [49] of the Decision where the
       Judge says this:-

           "[49]  It  would  seem  that  he  had  had  the  opportunity  of
           discussion and advice from legal advisors including any  defence
           or mitigation which could be provided to the court in respect of
           the  criminal  charges.   If  the  issue  of  exploitation   was
           discussed with his legal advisors, it  is  surprising  that  the
           appellant did not, at the very least, make some reference to the
           serious threats of death he now claims were being  made  against
           his father and son by the snakehead.  The line of seven circular
           scars on his left forearm found by the medical practitioner  and
           noted in the Rule 35 report could  have  been  easily  shown  to
           legal advisers to support a description of exploitation."

   30. Although I accept that the Judge does not make direct  reference  to
       the Trafficking Decision in those passages, it is clear from what is
       said at [59] of the Decision that  she  had  the  trafficking  claim
       firmly in mind.  She had already referred to  the  evidence  of  the
       Trafficking Decision.  As I have already observed,  the  Trafficking
       Decision was  scant  in  its  detail  as  to  the  reasons  for  the
       conclusion reached.  The Judge was not required  therefore  to  deal
       with this evidence in any depth.  In the absence of reasons for  the
       decision by the Competent Authority, it was for the Judge  to  reach
       her own conclusions whether the trafficking claim was credible.  She
       has provided reasons for her finding that it was not.


   31. Finally, the credibility findings at [48] to [61]  of  the  Decision
       have to be read as a whole.  In particular, the Judge  was  entitled
       to reach the conclusion she did as to  the  Appellant's  credibility
       when the evidence is considered as a whole, having particular regard
       to the inconsistencies  between  the  Appellant's  various  accounts
       ([51] to [53]), the fact of the earlier unsuccessful entry clearance
       application which did  not  sit  comfortably  with  the  Appellant's
       account ([50] and [58]), that the Appellant had significant sums  of
       money in his possession when he arrived which was also  inconsistent
       with his account to have been trafficked ([56],[57]  and  [61])  and
       that, even if he feared repercussions  from  "the  boss",  he  could
       relocate  within China ([63]).


   32. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that  the  Decision  does  not
       contain a material error of law.  I therefore uphold the Decision.




    DECISION


    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law.  I  uphold  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Wylie
    promulgated on 2 January 2018 with the consequence that the Appellant's
    appeal stands dismissed

      Signed           [pic]      Dated: 8 March 2018
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
