


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/07663/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 October 2018             |On 25 October 2018                |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    H. A.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rogers, Immigration Advice Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iraq,  entered  the  United  Kingdom
           illegally in 2009 and claimed asylum. That  claim  was  refused,
           and  his  appeal  against  that  decision   was   dismissed   by
           determination of Judge Balloch [B3-]. His appeal rights  against
           that refusal were exhausted on 7 January 2010.
        2. The Appellant lodged a further protection claim on 3 April 2017,
           which was refused  on  27  July  2017.  An  appeal  against  the
           decision to refuse this protection claim was heard and dismissed
           by First Tier Tribunal Judge Spencer in a  decision  promulgated
           on 2 October 2017.
        3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal from the FtT on  three
           grounds;
           i) that whilst the Judge had correctly accepted that Mosul was a
              "contested area", he had erred in concluding that Kirkuk  was
              not,
          ii)  that  the  Judge  had  relied  incorrectly   upon   evidence
              suggesting that the Appellant could gain entry to the KRG  as
              a Sunni Kurd without the need for a sponsor, and,
         iii) that the Judge had failed to adequately consider the  ability
              of  a  returnee  to  Iraq  to  support  themselves,   wrongly
              concluding  that  the  Appellant  would  face  no   risk   of
              destitution.
        4. Permission to appeal was refused by First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Lever on 17 January 2018. The Appellant renewed his  application
           to the Upper Tribunal, where it was granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
           Judge Plimmer on 4 May 2018 on the basis  it  was  arguable  the
           Judge had failed to properly apply the current country guidance,
           as amended by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017]  EWCA  Civ
           944.
        5. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further  evidence.  Thus  the
           matter came before me.


      The hearing
        6. When the appeal was called on for hearing Ms Rogers, who did not
           appear  below,  noted  that  the  Judge's  decision   had   been
           promulgated before the Court of Appeal decision in AA  had  been
           published, and shortly before direct  flights  from  the  UK  to
           Erbil in the KRG had ceased.
        7. It was common ground before me that direct flights from  the  UK
           to Erbil have resumed, and are  now  available  to  those  Kurds
           prepared to return voluntarily to Iraq. The point of return  for
           all involuntary returns remains Baghdad.
        8. Ms Rogers accepted that the grant of  permission  by  the  Upper
           Tribunal had been made before the most recent  country  guidance
           of AAH (Iraqi Kurds-internal relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2018]  UKUT
           212, and that  no  attempt  had  been  made  on  behalf  of  the
           Appellant to amend the grounds of appeal to take account of that
           guidance.
        9. As to grounds one and two, it is common ground that in the light
           of the guidance to be found in AAH, the Judge erred in accepting
           the Respondent's argument that the evidence  placed  before  him
           showed a material and  enduring  improvement  in  the  situation
           within Kirkuk. It is common ground before  me  that  the  Kirkuk
           area remained  a  "contested  area"  for  the  purposes  of  the
           humanitarian protection appeal at the date of the hearing below,
           and that on the current country guidance, it remains  so  today.
           However it is also common ground before me that this error would
           not be material, if, the decision upon the  Appellant's  ability
           to relocate to the KRG was sustainable. The Judge had found that
           the Appellant was able to avoid the Article 15(c) risk  that  he
           faced as a civilian in his home area of Mosul, by relocation  to
           the KRG.
       10. Ms Rogers therefore focused upon ground three, and  argued  that
           the Judge's assessment of the Appellant's ability to relocate to
           the KRG was necessarily flawed since it  was  conducted  without
           reference to the guidance to be found in AAH.  It  was  accepted
           however that if I were to accede to this argument  I  would  not
           need to hear any further evidence, or reconstitute  the  hearing
           of the appeal to take further submissions, in  order  to  remake
           the decision.
       11. For his part Mr Diwnycz argued that there was no material  error
           of law that could be identified, since I would be bound to reach
           the same decision upon the Appellant's ability to relocate, were
           I to apply the guidance to be found in AAH to the evidence  that
           was placed before the FtT, and the findings of fact made by  the
           Judge. Thus the decision to dismiss the appeal was  the  correct
           one.
       12. The Respondent's argument was that on the unchallenged  findings
           of fact, the Appellant's position had  to  be  assessed  on  the
           basis that he was a fit twenty nine year old  male  Sunni  Kurd,
           who was capable of being fully documented prior to  return,  who
           could obtain legitimate employment, and who  would  be  able  to
           access significant financial support from his  uncle,  and  from
           the support package available to  those  who  agreed  to  return
           voluntarily. The Appellant would be able to enter and settle  in
           the KRG, even though he was not a returning resident,  and  thus
           he would not be forced into destitution, or, life in a "critical
           shelter arrangement".


      Decision
       13. The Appellant's case at the 2009 appeal  hearing  was  not  that
           Kirkuk was his home area - his claim was that he only  moved  to
           live with an uncle in Kirkuk in 2005 once he  was  orphaned.  He
           claimed to have been born and raised in Mosul. That position was
           not altered in the course of the appeal below. On that basis, it
           is in Mosul that his "family book" records will be held.
       14. Although the Appellant's original case was that he faced a  risk
           of harm anywhere within Iraq because of his father's  past  role
           as an intelligence officer, the Appellant's evidence about  this
           was rejected as untrue by Judge Balloch. On any fair reading  of
           her decision, she considered the Appellant's evidence concerning
           his father to have been untrue [decision #53-5]. She  only  went
           on to consider the appeal in the  alternative,  and  found  that
           even if  his  father  had  been  killed  as  claimed,  then  the
           Appellant had not experienced  any  personal  threat  since  the
           death of his father, and nor had any threat  been  made  against
           the family. Judge Balloch concluded that  neither  he,  nor  his
           uncle genuinely believed that any such threat of  harm  existed.
           There was  no  new  evidence  placed  before  Judge  Spencer  in
           relation to these issues, and he  was  not  invited  to  revisit
           these adverse findings. They must therefore  form  the  starting
           point for any consideration of the Appellant's circumstances.
       15. I note that the Appellant did not pursue an asylum appeal before
           Judge Spencer; his appeal was pursued solely on  Article  3  and
           humanitarian protection grounds on the basis  he  could  not  be
           expected to return to either Mosul, or Kirkuk, in safety because
           of the levels of indiscriminate violence faced by  civilians  in
           those areas [Decision #4]. His appeal was argued  on  the  basis
           that relocation to avoid those risks was not an option that  was
           available to him, since he would not be admitted to the  KRG  as
           one who had never lived there previously. It was argued that  he
           had no documents, and could not be expected to  obtain  any.  It
           was also argued that he had no prospect of financial support  or
           practical assistance from his uncle because he had lost  contact
           with him. Thus it was argued that whether he gained entry to the
           KRG, or remained in Baghdad, he faced destitution and  a  breach
           of his Article 3 rights in the event that he was returned.  Thus
           it was argued that it was not reasonable to expect him to  avoid
           the risk he faced as a civilian in either  Mosul  or  Kirkuk  by
           relocation to either Baghdad, or to the KRG.
       16. Whilst the Judge did not have the benefit of the guidance to  be
           found in AAH he did make a number of findings  of  primary  fact
           which are relevant to any assessment of the Appellant's  ability
           to relocate to either Baghdad, or the KRG in the light  of  that
           guidance. None of those  findings  of  primary  fact  have  been
           challenged in the grounds.
       17. Thus the Judge found that the Appellant had not told the  truth,
           and that he was in contact with his uncle in  Kirkuk.  He  found
           that the Appellant had been issued with a CSID card in Iraq, and
           that he had left it with  his  uncle.  The  Judge  rejected  the
           Appellant's claim that he was unable to recover  the  CSID  from
           his uncle.
       18. Since, on the Appellant's own evidence his uncle was  relatively
           wealthy in the context of Iraq, because he had been able to  pay
           for the Appellant's travel to the UK, the Judge found  that  his
           uncle  would  be  in  a  position  to  support   the   Appellant
           financially should he return to Iraq. That  level  of  financial
           support was found to extend to an  ability  to  pay  for  direct
           flights to the KRG from the UK, to avoid the need for travel via
           Baghdad [Decision #31, 33].
       19. In those  circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  level  of
           assistance  that  the  Judge  concluded  was  available  to  the
           Appellant  would  necessarily  extend  to  the  ability  of  the
           Appellant's uncle to provide any identity document that  he  was
           holding on the Appellant's behalf in safe keeping.  The  ability
           to provide documents he held, would not be limited to the  CSID,
           but would extend  in  addition  to  any  birth  certificate  and
           national identity card that he held.
       20. The Judge  did  not  deal  with  the  question  of  whether  the
           Appellant had ever previously been issued with a passport by the
           Iraqi authorities. However I am satisfied that in this case that
           omission is  immaterial.  If  a  passport  had  previously  been
           issued, then if the uncle held  it  in  safe  keeping  he  could
           provide it to the Appellant. If one had been issued, but was now
           lost, then the Appellant could  obtain  a  replacement  passport
           from the UK, because he could provide his  biographical  details
           and finger prints  to  the  Embassy,  and  his  uncle  could  in
           addition, vouch for him as a male relative. If no  passport  had
           ever been issued, then the issue of a passport to the  Appellant
           in the UK could still occur, because the uncle could  vouch  for
           him, and could provide the identity documents he held. Moreover,
           on the basis of  the  findings  that  the  Judge  did  make  the
           Appellant's uncle would have the ability to pay  for  any  proxy
           that might be necessary to access any further  records  held  in
           Mosul, if he felt unable to travel there himself.
       21. Thus the Judge was correct to conclude that the  return  of  the
           Appellant to Iraq was feasible. Moreover, in the  light  of  the
           current country guidance of AA and AAH the  Appellant  would  be
           able to travel upon a valid Iraqi passport,  whether  issues  to
           him as a replacement, or as a new issue. If he chose  to  return
           voluntarily, then at the date of the hearing below flights  from
           the UK to Erbil were available allowing him to avoid  travelling
           via Baghdad. It is common  ground  that  such  flights  are  now
           available once again. If he returned voluntarily,  he  also  had
           available to him the financial support package provided to those
           who do so.
       22. It is common ground before me, in the light of the  guidance  to
           be found in AAH that the Judge was quite correct to  accept  the
           Respondent's  argument  that  the  evidence  showed   that   the
           Appellant as a Sunni Kurd would be allowed to  physically  enter
           the KRG without any need to demonstrate that he  had  a  sponsor
           resident within the KRG.
       23. Even if the Appellant travelled to the KRG via Baghdad, he would
           be able to take an internal flight in  safety  to  the  KRG.  He
           would be able to travel upon either his CSID, or a passport.
       24. The guidance in AAH is that the Appellant  would  be  physically
           unable to gain access to a refugee camp in the KRG because  they
           are all oversubscribed, and  that  relocation  would  be  unduly
           harsh if there was a  real  risk  that  he  would  therefore  be
           required to resort to the lower end of the spectrum of "critical
           shelter arrangements" [AAH #127].  Thus  the  question  for  the
           Tribunal becomes one of whether the Appellant would be  able  to
           support himself and find accommodation within the private rental
           sector from a combination of his own earnings, the  VRS  support
           package, the support available from the Iraqi  authorities,  and
           any financial support available from his uncle [AAH #128].
       25. The reasons offered for  the  Appellant's  inability  to  secure
           employment are;  (i)  his  lack  of  employment  experience  and
           skills, (ii) the unemployment rate for IDPs  in  the  KRG,  and,
           (iii) the lack of  family  contacts  to  provide  patronage  and
           introductions.
       26. As to (i). The Appellant's denial of employment  experience  and
           skills cannot be accepted at face value. The Appellant has  been
           found to have failed to have offered a credible account  of  how
           he has spent his time in Iraq, and his claim to have never  gone
           out of  the  house  has  been  rejected  as  untrue.  The  plain
           inference to be drawn from that finding, and the fact that he is
           a fit and healthy young man with an earning capacity, is that he
           does in fact have employment experience  from  his  time  within
           Iraq that he has chosen not to disclose.
       27. As to (ii). The guidance to be found in AAH is that unemployment
           amongst IDPs within the KRG is 70%, in contrast to a rate of 20%
           for other residents of the KRG.  However that unemployment  rate
           of 70% includes women who face serious gender discrimination  in
           their attempts to find employment, and, all those IDPS  who  are
           undocumented and thus unable to  take  employment  legitimately.
           The Appellant would not face that gender bias, and he  would  be
           able to take legitimate employment because he would hold a CSID.


       28. As to (iii), there is no finding that  the  Appellant  has  even
           distant family within the KRG  to  help  him  obtain  employment
           through nepotism, and there is no finding that  the  Appellant's
           uncle has contacts or friends  that  would  do  so.  That  would
           undoubtedly  mean  that  finding  employment   would   be   more
           difficult, and take longer to secure, but it does not mean  that
           it would be impossible.
       29. There is a finding that the Appellant would  have  available  to
           him significant financial support from his  uncle  (on  a  scale
           noted above), and there is the  guidance  that  as  a  voluntary
           returnee he would be able to  access  a  support  package  worth
           �1500 through the VRS. He cannot be heard to say that  he  would
           refuse to return voluntarily, and thus be unable to access this.
       30. I note the Appellant's argument  that  he  would  be  unable  to
           access support from the Iraqi authorities, because he  would  be
           unable to draw food rations using his CSID within the KRG. Since
           his CSID had been issued to him in Kirkuk, it is argued he would
           be required to travel to Kirkuk to draw those rations, which  he
           could not reasonably be expected to do, given  that  this  would
           require him to place himself at risk of harm through travel into
           a "contested area" [AAH #130]. Given his age, and  stated  place
           of birth, the Appellant's CSID ought to have been issued to  him
           in Mosul, not Kirkuk. Be that  as  it  may,  the  same  argument
           obviously applies to both areas. Both are within  the  contested
           areas, and accordingly I accept that  he  cannot  reasonably  be
           expected to enter them in order to draw food  rations.  AAH  did
           not suggest there was any ability to get a proxy to collect food
           rations.
       31. Looking at the evidence in the round I am  satisfied  that  this
           Appellant would be able to secure employment in the KRG within a
           reasonable period of arrival. I am not satisfied that relocation
           to the KRG would place him in circumstances of destitution. Thus
           the expectation that he relocate to the KRG is not unduly  harsh
           within the AAH guidance.
       32. Accordingly, and notwithstanding the terms in  which  permission
           to appeal was granted to the  Respondent  the  grounds  fail  to
           disclose any material error of law in the approach taken by  the
           Judge to the appeal that requires his decision to be  set  aside
           and remade.





   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on  2
   October 2017 contained no material error  of  law  in  the  decision  to
   dismiss the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision  to  be  set
   aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.





Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 19 October 2018
