
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07577/2017




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 November 2018                         |On 30 November 2018           |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                    [S K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H. Arrif of counsel, instructed by Ardens
Solicitors Advocates
For the Respondent:         Ms. J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent is a national of Iraq. He arrived in the United  Kingdom
    and applied for asylum in July 2007. His application was refused on  24
    July 2007 and he did not appeal against this decision. He made  further
    representations in March 2013, which were accepted as a fresh claim for
    international protections.  However, this application was also  refused
    on 28 June 2017.

2.   The Appellant appealed against this decision on  17  January  2018  and
    his appeal  was  heard  and  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Greasley in a decision promulgated  on  25  June  2018.  The  Appellant
    appealed against this decision and on 17 July 2018 First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kelly granted him permission to appeal.

3.   Meanwhile, he had started a relationship with a British woman  in  2009
    and they married in 2012. They had two children together. The first was
    born in December 2010 and the second in February 2012.   They  divorced
    in February 2016 and the children remained living with  her.  In  March
    2016, the Appellant's ex-wife wrote to the Respondent alleging that  he
    had only had a  relationship  with  her  in  order  to  obtain  British
    citizenship. She also refused to allow the  Appellant  to  continue  to
    have direct contact with his children.

4.   The Appellant applied for a Child Arrangement Order in August  2017  in
    order to have direct contact with his children. There were a number  of
    hearings at the Family Court in Croydon and there was supposed to be  a
    final hearing on 27 June 2018.

5.   At the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Greasley  on  13  June
    2018, the Appellant's legal representative confirmed  that  the  Family
    Court  had  not  given  permission  for  documents  from   the   family
    proceedings to be disclosed to the Tribunal.

6.   When the appeal came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Jordan  on  17
    September 2018, he directed the Appellant to apply to the Family  Court
    for the release of the relevant papers to the Upper Tribunal.

7.   On 7 November 2018, the Appellant applied for  an  adjournment  of  the
    hearing set down for today on the basis that he had not  been  able  to
    obtain the relevant documents from the Family Court and the fact that a
    final hearing in the Family Court was now listed for  7  January  2019.
    This application was not put before an Upper Tribunal Judge before  the
    hearing.

8.   However, the Family Court in Croydon  disclosed  a  number  of  Cafcass
    reports to the Upper Tribunal on 14 November 2018.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

9.   Counsel for  the  Appellant  did  not  renew  the  application  for  an
    adjournment at the hearing and both she and the Home Office  Presenting
    Officer made oral submissions, which I have taken these  into  account,
    where they were relevant, in my findings below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

10.  The grounds of appeal submitted by the Appellant do not  challenge  the
    decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley to  dismiss  his  asylum
    appeal and to find that he was not entitled to Humanitarian Protection.

11.  The sole ground of appeal was that the First-tier Tribunal  should  not
    have found that no breach of Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights arose in the absence of a final  decision  by  the  Family
    Court.

12.  When considering this issue, notice should have been taken  of  section
    E-LTRPT of Appendix FM to  the  Immigration  Rules  that  provides  for
    limited leave to remain as a parent to be granted if certain conditions
    are met.

13.  The Appellant could potentially meet some of the  conditions  contained
    in paragraph E-LTRPT.2.2 as his children are under 18,  are  living  in
    the United Kingdom and are British  citizens.  He  can  also  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph E-LTRPT.2.3, as the  children  normally  live
    with his ex-wife who is a British citizen and he  is  not  entitled  to
    apply  for  leave  to   remain   as   her   partner,   as   they   have
    divorced/separated.

14.  However, in order to meet the conditions in  paragraph  E-LTRPT.2.4  he
    would also have to show that he has direct contact  with  his  children
    and that he was taking and intending to continue to take an active role
    in children's upbringing and that he could meet the immigration  status
    requirement, which he currently cannot.

15.  Nevertheless, the extent to which he could  meet  the  requirements  of
    these Rules would be a factor when considering  whether  to  grant  him
    leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.

16.  The Home Office Presenting Officer relied on the case of  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v GD (Ghana) [2017] EWCA Civ 1126,  which
    confirmed that, even if the Family Court does make a residence order in
    favour of a migrant, that does not oblige the Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department to grant him leave to remain in the United Kingdom.
    However, even if this is the case, the Upper  Tribunal  has  previously
    confirmed that certain procedures must be complied with where there are
    parallel Family Court and Immigration Tribunal proceedings.

17.  In particular, in RS (Immigration and Family Court  proceedings)  India
    [2012] UKUT 00218 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal found that:

         "1.  Where a claimant appeals  against  a  decision  to  deport  or
         remove and there are outstanding family proceedings relating  to  a
         child of the claimant, the judge  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
         Chamber should first consider:


               i) Is the outcome  of  the  contemplated  family  proceedings
                  likely to be material to the immigration decision?


              ii)  Are there compelling public interest reasons  to  exclude
                  the claimant from the United Kingdom irrespective  of  the
                  outcome of the family proceedings or the best interest  of
                  the child?


             iii) In  the  case  of  contact  proceedings  initiated  by  an
                  appellant in an immigration appeal, is there any reason to
                  believe that the family proceedings have  been  instituted
                  to delay or frustrate  removal  and  not  to  promote  the
                  child's welfare?


         2.   In assessing the above questions, the judge will normally want
         to consider: the degree of the claimant's previous interest in  and
         contact with the child, the timing of contact proceedings  and  the
         commitment with which they have been progressed, when a decision is
         likely to be reached, what materials (if any) are already available
         or can be made available to identify pointers to where the  child's
         welfare lies?


         3.   Having considered these matters the judge will  then  have  to
         decide:


             i)   Does the claimant have at least an  Article  8  right  to
             remain until the conclusion of the family proceedings?


             ii)  If so, should the appeal be allowed to a  limited  extent
             and a discretionary leave be directed as per the  decision  on
             MS (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ 133?


             iii) Alternatively, is it more appropriate for a short  period
             of an adjournment to be granted to enable the core decision to
             be made in the family proceedings?


             iv)  Is it likely that the family court would be assisted by a
             view  on  the  present  state  of  knowledge  of  whether  the
             appellant would be allowed to remain in  the  event  that  the
             outcome of the family proceedings is the maintenance of family
             contact between him or her and a child resident here?"

18.  The Appellant had informed  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Greasley  that
    there were on-going Family Court proceedings in  the  Family  Court  in
    Croydon and that a full fact-finding hearing had been set down  for  27
    June 2018, some two weeks  after  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and he accepted that this was the case.

19.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not remind himself  of  the  guidance
    provided in RS and consider whether the decision in  the  family  court
    was likely to be  material  to  the  Appellant's  human  rights  claim.
    Instead, he based his decision on the fact that in the last three years
    the role that the Appellant had played in his children's lives had been
    minimal.

20.  He also  failed  to  consider  whether  there  were  compelling  public
    interest reasons to exclude  the  Appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
    irrespective of the outcome of  the  family  proceedings  or  the  best
    interests  of  the  children.  The  Appellant  was  not  subject  to  a
    deportation order and there was no evidence to suggest  that  he  posed
    any sort of risk to the public. In relation to a potential risk to  the
    Appellant's ex-wife, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Greasley  appeared  to
    accept, in paragraph 69 of his decision, that the content of the letter
    his ex-wife she wrote to the Respondent was  to  be  preferred  to  the
    account given by the Appellant. The proper forum for such  fact-finding
    is the full hearing of the Family Court case and it was  premature  for
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge to making a finding.

21.  He also  failed  to  consider  whether  the  application  for  a  Child
    Arrangements Order had been made in order to  delay  or  frustrate  the
    Appellant's removal and not to promote the children's  best  interests.
    It was not necessary for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to look  at  the
    Family Court papers as it was clear from the chronology before him that
    the Appellant had started a relationship with the children's mother  in
    2009 and lived with her until February 2016. Therefore,  he  had  lived
    with his children for a number of years. This was not a case  in  which
    an appellant attempted to have initial contact with  his  children  for
    immigration purposes.  This should have been  weighed  in  the  balance
    with the fact that the Appellant applied for a child arrangements order
    after he had been refused asylum and leave to remain.  He  should  also
    have taken into account the fact that the Appellant  had  continued  to
    attend Family Court  proceedings  from  August  2017  and  to  actively
    participate in those proceedings.

22.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge should also have  considered  whether  he
    and the children's right to continue to enjoy a  family  life  together
    justified him being permitted to remain  until  the  Family  Court  had
    reached its decision. This was in the context of the Appellant's  legal
    representative not applying for an adjournment.

23.  Furthermore, the fact that the account given by the  Appellant  in  his
    asylum appeal had not been believed, did not necessarily mean  that  he
    could not have a parental relationship with his children which included
    direct contact or that it may not be in their best  interest  for  this
    direct contact to continue.

24.  As a consequence, the decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Greasley
    did contain errors of law and should be set aside.

DECISION

(1)  The appeal is allowed.


(2)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Greasley or First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly.


Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Dated: 19 November 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
