
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07388/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision& Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7 July 2021                     |On 16 August 2021                  |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JARVIS


                                   Between

                                     OG
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For  the  Appellant:      Ms  S.  Panagiotopoulou  (Counsel  instructed   by
Montague Solicitors LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas (Home Office Senior Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction regarding anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant  or  members  of
his family. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.



INTRODUCTION

1. The Appellant is a Turkish national of  Kurdish  ethnicity,  born  on  29
   December 1986. On 3 October 2017 the Appellant applied for a  Visit  Visa
   which was granted and on the 2 November 2017 the  Appellant  entered  the
   United Kingdom. On 12 October 2018 the Appellant claimed  asylum  on  the
   basis of his claimed fear of the Turkish authorities.

2. On 21 July 2019, the Secretary of State made  a  decision  to  refuse  to
   grant the Appellant's asylum and humanitarian protection claims  as  well
   as to refuse claims under Articles 2, 3  &  8  ECHR.  The  Appellant  has
   exercised his right to appeal by reference to s. 82 of the NIAA 2002.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

3. The first time the appeal was heard was before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
   Lucas on 4 September 2019. Judge Lucas dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal
   in a decision promulgated on 19 September 2019.  The  Appellant  appealed
   against that decision to the Upper Tribunal eventually resulting in Upper
   Tribunal Judge Smith finding legal error by way of a decision promulgated
   on 31 December 2019. The effect of that decision was  to  set  aside  the
   entirety of Judge Lucas's decision and the matter was then reheard in the
   First-tier Tribunal before Judge Roopnarine-Davies on 11 February 2020.

4. In a decision  promulgated  on  6  March  2020,  Judge  Roopnarine-Davies
   dismissed all aspects of the  Appellant's  appeal.  The  Appellant  again
   appealed to the Upper Tribunal, permission being granted on  13  November
   2020 and on 17 March 2021 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hanson  set  aside  the
   decision  of  First-tier  Judge  Roopnarine-Davies   in   its   entirety,
   predominately based upon the Secretary of State's concession in the  Rule
   24 reply (dated 25 January 2021), that there were material errors of  law
   in that FtT decision.

5. The effect of the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson was to  require
   a full rehearing of the substantive protection and human  rights  appeals
   which have been maintained in the UT.

THE REASONS FOR REFUSAL LETTER ("RFRL") - 21 JULY 2019

6. In the RFRL dated 21 July 2019, the Secretary of  State  noted  that  the
   Appellant had previously applied for a Visit Visa to the  United  Kingdom
   on 4 August 2016 which was refused on 10 August 2016.

7. Additionally, it was noted that, having arrived in the United Kingdom  on
   2 November 2017 on a Visit Visa, the Appellant had initially applied  for
   Leave to Remain on the basis  of  the  Ankara  Agreement  but  that  this
   application was refused by the Home Office in June 2018.

8. The  letter  went  on  to  make  general  negative  observations  of  the
   Appellant's credibility including raising section  8(2)  The  Asylum  and
   Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 ("the 2004  Act")  in
   respect of the delay taken by the Appellant  to  claim  asylum  and  also
   noted that the Appellant had left Turkey without experiencing any adverse
   difficulties from the authorities (see para. 37) and concluded  that  the
   Appellant was not a member of the HDP and  had  not  experienced  adverse
   treatment as a result (para. 39).

9. The Secretary of State also concluded that members  of  the  Alevi  faith
   were not generally persecuted  in  Turkey  and  went  on  to  reject  the
   Appellant's human rights submissions including contending that there will
   be no very significant obstacles to the  Appellant's  reintegration  into
   Turkey by reference to 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration  Rules  and  that
   there were no exceptional reasons for otherwise granting Leave to  Remain
   outside of the Rules.

THE APPELLANT'S CLAIM

10. From the various forms of written evidence in  this  appeal  it  can  be
   seen that the Appellant claims to be a person of Kurdish ethnicity and of
   the Alevi faith born in Varto district, Mus province in the south-east of
   Turkey. As a result of discrimination experienced by the family from  the
   local authorities in the area, the family relocated to Istanbul when  the
   Appellant was seven years old. As a consequence of those difficulties the
   Appellant claims that he became interested in pro-Kurdish politics and in
   particular the BDP and later, the HDP party. The Appellant further claims
   that he  was  detained  by  the  Turkish  authorities  on  four  separate
   occasions:

     a. The first  on  1  May  2009,  the  Appellant  attended  a  May  Day
        protest/rally and when the Appellant and friends attempted to go to
        Taksim Square in Istanbul they were attacked by police who detained
        many people including the Appellant;

     b. The second on 7 or 8 July 2010 when the Appellant and two relatives
        were stopped in Varto district, Mus province (the home area in  the
        south-east) - the Appellant was not specifically targeted  (Q69  of
        the Asylum Interview Record ("AIR");

     c. The third on 20 March 2016 when the Appellant plus others attempted
        to celebrate Newroz in Bakirk�y area of Istanbul; the Appellant was
        with  the  HDP  cortege  and  they  were  refused  entry   to   the
        celebrations. The Appellant was  detained  and  interrogated  about
        being a member of the PKK;

     d. And the fourth on 1 May 2017 when there was general disturbance  at
        a May Day rally in Bakirk�y which the Appellant attended with other
        HDP members and supporters - the Appellant was detained with  other
        people (he was not personally targeted (Q91 of the AIR)).

11. The Appellant alleges that he was the victim  of  serious  ill-treatment
   during those detentions and that later,  after  the  Appellant  had  left
   Turkey to visit the UK in 2017, he believes  his  name  was  given  by  a
   friend to the Turkish police. The Appellant claims that  the  friend  who
   was questioned, who might have given the Appellant's name to the  police,
   might have suggested that the Appellant was the man wearing  a  headscarf
   in a picture taken by the Turkish police which  the  Appellant  had  been
   asked about during his fourth detention (Qs 104, 106 & 134  of  the  AIR)
   and as a result there have been further raids on the  Appellant's  family
   home in an attempt by the Turkish authorities to locate the Appellant. He
   also claims that his brother was detained  and  interrogated  as  to  the
   Appellant's whereabouts and that the authorities told  the  brother  that
   the Appellant should  return  to  the  home  area  and  surrender.  As  a
   consequence of this the Appellant asserts that there is a  real  risk  of
   his detention and ill-treatment on return to Turkey  on  account  of  his
   actual association or perceived associations to the  HDP  party  and  the
   PKK.

The Appeal hearing

12. The appeal hearing was conducted in person at  Field  House  on  7  July
   2021. We heard oral evidence from the  Appellant  given  in  the  Turkish
   language which we have made a note of in the record of proceedings. At no
   point during the hearing was there  any  suggestion  of  difficulties  in
   understanding from either the Appellant or the interpreter. We also heard
   submissions from Ms Panagiotopoulou, the Appellant's Counsel, as well  as
   from Mr Kotas, the Secretary of State's Senior Presenting  Officer  which
   we have also made a note of.

13. In assessing the evidence and those submissions we have had full  regard
   to the various Appellant's bundles dated 17 June 2021; 2  September  2019
   and 5 February 2020; the Home Office bundle as well as the  separate  but
   additional reports of the  IRB,  the  Home  Office  fact-finding  mission
   published in October 2019, an article from the  Baghdad  Post,  dated  10
   February 2020,  the  2014  letter  from  the  HDP  and  various  original
   photographs many of which have been reproduced in the various bundles. We
   have  also  been  assisted  by  Ms  Panagiotopoulou's  detailed  skeleton
   argument dated 10 February 2020.

14. At the end of the hearing we reserved judgment which we now give.

The legal framework

15. The Appellant's right of  appeal  and  the  Tribunal's  main  powers  to
   determine the appeal are detailed in Part V of the 2002  Nationality  and
   Immigration Act ("NIAA 2002").

16. The Appellant claims that the Secretary of State's decision would  be  a
   breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  1951  Geneva
   Convention relating to the status  of  refugees  and  the  1967  Protocol
   thereto (the Refugee Convention). The Appellant therefore claims to be  a
   refugee within the definition  in  The  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
   International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006.

17. In the alternative the Appellant is to be taken  to  claim  Humanitarian
   Protection pursuant to para. 339C of the Immigration Rules (by which  has
   been implemented EU  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC).  In  addition,  the
   Appellant says that his removal from the United Kingdom would be a breach
   of the United Kingdom's obligations under the European Convention for the
   Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms  -  now  incorporated
   into English Law by the provisions of the Human Rights Act 1998.

18. A  refugee  is  defined  by  Regulation  2  of  the  2006  Qualification
   Regulations by reference to Article 1A of  the  Refugee  Convention,  and
   thus as someone who, owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for
   reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social
   group, or political opinion, is outside the country of their  nationality
   and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to  avail  himself  of
   the protection of that country; or who,  not  having  a  nationality  and
   being outside the country of his former habitual residence as a result of
   such events is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to  return  to
   it. The burden is on the Appellant to show in an asylum appeal that their
   return will expose them to a real risk of an act  of  persecution  for  a
   Refugee Convention reason.

19. A grant of Humanitarian Protection is only to be made pursuant to  para.
   339C of the Immigration Rules. The Rules require that the relevant person
   must not qualify as a refugee, and, must not be a person who is  excluded
   by virtue of para. 339D. An Appellant must show substantial  grounds  for
   believing that if returned to their country of return, they would face  a
   real risk of suffering serious harm and that they are unable,  or,  owing
   to such risk, unwilling to avail themselves of  the  protection  of  that
   country. Serious harm is also defined in para. 339C.

20. In relation to an asylum appeal, a Humanitarian Protection  appeal,  and
   a Human Rights appeal we are obliged to look at the case  in  the  round,
   and to judge the situation at the time of hearing  the  appeal,  applying
   para. 339J-P of the Immigration Rules.

21. We have also given careful consideration to the Tribunal's  decision  in
   IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312 ("IK"), which
   remains extant Country Guidance.

The assessment of credibility

22. In assessing the  Appellant's  credibility  then,  we  have  taken  into
   account that the standard of proof is the  lower  standard,  and  as  per
   Karanakaran v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000] 3 All  ER
   449 and Ravichandran [1996] Imm AR 97 we must take into  account  all  of
   the material issues in the round.

23. The burden is upon the Appellant to establish the core elements  of  the
   protection claim. A failure to  do  so  will  mean  that  the  person  in
   question has failed to make out their claim in those key respects, as per
   MA (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC  49
   at [48] and HH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
   [2014] EWCA Civ 569 at [9].

24. We have also been guided in that assessment by the terms  of  Article  4
   of EU Council Directive (2004/83/EC) as well as the transposition of this
   Article into the Immigration Rules at 339L.

25.  We  have  borne  in  mind  that  genuine  protection  claimants   might
   exaggerate or fabricate evidence in their claim in order  to  reduce  the
   risk of the appeal being wrongly dismissed as per SB (Sri  Lanka)  v  The
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 160 at [43].

26. In the same judgment the Court laid out the approach to  the  assessment
   of credibility at [46]:

      "In cases (such as the present) where the credibility of the Appellant
      is in issue courts adopt a variety of different evaluative  techniques
      to assess the evidence. The court will for instance consider: (i)  the
      consistency (or otherwise)  of  accounts  given  to  investigators  at
      different points in time; (ii) the consistency (or  otherwise)  of  an
      Appellant's narrative case for  asylum  with  his  actual  conduct  at
      earlier stages and periods in time; (iii) whether, on facts  found  or
      agreed or which are incontrovertible, the Appellant is  a  person  who
      can be categorised as at risk if returned,  and,  if  so,  as  to  the
      nature and extent of that risk (taking account of  applicable  Country
      Guidance); (iv) the adequacy (or by contrast paucity) of  evidence  on
      relevant issues that, logically,  the  Appellant  should  be  able  to
      adduce in order to support his or  her  case;  and  (v),  the  overall
      plausibility of an Appellant's account."

27. We have also taken into account  the  Court  of  Appeal's  view  of  the
   applicability of the 'Lucas Direction[1]' to  the  IAC  in  Uddin  v  The
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 338  at  para.
   11:

      "...A witness may lie for many reasons, for  example,  out  of  shame,
      humiliation, misplaced loyalty, panic, fear, distress,  confusion  and
      emotional  pressure.  That  is  because  a  person's  motives  may  be
      different as respects different questions. The warning is  not  to  be
      found in the judgments before this court. This  is  perhaps  a  useful
      opportunity to emphasise that the utility of the self-direction is  of
      general application and not limited to family and criminal cases."

28.  We  have  additionally  reminded  ourselves  of  the   Court's   recent
   clarification that the terms: credibility and plausibility are not  terms
   of art and do  not  have  "special  technical  meaning",  see  MN  v  The
   Secretary of State for the Home Department (Rev 3) [2020] EWCA  Civ  1746
   at para. 127.

29. We have also been careful to heed the Tribunal's warning in  TK  (Tamils
   - LP updated) Sri Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 00049 to avoid  treating  country
   evidence as automatically 'objective' and have therefore scrutinised  the
   relevant background evidence provided with appropriate care:

      "7. The emphasis we place  on  assessment  based  on  objective  merit
      prompts us to  make  one  further  comment.  It  is  still  widespread
      practice for practitioners and Judges to refer to  "objective  country
      evidence" when all they mean is background country  evidence.  In  our
      view, to refer to such evidence as "objective" obscures the  need  for
      the decision-maker to subject such evidence to scrutiny to see  if  it
      conforms to the COI standards just noted.  This  practice  appears  to
      have had its origin in a distinction between evidence relating  to  an
      individual applicant (so-called "subjective  evidence")  and  evidence
      about country conditions (so-called "objective evidence"), but as  our
      subsequent deliberations on the Appellant's case illustrate (see below
      paras 153-9), even this distinction can cause confusion when there  is
      an issue  about  whether  an  Appellant's  subjective  fears  have  an
      objective foundation. We hope the above practice will cease."

FINDINGS AND REASONS

30. We should start by noting  that,  as  part  of  our  assessment  of  the
   reliability of the Appellant's core claim  to  international  protection,
   that his general claim to have been subject to arrest, detention and ill-
   treatment during disturbances relating to, for instance,  Newroz  is,  in
   general terms, in keeping with the current background evidence,  as  well
   as the conclusions of the Tribunal in IK, see for instance [110, 111, 116-
   120].

31. There is also no dispute about  the  Appellant's  Kurdish  ethnicity  or
   that he comes from the south-east of Turkey.

32. We also consider that  the  Appellant  has  been  relatively  consistent
   about the timing and detail of the first  two  detentions.  We  therefore
   accept that the Appellant was detained on two occasions in the past  but,
   for reasons that we outline below, we do not accept  that  the  Appellant
   was subject to detention and/or ill-treatment in  the  last  two  claimed
   detentions (2016 & 2017).

33. We also do not think that there is much by way  of  discrepancy  in  the
   Appellant's responses to his knowledge of the HDP's political  aims  (see
   paras. 26-32 of the  RFRL).  The  SSHD  has  criticised  the  Appellant's
   answers in the AIR as being vague or not reflecting the  real  detail  of
   the party's declared aims and, in fact, the  Appellant  himself  accepted
   this  in  the  letter  of  further  clarification  sent  by  his  current
   solicitors to the Home Office (dated 15 July 2019)  at  page  12  of  the
   Appellant's bundle. In our view however, although the Appellant's answers
   were brief they are not obviously at odds with the  HDP's  general  quest
   for relieving perceived inequality in Turkey.

34. We do however  consider  that  there  are  material  problems  with  the
   Appellant's credibility which have ultimately led us to conclude that his
   core claim to be a member of the HDP, to have been the victim  of  recent
   mistreatment in detention as well as being of ongoing adverse interest to
   the Turkish authorities is not credible when considered in the round  and
   applying the lower standard of proof.

   The third detention (20 March 2016)

35. We start with the third  detention  (20  March  2016).  Whilst  we  note
   Counsel's written submission  in  the  February  2020  skeleton  argument
   (para. 8) that the SSHD had not directly challenged  the  detail  of  the
   four claimed detentions but had rather observed that none of  those  were
   directly related to HDP activities, we also note that there was no formal
   concession on these detentions by the SSHD in the RFRL.

36. Equally, at the hearing before us, Mr Kotas did challenge the  Appellant
   on the reliability of some  of  this  evidence  and  submitted  that  the
   Appellant had not  been  tortured  or  arrested  as  claimed.  In  cross-
   examination the Appellant was asked  why  his  description  of  the  ill-
   treatment during the third detention in March 2016 at Q84 of the AIR  (11
   June 2019) only made reference to the use of electric shock to the  index
   finger (and 'metals') and not to the other forms of torture as alleged in
   his February 2019 witness statement at para.  11  including:  having  his
   nose broken, his head being hit against the table, hair being pulled  and
   so on. The Appellant's response was that he was not asked details of  the
   detention but only how many times he was arrested and the dates. He  also
   earlier told us that he had already mentioned the details in his  witness
   statement.

37. In our view this is not a reasonable explanation for  why  there  is  so
   little detail in the Appellant's response at Q84. It is quite plain  that
   he was asked by the interviewing officer "what happened in those 2 days?"
   (referring to the Appellant's earlier evidence about the 2016  detention)
   and that he had, previously to this question, provided detailed  evidence
   about the events leading up to his alleged arrest on that day at Q78.

38. We have also noted the compulsory statement detailed  at  page  3/33  of
   the SEF interview which would have been read to the Appellant (it has not
   been suggested that it was not): "This interview is your  opportunity  to
   tell us your reasons for claiming asylum. It is very important you do not
   withhold any information you believe  to  be  relevant  to  support  your
   claim. I will help you by asking  you  questions  so  that  we  have  the
   information we need to make a decision in your case".

39. Whilst the Appellant did mention a sinus problem at Q3 of the AIR  which
   he told the Tribunal in the hearing was a consequence of the broken  nose
   that he had received in detention, we note that  the  Appellant  has  not
   received medical treatment in the  UK  and  there  is  no  other  medical
   evidence in respect of the sinus problems described at Q3.

40. We therefore wholly reject the Appellant's  evidence  that  he  was  not
   asked to give the detail of the alleged abuse during the third  detention
   during the AI. We consider that this is  an  adverse  point  against  the
   Appellant's credibility and, is overall, part of the reason why  we  have
   decided to reject  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  been  detained  and
   mistreated on the third occasion as claimed.

   The delay in claiming asylum and the fourth detention (1 May 2017)

41. In accordance with the wording of section 8 of the 2004 act as  well  as
   the guidance in terms of the application of this provision  provided  for
   in the Court of Appeal's decision of JT (Cameroon) v Secretary  of  State
   for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 878, we have been careful not  to
   treat this provision as being determinative of  the  reliability  of  the
   Appellant's core claim.

42. Nonetheless,  we  consider  that  we  have  not  received  a  reasonable
   explanation from the Appellant as to why it was that he  took  almost  12
   months to claim asylum in the UK. Our assessment of this issue is made up
   of a number of elements and we start with the fourth detention as claimed
   by the Appellant.

   The Appellant's fourth detention (1 May 2017)

43. We agree with Mr Kotas  that,  bearing  in  mind  the  severity  of  the
   adverse treatment that the Appellant claimed to have received  in  Turkey
   in, especially, May 2017 (the 4th detention), it is  not  credible  that,
   having managed to travel to the UK without harm, the Appellant would  not
   then have sought to claim asylum as soon as he reasonably could.

44. In reaching that conclusion we have had regard to the  Appellant's  oral
   evidence that he "had no fears or concerns" about returning. He also told
   us that this was because there were no search warrants  out  for  him  at
   this time.

45.  We  take  into  account  Ms  Panagiotopoulou's  submission   that   the
   Appellant's attitude to the risk of future mistreatment must be  seen  in
   the context of his personal experience of violence as well  as  set  into
   the context of what is said in the background evidence about the frequent
   use of violence against political Kurdish people  by  the  Turkish  state
   (for instance some of the sources in the Report of a  Home  Office  Fact-
   Finding Mission Turkey: Kurds, the HDP and the PKK (Conducted 17 June  to
   21 June 2019) Published October 2019 ("the FFM report 2019")),  but  even
   with that in mind,  we  have  concluded  that  the  heightened  level  of
   violence was such, on the Appellant's  claim,  that  he  could  not  have
   genuinely considered returning to Turkey.

46. We have also taken into account that the  Appellant  had  entered  on  a
   Visit Visa valid for 6 months but, again, in our view, in this  case,  if
   the Appellant had been brutalised as claimed we consider it  most  likely
   that he would have sought to claim asylum on this basis  as  soon  as  he
   practically could. It is important to note that  the  Appellant  did  not
   explain the delay in claiming asylum on the  basis  of  having  temporary
   lawful status in the UK (the 6-month visit-visa) but that he  simply  did
   not think that there was any problem about returning until May 2018  when
   he claims that the family home in Turkey was  raided  (see  for  instance
   para. 12 of the 30 August 2019 witness statement).

47. We have carefully noted that the Appellant said that  when  he  came  to
   the UK he was not of particular interest to the Turkish  authorities  and
   that this adverse interest occurred in May 2018 around 6 months after his
   entry to the UK but we do not think that is plausible either. In  drawing
   that conclusion we have carefully considered the Appellant's evidence  in
   his witness statement dated 4 February 2019 at para. 13:

"They took  us  to  Vatan  Street  Anti-Terror  branch.  On  arrival  I  was
searched. They confiscated my personal belongings. Then I  was  taken  to  a
room where had fingerprints and  photo  taken.  Before  they  did  this,  my
handcuffs were removed. My eyes were blindfolded again with a  black  cloth.
Then I was taken to the ground floor, they removed the blindfold and put  me
in the cell and locked the door and left. It was a dark, smelly cell. A  few
hours later, someone came, blindfolded my eyes, handcuffed my  hands  behind
my back and took me upstairs. I was forced to sit in a chair.  They  started
talking by saying that they were  aware  of  my  previous  detention.  Since
tension occurred between the HDP group and the police, I was directly  asked
questions about PKK, nature of my involvement with PKK's and wanted to  know
PKK's Istanbul provincial committee. In addition of that they want  to  know
that why I shouted slogans against the AK Party and the state. I  told  them
I didn't have anything to do with PKK or YDGH and  I  didn't  know  who  was
working for the PKK and YDGH either  in  my  neighbourhood  or  an  Istanbul
province. The police didn't like my answers. One of them started to yell  at
me, and if I don't answer his questions like a man, he  would  get  my  dead
body out of there. I was subjected to a few slaps  furiously,  and  my  head
was hit against the wall a few times as well and I fell down  the  chair  on
the floor. Interrogation officer swore and put me back in  the  chair.  They
asked the same questions again and again. I was  accused  of  having  thrown
stones at the police and carrying a post of the head of the Terrorist,  thus
violating the law. I didn't do anything illegal, I  didn't  know  who  threw
stones and did not know who carried anyone's poster; there were two  persons
in the room that questioned me as I separated them from their voices. I  was
subjected to beatings with police  batons.  I  was  subjected  to  swearing,
humiliations, fists, slapping and kicking. I was subject to pressurise  cold
water. I couldn't stand the pain. This interrogation lasted approximately  2
-3 hours..."

   And in respect of the interrogation and beatings the next day:

"I was blindfolded again.  Again  I  was  subjected  to  threats,  insulted,
kicked, slapped, punched and beatings. They  grabbed  my  hair  and  hit  me
against the wall. They were swearing at me. I was  subjected  to  falaka  in
this interrogation...

On the evening of my detention, I found out the police had raided our  house
and that my family home was ransacked. They also asked a  lot  of  questions
about what I did for the PKK. My family went to HDP Sultanbeyli  branch  and
the party arrange a lawyer to send to the anti-terrorism branch  to  see  me
but they were not allowed to meet me." (sic throughout)

  48. We have also kept in mind  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  on  the
      approach to plausibility in the binding decision of Y v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 at paras. 25-27 and
      been careful not to judge this element of the assessment  through  our
      own expectations of life in the UK:

      "27. None of this, however, means that an adjudicator is  required  to
      take at face value an account of facts proffered by an  Appellant,  no
      matter how contrary to common sense and experience of human  behaviour
      the account may be. The decision maker is not expected to suspend  his
      own judgment, nor does Mr Singh contend that he should. In appropriate
      cases, he is entitled to find that an account of  events  is  so  far-
      fetched and contrary to reason as to be incapable of belief. The point
      was well put in the Awala case by Lord Brodie at para. 24 when he said
      this:

           "... the  Tribunal  of  fact  need  not  necessarily  accept  an
           applicant's account simply because it is not contradicted at the
           relevant hearing. The Tribunal  of  fact  is  entitled  to  make
           reasonable findings based on implausibilities, common sense  and
           rationality, and may reject evidence if  it  is  not  consistent
           with the probabilities affecting the case as a whole".

      He then added a little later:

           "... while a decision on credibility must be reached rationally,
           in doing so the decision maker is entitled to draw on his common
           sense and his ability, as a practical and  informed  person,  to
           identify what is or is not plausible".

49. However, when taking into account the Appellant's own claim  as  to  the
   severity of ill-treatment  during  the  fourth  detention  and  his  oral
   evidence  that  during  this  interrogation  he  was  told  that  he  was
   considered to be a member of the Yurtsever Devrimci Gen�lik Hareket  (The
   Patriotic Revolutionary Youth Movement) ("YDGH"), we  conclude  that  the
   Appellant's lack of concern about returning to Turkey in 2017 -  2018  is
   simply not plausible seen through the prism of  the  background  evidence
   about the antipathy from the Turkish state to those involved or perceived
   to be involved with the PKK and the AIT's findings  in  IK.  It  is  also
   inconsistent with his own  claim  that  the  reason  for  the  heightened
   interest in him in 2018, and the overall reason why he  started  to  fear
   returning to Turkey, was because the authorities thought that  he  worked
   with the YDGH (para. 15 of the 4 February 2019 witness statement).

50. We also reject the Appellant's evidence that he  would  have  sought  to
   return to Turkey to see his family  (because  he  had  no  concern  about
   ongoing, adverse interest) if he had been successful in  obtaining  Leave
   to Remain under the Ankara Agreement in 2018. This evidence  simply  does
   not credibly sit with the Appellant's description of events in Turkey  in
   2016 and 2017 even set into the context of  the  background  evidence  of
   general difficulties  for  those  associated  with  Kurdish  politics  in
   Turkey. We therefore consider that this does not constitute a  reasonable
   explanation for not claiming asylum as soon as he arrived  (or  within  a
   reasonable period) in the UK in 2017.







   The advice of a previous solicitor

51. We also noted the Appellant's evidence that he was told by  a  different
   solicitor in 2018 that he was not eligible to apply for asylum because he
   entered the  UK  lawfully  and  had  already  applied  under  the  Ankara
   Agreement (para. 20 of the  August  2019  witness  statement),  which  he
   states is part of the explanation for the delay in  claiming.  We  remind
   ourselves that in such a circumstance,  where  a  previous  solicitor  is
   accused of giving plainly incorrect legal advice, the Appellant must show
   that he has made some attempt to give  that  legal  advisor  a  right  of
   reply, see for instance  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting
   children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197(IAC) at para. 16:

      "...

      xi) Although we do not rule out that unfairness could  be  established
      through the incompetence of the advocate, there is a high threshold to
      establish. It is not sufficient that the advocate  exercised  forensic
      judgment that the Appellant now disagrees  with  or  has  subsequently
      proven to be unfortunate. Some regard may be relevant to the  test  in
      the Court of Appeal Criminal Division where conduct by the advocate is
      relied on as a ground to challenge the safety of the  conviction  (see
      Archbold 2012 7-83). Although the criminal courts  are  now  concerned
      primarily with the impact of the failure of the advocate on the  trial
      process, there must be demonstrated incompetence such as a  course  of
      action that no reasonable advocate would have taken.  The  allegations
      against counsel appearing on 30 March nowhere reached that standard.

      xii) Just as in criminal appeals, if the Appellant mounts criticism of
      a representative, legal privilege must be expressly waived  and  draft
      statements and  conference  notes  relevant  to  the  case  should  be
      disclosed. This  was  not  done  in  the  present  case.  We  have  no
      explanation for the differences  in  account  and  why  the  Appellant
      behaved as he did at the appeal and what he intended  to  say  if  any
      different from what the Judge recorded him as saying.  In  any  event,
      where credibility is in issue his complaint may not carry weight if it
      is evidentially unsupported."

   And in BT (Former solicitors alleged misconduct) Nepal [2004] UKIAT 00311
   at para. 5. In this case, and in the  absence  of  such  opportunity,  we
   conclude that the Appellant has not overall established that he was given
   wrong legal advice as part of the  reasons  for  the  delay  in  claiming
   asylum in this case.

  52. We therefore conclude that the Appellant has  not  reliably  explained
      why, if he had discovered in May 2018 that there had been  a  raid  on
      the family home in Turkey which was predicated upon  adverse  interest
      in the Appellant from the Turkish state, he did not  claim  asylum  at
      this point but chose to apply for a visa under  the  Ankara  agreement
      and did  not  claim  international  protection  until  much  later  in
      September 2018.

   The claim to mental health problems:

53. During Mr Kotas's cross-examination, the  Appellant  told  the  Tribunal
   that he did not know to mention the fact that he suffers  mentally  as  a
   consequence of his torture  when  asked  about  his  health  in  the  AIR
   (conducted on the 11 June 2019) at Q2. We  also  note  that  despite  the
   specific reference to mental health conditions at 2.3  of  the  Screening
   Interview, the Appellant claimed that this was not interpreted to him and
   that he understood these questions to  be  related  to  chronic  physical
   health conditions and so did not mention any mental health problems.

54. Overall, we are not prepared to accept the  Appellant's  claim  that  he
   has mental health problems whether or  not  related  to  mistreatment  in
   Turkey. We are not prepared to accept his belated claim that 2.3  of  the
   Screening Interview was not  properly  translated  to  him  and,  in  the
   absence of any corroboratory medical evidence  (the  Appellant  told  the
   Tribunal that he is not being and has not been  treated  for  any  mental
   health difficulties), we are not prepared to accept that the Appellant is
   afflicted as claimed.

55. This is not a case in which it is  said  that  the  Appellant  does  not
   recognise his own alleged mental health issues or has  some  pre-disposed
   difficulty in admitting such problems:  he  mentioned  this  without  any
   apparent  difficulty  during  the   hearing   and   mentioned   suffering
   psychologically after a suicide bomb attack in Ankara on 10 October  2015
   at para. 9 of the 4 February 2019 witness statement.

56. We also note the Appellant's oral evidence that  he  went  to  a  GP  in
   Newport on one occasion with his family but  does  not  know  if  he  was
   registered. We again do not accept that,  in  this  case,  the  Appellant
   would not have sought help from the GP in the UK through  his  family  or
   that, according to his evidence given to Counsel's re-examination, he did
   not know that he was able to get  such  treatment  in  the  UK.  This  is
   incongruous with the amount of time the Appellant has spent  in  the  UK;
   his receipt of physiotherapy in the UK for the after-effects  of  a  road
   traffic accident in November 2017 and his access to  legal  advice  which
   would easily have resolved this issue. In  our  view  the  Appellant  has
   clearly embellished having mental health problems, and whilst this is not
   determinative  of  the  reliability  of  his  core  credibility,  it   is
   nonetheless part of the  overall  picture  of  the  Appellant's  lack  of
   truthfulness in his evidence to the Tribunal.

57. We also formally reject the Appellant's  claim  that  the  road  traffic
   accident in November 2017 (in the UK)  led  to  the  Appellant  remaining
   longer in the UK than the 6 months given on  his  Visit  Visa  (until  18
   April 2018, see A2 of the Home Office bundle), as per the explanation  at
   para. 14 of the February 2019 statement. The Appellant has only  produced
   a letter dated 9 April 2018 (at page 18 of the Appellant's  bundle)  from
   Carpenter's (solicitors) which records a claim in respect of an  accident
   on 17 November 2017.

58. We have not  seen  any  medical  evidence  to  support  the  Appellant's
   contention that any injuries received would have caused him  to  have  to
   stay beyond 18 April 2018 and there is equally no corroboratory  evidence
   from the Appellant's sister in Newport (UK) to support the claim that the
   Appellant had to stay longer because of his niece's epilepsy. There is  a
   letter  from  a  Dr  Barber  (dated   26   February   2018),   consultant
   paediatrician at Royal Gwent Hospital but this letter states that Miss HA
   had a probable seizure which  was  now  fully  resolved  and  a  "further
   seizure" in August 2017 (before the Appellant had even arrived in the UK)
   after which Miss HA "has been absolutely fine". We consider that we  have
   been  given  no  reasonable  explanation  for   the   absence   of   such
   corroboratory evidence.

   The ongoing adverse interest in the Appellant

59. We also, overall, have concluded that the Appellant is not  reliable  in
   his claim that, since his departure from Turkey in 2017, his family  home
   has been subject to numerous raids which appear to be largely based on  a
   desire to locate the Appellant  and,  as  a  corollary  issue,  that  his
   brother was detained as well. Whilst we recognise that that there  is  no
   legal duty per se to corroborate the  underlying  claim  for  protection,
   there is nonetheless no evidence at all from the Appellant's  friends  in
   the HDP whom, the Appellant told us in oral evidence,  had  confirmed  to
   him that the reason for the adverse interest in him was that a friend had
   given the Appellant's  name  to  the  police.  We  again  find  that  the
   Appellant has failed to provide a reasonable explanation for the  absence
   of evidence which could logically corroborate his claim  (as  per  SB  at
   [46]).

60. We also note  that,  despite  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  the  HDP
   arranged for a lawyer in Turkey  to  see  the  Appellant  whilst  he  was
   detained on the fourth occasion in 2017 (para. 13 of  the  February  2019
   witness statement) - albeit the lawyer was not able to have access to the
   Appellant, no such  corroboratory  evidence  has  been  provided  to  the
   Tribunal.

61. When asked  about  the  absence  of  corroboratory  evidence  from,  for
   instance, the Appellant's family in  Turkey  or  the  UK,  the  Appellant
   replied that he was not asked  about  that  by  anyone.  We  reject  that
   response as incredible.

62. In our judgment it is simply not true that having spent  the  best  part
   of 3 years pursuing, firstly an application under  the  Ankara  Agreement
   and then a protection claim to the Home Office and to the Tribunal on two
   previous occasions, that it would not have occurred to the Appellant that
   corroboratory evidence about his problems from the HDP or his  family  in
   Turkey might be useful. This is especially the case in light of the  fact
   that the Appellant has provided a letter said to be  issued  by  the  HDP
   from 2014 (we have seen the original).

63. In her submissions, Ms Panagiotopoulou  argued  that  there  was  little
   point in the Appellant providing  such  evidence  because  the  SSHD  was
   likely to challenge its reliability and the Tribunal might conclude  that
   little weight should be attached to it.

64.  We  firstly  remind  ourselves  that  this  was  not  the   Appellant's
   explanation for the failure to provide such documents, but  secondly,  in
   considering this submission we have also concluded that  this  is  simply
   not a good reason for such an absence. In our view, if the Appellant  was
   truthful about his fear of the Turkish authorities  then  he  would  have
   attempted to provide corroboration even if it could be challenged by  the
   SSHD. We therefore find that the absence of a reasonable explanation  for
   failing to provide evidence which  could  logically  have  been  provided
   seriously undermines his claim to be of current,  adverse  interest  from
   the Turkish authorities.

65. We have also decided for similar reasons  overall,  that  the  Appellant
   has not reliably established that his brother was detained and/or that it
   was in response to an adverse interest in the Appellant as claimed.

   Membership of the HDP

66. As noted, we have seen the 'original' of a Turkish document  (translated
   in the Appellant's bundle at page 22) which is said to have  been  issued
   by the party and confirms his membership since 10 September 2014. We have
   taken this document in the round with the other  evidence,  applying  the
   well-known principles in Tanveer Ahmed, and have  concluded  that  little
   weight should be given  to  this  document.  We  have  already  expressed
   serious concern about other aspects of the Appellant's core evidence  and
   noted the sheer  absence  of  corroboratory  evidence  which  could  have
   reasonably been provided to the Tribunal or SSHD and the failure  of  the
   Appellant to provide a reasonable explanation for  the  absence  of  that
   evidence.

67. We have also noted that despite the Appellant claiming to  be  a  member
   of the HDP in the AIR (see Qs 28 & 32) and his witness statement dated 30
   August 2019 at para. 3, this is  contradicted  in  the  letter  from  his
   current solicitors at page 12 of the Appellant's bundle. In  that  letter
   (dated 15 July 2019) it is expressly stated that  "Q42  -  The  applicant
   instructs that he was not a member of the HDP but he was a member of  the
   BDP". The Appellant has had sufficient  time  to  address  this  material
   inconsistency in his evidence but has not sought to do so.

68. We are also concerned about the Appellant's answer at Q38  of  the  AIR:
   he was asked what evidence he had to support his claim to be a member  of
   "this party" (at Q37 the Appellant said that he became "the other parties
   member" (sic) in 2014 when the HDP came into existence), and  replied  "I
   don't have any. I didn't bring my cards and I asked my family to find  it
   but they  couldn't".  In  the  follow  up  letter  from  the  Appellant's
   representatives (page 12 of the bundle), the Appellant asserted  that  he
   was in fact confused and that  "neither  BDP  or  HDP  issued  membership
   cards". This latter representation appears  to  be  consistent  with  the
   background evidence in the FFM 2019 at 2.2.4:

      "An HDP MP explained that the HDP do not offer  ID  cards,  membership
      card   or   document   cards   for   members.   You   can   apply   at
      district/provincial levels and once you are accepted, the new member's
      name is in the system."

69. We consider that  the  Appellant's  explanation  in  the  15  July  2019
   letter, that he was confused does not adequately  explain  why  he  would
   have, of his own volition, told the interviewing officer during  the  AI,
   that he had cards at home but they could not now be found.  In  our  view
   this is further evidence of  the  Appellant  embellishing  his  level  of
   political interest and involvement in Turkey. Whilst  it  might  be  said
   that this point was not put to the Appellant during the  hearing,  it  is
   nonetheless the case that the SSHD  has  long  disputed  the  Appellant's
   claim to be a  BDP/HDP  member  (see  para.  39  of  the  RFRL)  and  the
   difficulties in the evidence about the Appellant's membership and  access
   to membership cards was ventured by the Appellant himself in the 15  July
   2019 letter. We therefore consider that there is no unfairness caused  to
   the Appellant by the Tribunal grappling with the evidential  difficulties
   that he has already highlighted and attempted to explain.

   The Appellant's activities in the UK

70. We should also record that we have carefully considered, in  the  round,
   the additional evidence relating to the Appellant's activities in the UK,
   see for instance pages 23-34 of the  current  Appellant's  bundle.  These
   consist of:

     a. A letter from the  Kurdish  Community  Centre  in  Wales  (dated  2
        September 2019), as well as a membership card;

     b. A letter from the Kurdish People's Democratic Assembly  in  Britain
        (dated 15 August 2019);

     c. Pictures of the  Appellant  in  the  Kurdish  Community  centre  in
        London; as well as from  the  march  past  the  BBC  in  London  in
        relation to the presence of ISIS in Rojova (13  October  2019):  he
        also identified himself holding the corner of a  banner  (page  29)
        requesting that the UK government stop supporting the Turkish state
        and ISIS - there is a picture of the Appellant  holding  a  placard
        accusing the Turkish state of being a murderer (page 33).

71. Whilst we note that the Appellant's evidence  at  para.  10  of  the  30
   August 2019 witness statement is that he was detained  on  the  last  two
   occasions because he was part of HDP corteges, we also  note  that  these
   were not political events (Qs 81 & 89 of the AIR)  and  were  very  large
   gatherings of people.

72. We have no  doubt  that  the  Appellant  has  interest  in  his  Kurdish
   cultural identity but we, for the reasons we have laid out, are unable to
   accept that this provides material support for the Appellant's claim that
   he was a member of HDP (or otherwise involved with the party)  in  Turkey
   as claimed bearing in mind the problems with the evidence which  we  have
   identified.

The claim to ill-treatment and ongoing adverse interest - conclusions

73. We therefore reject  the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  was  subject  to
   detention and/or to serious ill-treatment in March 2016 and May  2017  as
   claimed,  because  of  our  overall  concerns   about   the   Appellant's
   reliability as a witness on these issues. We consider that the  Appellant
   has engineered a falsified account as a response to the  failure  of  his
   Ankara Agreement application in 2018.

74. We have also rejected the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  is  of  ongoing
   adverse interest to the Turkish authorities, that  the  family  home  has
   been raided and that his brother was arrested  and  detained  because  of
   this.

Risk of persecution/serious harm on return to Turkey

75. Both parties have relied upon the Tribunal's Country  Guidance  decision
   of IK and we have had careful regard to it in reaching our decision  both
   on credibility issues and the question of risk.

76. We note that the Tribunal in IK  endorsed  the  earlier  decision  in  A
   (Turkey) CG [2003] UKIAT 00034 at [46 & 47]:

      "46. The following are the factors which inexhaustively we consider to
      be material in giving rise to potential suspicion in the minds of  the
      authorities concerning a particular claimant.

           a) The level if  any  of  the  appellant's  known  or  suspected
           involvement with a separatist organisation. Together  with  this
           must be assessed the basis upon which it is contended  that  the
           authorities knew of or might suspect such involvement.

           b) Whether the appellant has ever been arrested or detained  and
           if so in what circumstances. In this context it may be  relevant
           to note how long ago such arrests or detentions took  place,  if
           it is the case that there appears to  be  no  causal  connection
           between them and  the  claimant's  departure  from  Turkey,  but
           otherwise it may be a factor of no particular significance.

           c) Whether the circumstances of the appellant's  past  arrest(s)
           and detention(s) (if any) indicate that the authorities  did  in
           fact view him or her as a suspected separatist.

           d) Whether the appellant was  charged  or  placed  on  reporting
           conditions or now faces charges.

           e) The degree of  ill  treatment  to  which  the  appellant  was
           subjected in the past.

           f)  Whether  the  appellant  has  family  connections   with   a
           separatist organisation such as KADEK or HADEP or DEHAP.

           g) How long a period elapsed between the appellant's last arrest
           and detention and his or her  departure  from  Turkey.  In  this
           regard it may of course be relevant to consider the evidence  if
           any concerning what the appellant was in fact doing between  the
           time of the last arrest and detention and departure from Turkey.
           It is a factor that is only  likely  to  be  of  any  particular
           relevance if there is a reasonably lengthy  period  between  the
           two events without any ongoing problems being experienced on the
           part of the appellant from the authorities.

           h) Whether in the period after the appellant's last arrest there
           is any evidence that he or she was kept  under  surveillance  or
           monitored by the authorities.

           i) Kurdish ethnicity.

           j) Alevi faith.

           k) Lack of a current up-to-date Turkish passport.

           l) Whether there is any evidence that the authorities have  been
           pursuing or otherwise expressing an interest  in  the  appellant
           since he or she left Turkey.

           m) Whether the appellant became an  informer  or  was  asked  to
           become one.

           n) Actual perceived political activities  abroad  in  connection
           with a separatist organisation.

           o) If the returnee is a military draft evader there will be some
           logical impact on his profile to  those  assessing  him  on  his
           immediate return. Following Sepet of course this alone is not  a
           basis for a refugee or human rights claim."

77. At para. 111 the AIT in IK found:

      "In saying this, we emphasise that many of the individual risk factors
      described in A (Turkey) comprise in themselves a broad  spectrum  of
      variable potential  risk  that  requires  careful  evaluation  on  the
      specific facts of each appeal as a whole. The factors described  in A
      (Turkey) were not intended as a simplistic checklist and should not be
      used as such.  Thus,  not  all  "detentions"  will  be  of  comparable
      significance in assessing risk. For  example,  in  the  light  of  the
      positive developments in Turkey  in  recent  years,  described  above,
      there  could  be  a  considerable  difference  between  the  potential
      significance when evaluating present risk to  a  person  who  say  was
      rounded  up  with  many  others  in  the  course  of  Kurdish   Nevroz
      celebrations and held overnight before being released without  charge,
      and a person who was ill-treated along with others in his  village  in
      implementation of the clearance programme in the Southeast on the  one
      hand, and a person who was specifically and individually targeted  and
      detained for reasons inherent in his personal  history  and  seriously
      ill treated over a more protracted period  on  the  other  hand.  This
      comparison  illustrates  why  we  caution  against  a  too  simplistic
      approach to "headline" factors."

78. At para. 78, the AIT went on to establish that the starting point for  a
   Tribunal's substantive consideration of risk on return is:

      "...whether the claimant would be at any real risk of  persecution  or
      breach of article 3 in his home area as a consequence of his material
      history there. If the answer to that is  no,  then  the  claim  cannot
      normally  succeed  unless  of  course  the  risk  arises  from  or  is
      aggravated by other factors, such as his material activities abroad or
      in other parts of Turkey."

  79. The AIT also went on to say:

      "116. We have already touched upon this issue in some of our  previous
      observations. We have indicated that the proper  course  in  assessing
      risk on return is normally to decide first whether an individual has a
      well founded fear of persecution in his home area based  upon  a  case
      sensitive assessment of the facts in the context of an analysis of the
      risk factors described in A (Turkey). It is however implicit  in  our
      conclusions so far that the risk to  a  specific  individual  in  most
      circumstances will be at its highest in his home area for a variety of
      reasons, and particularly if it is located in the areas of conflict in
      the south and east of Turkey. Conversely the  differential  nature  of
      the risk outside  that  area  may  be  sufficient  to  mean  that  the
      individual would not be at real risk of persecution by  the  state  or
      its agencies elsewhere in Turkey, even if they were made aware of  the
      thrust of the information maintained in his home area by telephone  or
      fax enquiry from the airport police station  or  elsewhere,  or  by  a
      transfer of at least some of the information to a  new  home  area  on
      registration with the local Mukhtar there.

      117. Some information about an individual is not reasonably likely  to
      be apparent to anyone other than a few individuals in his  home  area.
      For example, a specific gendarme might have it in  for  an  individual
      whom he considers to be a local "ne'er-do-well" but against whom there
      is no specific information. Also it is  implausible,  in  the  current
      climate of zero tolerance for torture that an official would  wish  to
      record or transfer information that  could  potentially  lead  to  his
      prosecution for a criminal offence.

      118. In general terms however we consider  that  one  should  proceed,
      when assessing the viability of internal relocation, on the basis that
      an individual's material history will in broad terms become  known  to
      the authorities at the airport and in his new area  when  he  settles,
      either through registration with the local Mukhtar or if he  comes  to
      the attention for any reason of the police there. The issue is whether
      that record would be reasonably likely to lead to persecution  outside
      his home area.

      119. We have already identified some examples of the circumstances  in
      which a person may have experienced serious ill-treatment in the  past
      in areas of Turkey where the PKK was or now is active, but  would  not
      necessarily be at similar risk of such treatment elsewhere  in  Turkey
      where it is not, and where a different view of his  history  could  be
      taken.  They  include  examples  of  general   intimidation   by   the
      authorities of the Kurdish population to discourage  support  for  the
      PKK, or to clear whole villages. The evidence is that anything between
      some hundreds of  thousands  to  some  millions  (depending  on  whose
      figures  one  uses)  may  have  been  displaced  within  Turkey  as  a
      consequence of this. However outside the areas of PKK  activity  there
      will not be the same perceived need to undertake such intimidation  or
      clearances and the authorities within  the  receiving  areas  will  be
      aware of the tactics that led to this mass migration, and will be able
      to assess an individual's record in the  light  of  it.  Similarly,  a
      person who was included on Mr Dil's list  of  local  "ne'er-do-wells",
      against whom there was no evidence of PKK involvement, but who ran the
      risk of being  detained  for  questioning  whenever  an  PKK  incident
      occurred in his vicinity, would not be at a similar  risk  in  another
      area where the PKK was not active and where such incidents  were  much
      less likely to occur. These are just some examples of why differential
      risk can arise in different areas of Turkey."

80. In assessing the nature of the differential risk in this case,  we  make
   the following findings: we accept that the Appellant has been  previously
   detained on two occasions in 2009 and 2010 and that he was mistreated  on
   those occasions. Therefore, on the basis of IK, there  is  likely  to  be
   some form of locally held record, the thrust of which would become  known
   to those members of the authorities dealing with the Appellant on return.
   However, we consider it important that these detentions were in 2009  and
   2010 so some considerable time ago now and that the first detention  (May
   2009) was a May Day celebration which the Appellant was invited to  by  a
   trade union (para. 4 of the February 2019 witness statement) and that  he
   was arrested with more than 100 other people (Q56 of the  AIR)  and  that
   the second detention was in the context of a random stop by the police in
   the south-east after an attack on a local  police  station  and  was  not
   specifically targeted at the Appellant.

81. We do not accept, for the reasons we have  given,  that  since  he  left
   Turkey his name was given to the Turkish authorities such as  to  provoke
   an adverse interest in the Appellant. We also  do  not  accept  that  the
   family home in Turkey was raided as a consequence of  this  new  specific
   interest and we do not accept the Appellant's  brother  was  detained  as
   claimed.

82. We have also rejected the Appellant's claim to have  been  a  member  of
   the HDP and to have been actively  involved  with  the  party  in  recent
   years.

83. We also take into account that the Appellant is Alevi and that  he  left
   Turkey legally using his own  passport  and  had  no  problems  with  the
   authorities when doing so.

84. So far then it is our view that, applying the general themes  identified
   in A and endorsed in IK and making sure not to treat them as a  checklist
   (as per [47] of IK), the Appellant has not established  that  this  prior
   mistreatment in 2009 and 2010 would  cause  sufficient  adverse  interest
   from the Turkish authorities now to lead to a real risk  of  mistreatment
   upon return even where the first detention 12 years ago was  in  Istanbul
   itself.

   Sur place activities in the UK

  85. In considering the potential  impact  of  the  Appellant's  sur  place
      activities in the UK on the risk he faces upon  return  to  Turkey  we
      have directed ourselves to the binding decision of the Court of Appeal
      in TM (Zimbabwe) & Ors v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      [2010] EWCA Civ 916 ("TM"), at [25-29].

  86. In this case we accept that the Appellant attended a rally  in  London
      about the ISIS presence in Rojova (Syria) in 2019 but we  have  little
      information about the lengths that the Turkish authorities  go  to  in
      the UK to record and/or identify Turkish nationals who attend  rallies
      away from Turkish embassy buildings. We do however note that there  is
      some evidence in the FFM report (2019) that the  Turkish  police  made
      video recordings of those entering  HDP  premises  in  the  south-east
      (3.2.12) and, in applying TM (especially [27]),  we  have  taken  into
      account the general background evidence of the Turkish state's adverse
      interest in those who are deemed activists in Kurdish politics.

  87. Overall, we are prepared to accept that there might be surveillance of
      political rallies in  the  UK  which  the  Turkish  authorities  might
      consider contentious however we have no evidence before us to show how
      effective the Turkish authorities are in connecting people seen  at  a
      rally in the UK to their identities/personal  details  in  Turkey.  On
      that basis we do not think it is reasonably likely  that  the  Turkish
      authorities will know from their own surveillance that  the  appellant
      was at this specific rally. We also note that the  Appellant  has  not
      credibly made out the claim that there have been raids on  the  family
      home in Turkey since the Appellant came to the UK  in  2017  including
      after this demonstration in 2019.

  88. However, we are aware of course  that  one  of  the  aspects  we  must
      consider in respect of the application of IK  is  what  questions  the
      appellant is likely to be asked when he is returned. In  that  respect
      we would accept that there is a likelihood that  the  appellant  would
      disclose that he was at a rally in 2019 in London and had  involvement
      with Kurdish groups in the UK (the Kurdish Community Centre in  Wales,
      the Kurdish People's Democratic Assembly  in  Britain).  We  would  of
      course also observe that the appellant is not expected to lie, and  if
      asked, which we think it is likely he would be, he would also have  to
      report that his asylum claim was dismissed and that his  claim  to  be
      politically active in Turkey, including being a member or supporter of
      the HDP, was not accepted as credible by the UK Tribunal.

89. Whilst Ms Panagiotopoulou has, in her skeleton  argument  at  para.  12,
   relied upon extracts from the FFM 2019 which could be read as  suggesting
   a possible  heightened interest in those involved in  the  most  informal
   forms of Kurdish politics (i.e. being caught leafletting)  we  also  note
   that she did not argue that the current evidence should cause the  UT  to
   depart from IK, applying the Court of Appeal's guidance in  SG  (Iraq)  v
   Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  940,  in
   particular at [47].

  90. We have also directed ourselves to the Secretary of  State's  view  of
      the overall position for HDP members (although this Appellant  is  not
      such a member)  in  the  Country  Policy  Information  Note,  'Turkey:
      Peoples' Democratic Party (HDP)' Version 4.0 (March  2020)  which  was
      provided in the Appellant's evidence bundle (dated 17 June 2021):

      "2.4.15 In general, simply being a member or supporter of the  HDP  is
      not likely to result in a person facing persecution. However, the risk
      faced will  depend  on  the  person's  profile  and  activities.  When
      ordinary members of the HDP have come to the adverse attention of  the
      authorities,  this  has  generally  been   whilst   participating   in
      demonstrations and rallies, or for  being  vocal  in  criticising  the
      government or the president  or  speaking  out  on  Kurdish  political
      issues, or for taking an active and visible interest in the court case
      of a relative who is a high-profile member of the HDP.  Otherwise,  an
      ordinary member is less likely to attract the adverse attention of the
      authorities on account of their political beliefs. It will  be  up  to
      each person to demonstrate that their membership or support of the HDP
      (or their perceived membership or support) will have brought  them  to
      the adverse attention of the authorities to such an extent  that  they
      would experience a risk of serious harm or persecution on return.

      2.4.16 If the person is a senior member of the HDP,  for  example,  an
      MP, local officials, or elected  mayor,  or  is  an  activist  or  has
      otherwise come to the adverse attention of the authorities because  of
      suspected involvement with the PKK or support for autonomy for Kurdish
      people,  they  may  be  at  risk  of  arrest  under  the  government's
      interpretation of terrorism-related charges. In such  cases,  see  the
      Country Policy and Information  Note  on  Turkey:  Kurdistan  Workers'
      Party (PKK)."

   And:

      "10.10.3 The HO FFT met with a number of interlocutors  who  mentioned
      the issue  of  torture.  The  representative  from  the  Human  Rights
      Association explained 'Articles 94 and 95 of the  Turkish  Penal  Code
      prohibit  torture.  'The  interlocutor  at  the  Ministry  of  Justice
      outlined that Turkey's policy of zero tolerance for any kinds of  ill-
      treatment  continues  all  the  time.  Andrew   Gardner   of   Amnesty
      International also noted Turkey's 'zero tolerance for torture' policy,
      but also claimed that 'after the coup attitudes changed and  it  seems
      that in the months that followed authorities decided to revert to 'any
      means necessary.' He described a  'surge  in  the  number  of  torture
      allegations [after the coup attempt], especially coming from perceived
      supporters of the Gulen movement' and that people 'were more likely to
      be tortured after the coup attempt than before because police officers
      and prison guards were even  more  confident  that  they  wouldn't  be
      brought to account for any abuses that they committed'. He also stated
      that  the  likelihood  of  the  torture  increases  during   political
      detention.' However, Mr Gardner also noted that, 'Torture isn't as bad
      as it was in the 90's and early 00's, but after a steep decline, cases
      are being reported again at a higher level than they were  before  the
      coup attempt.' He added that torture is not used in  every  prison  or
      with every prisoner and stated  that,  'Ill-treatment  and  systematic
      torture  in  Turkey  is  complicated.  'The  Director  of  a   Turkish
      organisation in the UK also believed that 'Torture takes place but not
      as widely as in  the  past.  'The  executive  from  the  Human  Rights
      Association stated, 'First and foremost, it depends on the province or
      region and the reason why the  person  was  detained'  and  that  they
      'cannot say that one person from HDP will be tortured and another  HDP
      member will not be tortured; this depends on the person, so there  can
      be no such presupposition."

  91. Applying this to the Appellant, we have concluded  that  although  the
      Appellant attended a  demonstration  in  the  UK  in  2019  which  was
      critical of the Turkish state the Appellant has  failed  to  establish
      that there is a real risk of ill-treatment amounting to persecution or
      serious harm in this case.

  92. In reaching that  conclusion  we  have  reminded  ourselves  that  the
      Turkish authorities are likely to  have  some  information  about  the
      Appellant including that he had been resident in Turkey  and  had  not
      been detained or otherwise interacted with the authorities in Istanbul
      since  2009.  We  have  also  found  that,  through  the   course   of
      interviewing  the  Appellant  (which  does  involve  a  real  risk  of
      mistreatment at this stage of the returns process), it  is  reasonably
      likely that the Appellant will mention the demonstration in the UK  in
      2019 and his help with the integration into  the  UK  of,  presumably,
      Kurdish people (see the letters at pages 23 & 24  of  the  Appellant's
      bundle). We also find that the Turkish authorities will know, or  will
      discover from the interview, that the Appellant's asylum claim was not
      accepted by the UK IAC and that it was  not  accepted  that  he  is  a
      member of the HDP or was  otherwise  involved  in  HDP  activities  in
      Turkey.

  93. In our view, bringing together the relatively varied  strings  of  the
      background evidence, and bearing in mind that neither side argued that
      IK was no longer good Country Guidance, we  have  concluded  that  the
      Appellant would not be considered by the Turkish government  to  be  a
      true political opponent nor a supporter or member of the  HDP/PKK.  We
      consider that it is reasonably likely  that  the  Appellant  would  be
      considered an opportunist.

  94. Even if we are wrong on that latter point, we  nonetheless  also  take
      the view that the Appellant's attendance at one demonstration  in  the
      UK with a record of two historic detentions  which  were  non-targeted
      arrests and adding to that that the Appellant's home area, in  reality
      was Istanbul, and not the south-east, would not be sufficient to cause
      an adverse reaction from the Turkish authorities.

  95. The Appellant has therefore failed to show at the lower standard  that
      there is a real risk to him of persecution/serious harm on  return  to
      Turkey  and  therefore  there  would  be  no  breach  of  the  refugee
      convention or Article 2 or 3 of the ECHR in his removal to Turkey.

  96. For the same reasons we also  conclude  that  the  Appellant  has  not
      established that he requires subsidiary protection under Article 15(b)
      of the Qualification Directive or that he qualifies  for  humanitarian
      protection under 339C of the Rules.

The Article 8 claim

  97. The Article 8 ECHR appeal was not particularly pursued by Counsel  but
      we should formally find that the Appellant  has  failed  to  establish
      that there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  return  to
      Turkey, applying 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules.

  98. The Appellant has spent  most  of  his  life  in  Turkey,  speaks  the
      language and has formally worked for a number of years in Istanbul. He
      also has his family there and has no physical or mental health  issues
      which would interfere materially with his reintegration.

  99. In terms of the outside the Rules assessment and the consideration  of
      exceptional circumstances as defined in GEN.3.2 of the Rules, we  have
      concluded that there are no such circumstances and that removal  would
      not cause undue harshness to the Appellant.

 100. We are prepared to find that the Appellant has an Article 8(1) private
      life in the UK (albeit we were not furnished  with  a  great  deal  of
      detail about his connections in the UK). Turning to Article  8(2)  and
      the proportionality assessment we have applied s. 117B  of  NIAA  2002
      and conclude that the Appellant does not speak English  (s.  117B(2));
      appears to be financially independent (s. 117B(3)) although the effect
      of this provision is only neutral; and has resided in the UK,  at  the
      very least precariously since his arrival in 2017 and so on that basis
      we give little weight to his private life in the UK (s. 117B(5)).

 101. We overall conclude that removal would not lead to a breach of Article
      8(2) of the ECHR and that therefore removal is proportionate.



DECISION

The Appellant's refugee convention appeal is dismissed.

The Appellant's humanitarian protection appeal is dismissed.

The Appellant's Articles 2/3 ECHR appeals are dismissed.

The Appellant's Article 8 appeal is dismissed.



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                          Date 28 July 2021




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Jarvis
____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

-----------------------
[1] CACD in R v Lucas [1981] QB 720

