
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/07639/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 March 2018                          | On 1 May  2018                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     M R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z McCallum, Counsel, instructed by Londonium
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh and his date of birth is  [  ]
    1994.  He made an application for asylum and this was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of  State  on  2  August  2017.   He  appealed  against  this
    decision.  His appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  J  K
    Swaney in  a  decision  that  was  promulgated  on  27  September  2017
    following a hearing  at  Hatton  Cross  on  8  September  2017.   Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rimington granted  permission  to  the  Appellant  on  2
    January 2018 and thus the matter came before me.

2.   The Appellant came to the UK on 23 February  2012  as  a  student.   He
    made an application before the expiry of his visa on 14 October 2013 to
    remain as a student. He was granted valid leave until 29 November 2017.
     On 3 June 2014 his leave was curtailed to expire on 8 August  2014  on
    the basis that the educational establishment's Sponsor licence had been
    revoked.  The Appellant made another application to remain as a student
    on 5 August 2014 which was refused.  He appealed  and  the  appeal  was
    allowed on 29 September 2015.  He was granted leave to  remain  outside
    the Immigration Rules until 11 June 2016.  He made an application on  9
    June 2016 for a residence card as  an  extended  family  member.   This
    application was refused on 18 December 2017. He  claimed  asylum  on  6
    February 2017.

3.   The Appellant's case is that he fears the  authorities  in  Bangladesh.
    He was involved with Islami Chhatra Shabi (ICS) which  is  the  student
    branch of Jamaat-e-Islami from 2008.  His grandfather was a local union
    chairman and member of  Jamaat-e-Islami.   The  Appellant's  activities
    included  encouraging  other  students  to  join  the  organisation  by
    inviting them to attend events, to discuss issues and  hand  out  party
    literature.  He progressed from being a worker to a "Shathi".  In order
    to achieve this he had to sit an exam and make an  application.   As  a
    Shathi he was responsible for supervising  a  group  of  members.   The
    Appellant's group would look after guests on special occasions.

4.   In June 2011 he took part in  a  demonstration  against  party  leaders
    being arrested or made to disappear. He shouted slogans  and  supported
    the leadership policy at the demonstration.  He became aware two  weeks
    after the demonstration that a false claim had been filed  against  him
    in June 2011 about what he allegedly did at the demonstration.  On  the
    day of the demonstration he went into hiding because of his prominence.
    He knew that the police were looking for him.  He hid  in  Sylhet  with
    his aunt.  The Chhatra League (CL) found the Appellant  at  his  aunt's
    home in November 2011. They attacked him and as a result of this he was
    hospitalised.  His father reported the attack to the  police  and  they
    took a statement. They did not do anything further.  The police visited
    the Appellant in hospital. They did not arrest  him  despite  the  fact
    that a false claim had been filed against him in 2011.  A  second  case
    was filed against him in January 2012 and the police came  looking  for
    the Appellant at his aunt's house.  An arrest  warrant  was  issued  in
    August 2012.  The Appellant does not know whether there was  a  finding
    against him made by a court.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The judge found that the Appellant was an  active  member  of  ICS  but
    recorded that the Appellant's own evidence was that he did not  hold  a
    responsible position within the party.  The Appellant, as  recorded  by
    the judge, referred to his position as one above an ordinary member. He
    had worked with ordinary members in order to carry out instructions  of
    the leadership.  The judge found that he did not have a  high  profile.
    The judge found that the authorities did not have an  interest  in  the
    Appellant and this was supported by his evidence that he  was  able  to
    leave Bangladesh through the airport using his own passport.  The judge
    accepted that the Appellant was  attacked  by  members  of  the  CL  as
    claimed.  The judge considered this to be consistent with  the  country
    guidance.  However, it was not accepted by the judge that he  had  gone
    into hiding.

6.       The judge took into account the Appellant's evidence that  he  went
    to his English tutor three or four times a week which was found not  to
    be consistent with his evidence that  he  was  during  this  period  in
    hiding.  The judge accepted that the Appellant  had  been  involved  in
    political activities and that he was trying to encourage others to join
    and participate.  He found that he had attended  the  demonstration  in
    June 2011. It was not accepted that  he  had  been  identified  at  the
    demonstration by the police.  He accepted the medical evidence that the
    Appellant was assaulted in November  2011  and  that  he  had  received
    treatment as a result of this.  He accepted that his father had  lodged
    a complaint and that the police visited the Appellant whilst he was  in
    hospital.  The judge did not accept that the police failed to follow up
    the matter.

7.   The Appellant submitted documents in  support  of  his  case  including
    documents relating to the cases which he stated had been filed  against
    him.  The judge placed little weight on these for the reasons  that  he
    explained at paragraphs 37 and 38.  The judge did  not  accept  that  a
    warrant had been issued  for  his  arrest.   He  did  not  accept  that
    complaints had been filed against him.  He took into account  that  the
    police visited him in hospital at a time  when  the  Appellant  claimed
    that he was wanted however the police had not  shown  any  interest  in
    him.  The judge took into account that the Appellant  is  no  longer  a
    student and that he left Bangladesh some years ago.  Given the  passage
    of time those who attacked him, according  to  the  judge,  would  have
    moved on.  He found that the chances of him being recognised on  return
    by members of the  CL  are  low.   In  any  event  he  could  seek  the
    protection of the authorities.

8.   Alternatively the judge found that he could relocate,  concluding  that
    the Appellant has family in Bangladesh.  The judge found that there was
    nothing to suggest that the Appellant would not  be  supported  by  his
    family should he relocate to another part of Bangladesh.  He  concluded
    that relocation would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh.

9.   The salient paragraphs of the determination are as follows:

         "36. I place weight  on  the  medical  evidence  contained  in  the
             appellant's bundle.  It appears to suggest the  appellant  was
             taken to hospital suffering injuries near his left eye, on the
             back of his hand and between his fingers.  This is  consistent
             with his evidence that he suffered injuries on  his  face  and
             hands.  The evidence states that his injuries were the  result
             of a physical assault and that they  were  stitched.   He  was
             discharged on 26 November 2011.  This is consistent  with  his
             claim to have been attacked in November 2011.   I  accept  the
             appellant's father lodged a complaint with the  police.   This
             is consistent with the appellant's evidence.   I  accept  that
             the police visited the appellant in hospital.


         37.  I place little weight on the documents  relating  to  the  two
             cases  against  the  appellant.   He  has   given   no   clear
             explanation of how he obtained  these  documents.   He  stated
             that they were brought to the United Kingdom by  a  friend  of
             his uncle.  This may  well  be  true,  however  what  is  more
             important is an explanation of how those documents  came  into
             the possession of his uncle's friend.  There is no evidence as
             to how the documents were obtained from the  police/court.   I
             note also that it is unclear when some of the  documents  were
             created.  The first information report relating to  the  first
             case appears to have been created on 12 June 2011.  At the top
             of the document however there are a number of what  appear  to
             be dates in March 2017.  There is no  information  as  to  the
             significance of these dates.


         38.  The appellant claims that despite knowing his name  and  there
             being a warrant for his arrest outstanding at  the  time,  the
             police did not arrest him or take any action against him  when
             they visited him in hospital.  This further casts doubt on the
             genuineness of the documents.  His  explanation  for  why  the
             police did not arrest  him  is  speculative  and  implausible.
             Taken together with the fact that the appellant  was  able  to
             leave Bangladesh using his  own  passport  without  coming  to
             anyone's adverse attention, I find that there  was  no  arrest
             warrant issued against the appellant.


         39.  I find to the lower standard that the appellant  was  involved
             in student politics for IslamiChhatraShibir.  I accept that he
             was  active  in  trying  to  encourage  others  to  join   and
             participate.  I find the appellant attended a demonstration in
             June 2011.  His evidence of the demonstration  was  relatively
             detailed and credible.   I  do  not  accept  that  the  police
             identified him at the demonstration among a  crowd  of  20,000
             even if he was close to the front as claimed.  The appellant's
             claim to have been at the front  holding  a  banner  was  only
             expressed after he was challenged on how the police would have
             identified him in such a large crowd.  When he was  asked  why
             he did not mention the fact that he  had  been  at  the  front
             holding a banner earlier, he stated that he had forgotten.  If
             this was what prompted him to go into hiding then  I  consider
             it is not plausible  that  he  would  forget  about  it  until
             reminded.


         40.  Although I accept  the  appellant  was  an  active  member  of
             IslamiChhatraShibir, his own evidence was that he did not have
             a responsible position within the organisation.   He  referred
             to his position as one above an ordinary member, but  he  also
             said that he and ordinary members worked together to carry out
             the instructions of the leadership.  This is not indicative of
             him having a high profile role.  This, taken together with the
             fact that he was able to leave Bangladesh  without  difficulty
             travelling on his own passport lead me to  conclude  that  the
             Bangladeshi authorities  do  not  have  any  interest  in  the
             appellant.


         41.  I find it is plausible that the appellant was attacked  as  he
             claims  by  members  of  the  Chhatra  League.   Although  the
             appellant states that he was in  hiding,  in  reality  he  was
             simply living at a different address.  His evidence is that he
             went to his English tutor three to four times a week and  also
             that he went to his father's.  It is plausible that they would
             have known him from student political activities and that they
             would have attacked him as claimed.  This is  consistent  with
             the  Country  Information  and   Guidance   note   Bangladesh:
             Opposition to the government dated February 2015 which reports
             that when their parties are in government  the  student  wings
             become  unchallenged  perpetrators  of  human  rights   abuses
             (paragraph 2.52).  It goes on to state  that  throughout  2014
             the Chhatra League took part in  taking  part  in  abductions,
             mugging,  extortion,  tender  manipulation,  admission  trade,
             assaulting teachers and attacking journalists.


         42.  As stated above,  I  accept  the  appellant  received  medical
             treatment in hospital as claimed and that his father  reported
             the attack to the  police.   The  appellant  stated  that  the
             police did nothing to follow the matter up; however  there  is
             no evidence to support his claim.  For  example  there  is  no
             statement from the appellant's father to  confirm  either  the
             steps he took to pursue a response  from  the  police  or  the
             response he received.  There were further steps the  appellant
             and his father on his behalf could have taken  to  purse  this
             matter to attempt to obtain protection  from  the  Bangladeshi
             authorities however they did not take them.


         43.  The appellant was a member of a student political organisation
             and he was attacked by members of  another  student  political
             organisation.  He is no longer a student and  left  Bangladesh
             some years ago.  Given the passage of time I  consider  it  is
             reasonably likely that the people who attacked  him  have  now
             moved on.  I find that the chances of him being recognised  on
             return to his home area by members of the Chhatra  League  are
             low but  even  if  I  am  wrong,  the  appellant  has  options
             available  to  him.   He  can  approach  the  authorities  for
             protection.  As I have said, I do not accept  the  authorities
             are aware of his political activity.  Alternatively, he  could
             relocate elsewhere within Bangladesh."

The Grounds of Appeal

10.  It is asserted that the judge  accepted,  at  paragraph  36,  that  the
    Appellant had been persecuted in the past  leading  to  hospitalisation
    and he did not take this as a  serious  indication  as  to  his  future
    threat in accordance with paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules.  The
    judge failed to take into account the country information and  guidance
    relating to Bangladesh of February 2015 which reads as follows:

         "2.4.6   According to information gathered by Odhikar:

                'A reported total  of  108  persons  were  extra  judicially
                killed, between January and June 2014.  This means  that  on
                average, 18  persons  were  killed  extra  judicially  every
                month.  ...  Of  the  108  persons  who  were  killed  extra
                judicially, twelve were leaders-activists of BNP, three were
                activists of Awami  League,  21  were  activists  of  Jamaat
                Shibir.'

         2.5.5    ... On December 12, 2013 at around 7.30pm an  activist  of
                the student wing of Jamaat-e-Islami Anwar (20) was shot dead
                when the police attacked a procession which was brought  out
                after the execution of Jamaat-e-Islami  Assistant  Secretary
                General Abdul QuaderMollaat Manoharganj, Comilla.  The clash
                continued for about half an hour leaving 30 [student wing of
                Jamaat-e-Islami] activists injured  with  bullets.   Of  the
                injured Anwar was pronounced dead after he had been taken to
                Dhaka Medical College Hospital.

         2.5.6    Odkikar reported  that  'On  February  10,  2014,  Chhatra
                League leaders drove out 97 newly admitted students of Dhaka
                University from SM Hall.  Chhatra League  leaders  told  the
                students that they would not be allowed in  the  residential
                hall if they  were  not  Chhatra  League  activists'.50   It
                further notes that on May 5, 2014 Chhatra  League  activists
                beat  a  student  named  Rassel  with  bamboo  rods  on  the
                assumption that he was a Shibir activist, at  the  Proctor's
                Office of the Jagannath University."

11.  The grounds assert that the country information  shows  that  a  person
    does not need to be a leader or hold any specific position  within  the
    party in order to be at risk of persecution.

Ms McCallum's Speaking Note

12.  The speaking note prepared by Ms McCallum raised  a  number  of  issues
    many of which were not raised in the  grounds.   She  argued  that  the
    starting point for the First-tier Tribunal  was  the  positive  finding
    that the Appellant was a political  activist  for  Jamaat-e-Islami  and
    that he had been attacked by activists of the rival CL as a  result  of
    his political activities and that this  resulted  in  injuries  to  his
    face, hands and  hospitalisation.   The  judge  at  [26]  recorded  the
    submissions that were made on behalf of the  Appellant  including  that
    the background evidence demonstrated that it  was  not  only  political
    leaders who were at risk of persecution but that student activists were
    also at risk.  The judge having accepted that the  Appellant  had  been
    attacked by members of the CL drew  upon  the  Appellant's  consistency
    with paragraph 2.5.2 of the 2015 CIG report.  However, then  the  judge
    failed to take into account the report in respect of the assessment  of
    risk of persecution, sufficiency of  protection  and  the  validity  of
    internal relocation.  The judge made a wrong assumption that only those
    with a high profile face persecution which was contrary to what is said
    in the 2015 CIG  report  specifically  at  paragraph  2.5.   The  clear
    implication of the country information and  guidance  is  that  student
    activists and not just those with a high profile face  persecution  and
    that the student wing of the CL which has been the ruling  party  since
    the 2008 election functions at the very least in  connivance  with  and
    even at the direction of state machinery including  the  police  rather
    than independently of it.  The relevant extracts  of  the  report  were
    before the judge.

13.  The judge assumed that state  protection  would  be  available  to  the
    Appellant without assessing the evidence that was relevant to answering
    that question namely that at paragraphs  1.3.10to  1.3.12  of  the  CIG
    report which point to the opposite conclusion to that  reached  by  the
    judge.  In addition it carefully directs the judge to take  account  of
    past persecution which is an indicator of  future  risk.   The  judge's
    assessment  of  internal  relocation  was  flawed  with  reference   to
    paragraphs 1.3.14 and 1.3.15 of the CIG report.  The  clear  conclusion
    of the passages is that if as other parts of the  CIG  suggest  the  CL
    function in connivance with the state authorities, internal  relocation
    would not be an option for the Appellant.

14.  In the speaking note it is argued  by  Ms  McCallum  that  the  judge's
    assessment of the documentary evidence was  flawed.   The  judge  erred
    when concluding that the Appellant's father had failed  to  pursue  the
    police complaint.  It is argued that the judge appears to have attached
    weight to this  as  evidence  of  the  absence  of  continued  risk  of
    persecution as at the date of the hearing and the grounds  rely  on  at
    [42].  However, it is argued that paragraph  1.3.10  of  the  2015  CIG
    report  makes  it  clear  that  an  Appellant  is  unlikely  to  obtain
    sufficiency of protection from the police in  the  circumstances  where
    his assailants are from the ruling party.  It was,  having  taken  into
    account the country information and guidance,  coherent  and  plausible
    that the police did nothing to follow up on the claim  and  it  was  an
    error of law to reach the  conclusion  on  objective  persecution  risk
    without considering the evidence and stating the reasons for  rejecting
    it.  The rejection of the Appellant's claim that the police had  failed
    to follow up on his case amounts  to  an  adverse  credibility  finding
    purely for failing to supply corroborative evidence which requires  too
    much in the light of the standard of proof in asylum cases.

15.  According to Ms McCallum's speaking note and the oral submissions  each
    of the reasons  given  by  the  judge  for  rejecting  the  documentary
    evidence was flawed such as collectively  the  decision  not  to  place
    weight on the documents amounted to an error.  When the  first  warrant
    was issued against the Appellant in January 2011 he was aged 17  and  a
    minor.  He had no direct evidence of how they were obtained and  it  is
    not implausible that he would fail to ask.  The issue of discrepancy as
    to the dates on the face of the document was not put to  the  Appellant
    in cross-examination.   The  judge's  determination  records  that  the
    Respondent relied only on country background information  and  did  not
    point to any particular features of the documents that  suggested  they
    were not genuine.  It was a violation of  basic  common-law  procedural
    fairness that this aspect of the case against the Appellant was not put
    to him.   There  may  well  have  been  an  easy  way  to  explain  the
    discrepancy which the Appellant could have advanced.  It  was  perverse
    to  reach  an  adverse  credibility  finding  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant's explanation why the police did not arrest him  in  hospital
    was "speculative".   The  Appellant  was  incapable  of  giving  direct
    evidence on that point because he is not a policeman  himself  and  the
    answer was therefore necessarily speculative.

16.    In relation to the Appellant being able to depart the country on  his
    passport when a warrant was outstanding for  his  arrest,  it  was  not
    properly considered in the round in the light of the background country
    information which established that  in  many  underdeveloped  countries
    there is an absence of coordination and  that  at  1.3.10  of  the  CIG
    report "the effectiveness of the police is  undermined  by  a  lack  of
    basic resources, including  a  lack  of  infrastructure,  training  and
    proper investigative equipment, inefficiency and endemic corruption."

17.  Ms McCallum relied on the CIG report with  specific  reference  to  the
    following extracts;

         "1.3.10  Whilst the there is a functioning criminal justice system,
                the effectiveness of the police is undermined by a  lack  of
                basic  resources,  including  a  lack   of   infrastructure,
                personnel,  training  and  proper  investigative  equipment,
                inefficiency and endemic  corruption.  Despite  measures  to
                improve the police force and its service, through the Police
                Reform Programme, low wages,  lack  of  education  and  poor
                working conditions contributed to a culture  of  corruption,
                and security forces commit serious abuses including  torture
                to obtain confessions, enforced  disappearances  and  extra-
                judicial  killings  with  impunity.  There  have  also  been
                reports that the police often  failed  to  prevent  societal
                violence  or  protect  members  of   religious   minorities,
                political opponents, and  women.  The  judiciary  is  highly
                bureaucratic, overburdened with a huge  backlog  of  pending
                cases, has a limited number of trained judges  and  lawyers,
                is costly, and  is  subject  to  bribery,  interference  and
                political pressure, particularly at lower levels. (see  Rule
                of law and the judiciary  in  the  Country  Information  and
                Guidance.  Bangladesh:  Background   information   including
                actors of protection and internal relocation.

         1.3.11   Perceived political opponents whose  fear  is  of  serious
                harm at the hands of the state on account of their political
                opinion or activities and who have come to the attention  of
                the authorities would  be  unable  to  avail  themselves  of
                protection from the authorities.

         1.3.12   In cases based on fear  of  ill-treatment  by  members  of
                opposing political parties or in fear of  opposing  factions
                within their  own  party,  it  is  unlikely  that  effective
                protection   would   be   available   from   the   governing
                authorities. However an assessment of whether a person would
                be  able  to  access  assistance  and  protection  must   be
                carefully considered on the  facts  of  the  case.  Decision
                makers must take particular account of past persecution  (if
                any) and consider whether there are good reasons to consider
                that  such  persecution  (and   past   lack   of   effective
                protection) is likely to be repeated. In each case, decision
                makers must identify whether  attempts  were  made  to  seek
                protection and what the response of the authorities was.  If
                the person did not seek the protection of  the  authorities,
                decision makers must assess why. (See relevant section(s) of
                the Asylum Instruction on Assessing credibility and  refugee
                status).

         1.3.13   Bangladesh's total land area is  130,168  sq  km  with  an
                estimated population of166,280,712.  The  law  provides  for
                freedom of movement  within  the  country,  except  for  the
                Chittagong Hills Tracts (CHT) and  Cox's  Bazar,  and  these
                rights are generally respected in  practice  (see  Geography
                and demography in  the  Country  Information  and  Guidance.
                Bangladesh:  Background  information  including  actors   of
                protection and internal relocation).

         1.3.14   Actual or perceived opposition political  activists  whose
                fear is of ill treatment/persecution at  the  hands  of  the
                state and who have come to the attention of the  authorities
                would be unable to relocate to another area of Bangladesh to
                escape that threat.

         1.3.15   In cases based on fear  of  ill-treatment  by  members  of
                opposing political parties or in fear of  opposing  factions
                within their own party, the threat is likely to be localised
                and relocation to another area of Bangladesh may  be  viable
                depending on the nature of the threat from non state  agents
                and the individual circumstances of the person, as  long  as
                it would not be unduly harsh to expect them to do so. Women,
                especially single women with no support network, are  likely
                to be vulnerable and may be subjected to destitution.

         2.5.1    Jane's reported:

                    'Almost  every  major  political  party  has  a  student
                    wing... The Bangladesh Chattra Dhal(BCD)  is  affiliated
                    with  the  Bangladesh  Nationalist  Party   (BNP),   the
                    Bangladesh  ChattraLeague  (BCL)  is  connected  to  the
                    ruling    Awami    League    (AL),    and    the     ICS
                    [IslamiChhatraShibir]  is  associated  with  JI.   These
                    groups function  in  connivance  with  their  affiliated
                    parties and when their parties are in government,  armed
                    "student" groups  become  unchallenged  perpetrators  of
                    human rights abuses, reportedly under the  patronage  of
                    their party's  politicians.  The  involvement  of  these
                    armed groups in the political  process  is  one  of  the
                    major  causes  of  political  violence  in   Bangladesh.
                    Political parties have routinely pledged, but failed, to
                    disarm  them.  Fighting  between  rival  student   wings
                    featured heavily during the political  impasse  in  2013
                    between the AL and BNP. Future disputes between the  two
                    major  parties  are  very  likely  to  include  fighting
                    between student wings.'"

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

18.  Mr Avery submitted that the conclusions  are  sustainable.   The  judge
    accepted that the  Appellant  was  involved  in  local  issues  between
    students but given the circumstances and  the  lapse  of  time  it  was
    unlikely that he would come to their attention on return.   Essentially
    the judge said that the Appellant would not come to  the  attention  of
    the authorities and dealt with risk on that  basis.   The  judge  found
    that the Appellant would not be  at  risk  on  return  and  was  of  no
    interest  to  the  authorities.   The  judge  properly   assessed   the
    documentary evidence that  was  produced  late  in  the  day  and  made
    findings open to him.

Country Information and Guidance Bangladesh: Opposition to the Government
February 2015 ("the CIG")

19.  The thrust of the CIG is that there are human rights abuse  perpetrated
    by the police and political parties, including the ruling party against
    dissenters. There were measures introduced by the  government  in  2014
    aimed at cracking down on critics. There are instances of abuse of  the
    law to shut down the voice of opposition and an  inappropriate  use  of
    force. The authorities sometimes try to prevent  rallies  by  arresting
    party  activists  and  protesters  who  are  frequently   injured   and
    occasionally killed during clashes with the police use excessive force.



20.  In 2014  political  violence  was  relatively  high  and  it  increased
    leading up to the election that  year.  The  headquarters  of  JI  were
    raided by the police in 2013 in Dhaka following  violent  protests.  In
    2013 the High Court ruled the JI were required to  amend  its  charter.
    The build up to the 2014 elections were marked by deplorable  violence.
    One source reported that 500 were killed in political violence and  may
    others seriously injured, including 215 shot  dead  by  law  enforcers.
    Opposition violence  and  government  abuses  were  reported  in  2014.
    Amnesty International reported  more  than  100  deaths  during  street
    violence around election time in 2014.  Many  were  killed  in  clashes
    between police and the  opposition  groups  or  opposition  groups  and
    government  sources.  Members  of  the  opposition  groups  were   also
    responsible for violence.   There  were  108  extra  judicial  killings
    between January and June 2014, including 21 activists of JS. There  was
    violence  between  political  parties  youth  wings  and  groups  often
    resulting in death or injury.  In  January  2015  Human  Rights  Office
    expressed concern at the rising levels of political violence and  urged
    all political parties to show restraint.  In January 2015 Human  Rights
    Watch cited the authority's indiscriminate use of force  and  arbitrary
    arrests and media censorship and deaths following from clashes  between
    government and opposition groups including shootings  by  the  security
    forces.

21.  The CIG (at 2.5) specifically engages  with  student  political  groups
    and  violence.   Various  student  groups  including  ICS  function  in
    connivance with their affiliated parties and when their parties are  in
    government armed student groups become the perpetrators of human rights
    abuses, reportedly under the patronage of  their  party's  politicians.
    The ruling Awami League (AL) student front is CL and made headlines  in
    2014 with activities  including  abductions,  muggings  and  extortion.
    There were violent clashes in 2013 and attacks  on  student  opposition
    (on leaders and activists). In some cases the authorities  appeared  to
    target the victims because of suspected involvement in specific  crimes
    in other  cases  security  forces  appeared  to  seek  out  influential
    opposition district and sub district leaders who might have  been  able
    to mobilise people. Members and activists of ICS have fallen victim  to
    attacks from CL and the police in 2013 and 2014.

Conclusions

22.  The judge accepted the Appellant's evidence about the attack  in  2011,
    having considered that it was consistent with the CIG.   The  challenge
    to this is that having found that  the  Appellant  was  the  victim  of
    persecution the judge failed to have regard to paragraph  339K  of  the
    Rules which states that the fact that a person has already been subject
    to persecution or serious harm will be regarded as a serious indication
    of the persons  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  or  real  risk  of
    suffering serious harm, in the absence of good reasons to consider that
    it will not be repeated.

23.  The judge did not mention paragraph 339K of  the  rules.  He  concluded
    that the Appellant would not be at risk  on  return  for  a  number  of
    reasons. The context of the attack in 2011 must be  considered  because
    this is relevant to the issue  of  future  risk.  The  judge  found  it
    plausible that the members of CL would have known  the  Appellant  from
    student political activists.  He  was  attacked  shortly  after  (three
    months) the demonstration he attended.  However, the judge did not find
    that there was any continuing interest  in  him,  having  rejected  his
    evidence that he went into hiding (paragraph 41). The judge found  that
    the attack on the Appellant by CL was a one off attack on  a  political
    opponent.  The  judge  did  not  find  that  the  Appellant  had   been
    specifically targeted by CL as a result of specific  activities  within
    ICS or as a result  of  his  role  within  that  organisation.  He  was
    attacked because he was recognised from his political activities.   The
    judge rejected the Appellant's evidence that he was identified  by  the
    police or that he would  have  been  identified  at  the  demonstration
    amongst the large crowd. The judge was entitled to  take  into  account
    that the Appellant did not have a high profile role.  Whilst  activists
    at all levels are  general  targets  during  demonstrations  or  street
    fights, his role within the organisation is  material  to  whether  the
    Appellant  was  specifically  targeted  by  CL  and  whether  there  is
    continuing interest in him by CL and the police.

24.  The judge properly focused his mind on whether the Appellant would  now
    be at risk on return. The circumstances of the attack were material  to
    this consideration. It was a material consideration that the attack was
    historic and that the Appellant is no longer a  student.  His  ultimate
    conclusion, that the chances of him being recognised on return (and  at
    further risk of attack) by the perpetrators is not  reasonably  likely,
    was open to the judge on the evidence.

25.  Material  to  the  consideration  of  risk  was  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant concerning the documents which he  produced  to  support  his
    evidence that cases had been  filed  against  him  in  Bangladesh.  The
    grounds at [6] make an incoherent challenge  to  the  findings  of  the
    judge. Ms McCallum's 13 page speaking note articulately expands on  the
    issue and raises unfairness, perversity and other issues not raised  in
    the grounds. In  any  event,  the  judge's  findings  relating  to  the
    documents were open to him on the evidence.  The  judge  made  findings
    grounded in the evidence at [37] about these documents.  The  Appellant
    produced the evidence at the eleventh hour. It was a matter for him and
    those representing him to explain the contents of these  documents  and
    to recognise any potential internal discrepancies. It was not incumbent
    on the judge to question him about internal discrepancies  in  his  own
    evidence. The judge rejected the Appellant's evidence  that  an  arrest
    warrant had been issued and this was a finding that was open to him  on
    the evidence. The judge concluded that  it  was  not  credible  that  a
    warrant had been issued, taking into account that  the  police  visited
    the Appellant in hospital after this and did not arrest him. This was a
    finding that was open to him. The issues raised in the grounds  and  in
    the speaking note are a disagreement with the findings.

26.  Ms McCallum submitted that the evidence was credible in  the  light  of
    the ineffectiveness of the police force and reference was made  to  the
    CIG (at 1.3.10 and 1.3.11). It is not clear whether  such  an  argument
    was presented to the judge; however, the judge was entitled  to  reject
    the Appellant's account notwithstanding the shortcomings in the  police
    force. Whilst the judge uses the word "speculative," a  proper  reading
    of the decision indicates that he found  that  the  evidence  that  the
    police would visit the Appellant in hospital in relation  to  a  police
    matter and not act upon an outstanding arrest warrant  for  his  arrest
    undermined the Appellant's  account  generally.   It  is  a  reasonable
    inference to draw that the police  when  visiting  the  hospital  would
    recognise the Appellant if there was an  outstanding  warrant  for  his
    arrest.  The CIG indicates that there is a functioning criminal justice
    system. The judge was entitled to attach weight to  the  evidence  that
    the Appellant left Bangladesh via the airport  whilst  on  his  account
    there was a warrant outstanding for his arrest.  The weight  to  attach
    to the evidence was a matter for the judge. His findings  are  grounded
    in the evidence and adequately reasoned.

27.  The judge may have  erred  when  assessing  police  protection  in  the
    context of the 2011 attack on him, in so far as he stated that he could
    have taken steps to  pursue  the  matter  with  the  police  to  obtain
    protection. This is arguably at odds with the CIG. However,  this  must
    be considered in the light of the Appellant's evidence that his  father
    reported the attack to the police.  Ms  McCallum's  speaking  note  was
    very much concerned with relocation and sufficiency of  protection.   I
    accept that the CIG may corroborate the Appellant's case that if he was
    at risk on return of further attack by CL, whether or not  there  is  a
    warrant out for his arrest, there may not be sufficiency of  protection
    available to him, but that was not a material issue because  the  judge
    found that he was not at risk on return.  There was  no  need  for  the
    judge to make findings about relocation and sufficiency of  protection.
    The findings he made are not material to the outcome in this case.

28.  In the light of the nature of the attack in 2011  and  the  lawful  and
    sustainable findings of the judge in respect of it, I am satisfied that
    there is no error of law on the basis  that  the  judge  did  not  make
    reference to paragraph 339K in his decision. I am not satisfied that he
    failed to have regard to it. In any event, if such an error  was  made,
    it would not be material, in the light of  the  circumstances  of  this
    case. I am satisfied that the judge took  into  account  the  CIG.  The
    decision is not at odds with the background evidence. There is no error
    of law. The decision of the judge to dismiss the appeal is  maintained.




Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 29 April 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

