
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA073422016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 28 July 2017                           |On 01 August 2017                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                                     RZ
                                                         (Anonymity
direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Moriarty, counsel instructed by Luqmani
                    Thompson & Partners, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Iran, has been  granted  permission
      to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Blake who, by  a
      determination promulgated on 27 February 2017,  dismissed  his  appeal
      against a decision of the respondent, made on 6 July 2016,  to  refuse
      his application for asylum.


   2. The parties are, of course, aware of the  full  detail  of  the  claim
      advanced by the appellant and, for  present  purposes,  the  following
      summary will suffice. The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  in
      July 2012 and was admitted as a student with leave to remain until  30
      January 2014. In Iran he had been a voluntary or regular member of the
      Basije but on occasion had refused to act as required because  he  did
      not approve of what he had been asked to do.  Shortly  before  leaving
      Iran to come to  the  United  Kingdom  to  study,  the  appellant  was
      required by the Iranian authorities to sign an undertaking to  provide
      them with his contact details in the United Kingdom and,  if  required
      to do so, to act as a "spy" or informant. It was not until 19 December
      2013, a few weeks before his leave to remain was due to  expire  after
      which he had intended to return to Iran, that he was contacted  by  an
      unknown man who referred to the undertaking the appellant  had  signed
      and said that, in the absence of a  functioning  London  Embassy,  his
      help was now required.

   3. The appellant said he did not wish to  provide  this  service  and  so
      terminated the call. He received further such calls subsequently  and,
      on 22 December 2013, heard from his father in  Iran  that  the  family
      home had been raided and the authorities said that the appellant was a
      traitor. His belongings, including a computer, were  confiscated.  For
      these reasons he feared that should he return  to  Iran  he  would  be
      detained and be subjected to persecutory ill-treatment.

   4. The respondent refused the claim because the account of  these  events
      was not considered to be credible.  The  judge  dismissed  the  appeal
      because he agreed with the respondent that the account  given  by  the
      appellant of the events he has described  was  not  credible  and  the
      judge did not accept that account to be true.

   5. A remarkable feature  of  the  determination  of  the  judge  is  that
      although he sets out a lengthy summary of the  reasons  given  by  the
      respondent for refusing the claim, between paragraphs 33 to 81 of  his
      decision, he does not set out any summary, discussion or  analysis  of
      the evidence offered by the appellant  in  response  to  the  decision
      letter. All we have is that, at paragraph 12, the judge said:
           "The Appellant's evidence and the  oral  submissions  from  both
           representatives are fully set out in the Record  of  Proceedings
           and have been taken into account by me."
      The difficulty with that is that, as the record of proceedings is  not
      a document available to the reader of the determination,  we  have  no
      idea what the judge understood the appellant's evidence to  amount  to
      and nor do we have any indication of the understanding of the judge of
      the challenges raised  by  the  appellant  to  the  reasoning  of  the
      respondent that led her  to  reject  the  claim.  This  was  important
      because, as is observed in  the  grounds  for  seeking  permission  to
      appeal:
           "As detailed in the Appellant's witness statement in support  of
           this appeal and submitted in his skeleton  argument,  it  was  a
           central feature  of  his  appeal  that  the  credibility  issues
           asserted in the SSHD's Reasons for Refusal Letter ("RFRL")  were
           largely based on misunderstandings and /  or  misinterpretations
           of his role  within  the  Basije,  the  general  nature  of  the
           training he received in Iran and his  subsequent  problems  with
           the Iranian authorities."
   6. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was sought and granted may
      be  summarised  as  follows.  In  challenging  the  rejection  by  the
      respondent of the credibility of his account, the appellant relied  in
      particular upon an expert report prepared  by  Roya  Kashef  dated  22
      January 2017. This lengthy report was said by the appellant to provide
      strong support for the credibility of his account of  his  experiences
      and his dealings with the authorities in Iran and their representative
      who contacted him in London. The report  addressed  and  engaged  with
      specific adverse credibility findings relied upon by  the  respondent,
      expressing the view that the appellant's account was  not  implausible
      or lacking in credibility. In particular, a key  point  taken  against
      the appellant was that it was implausible that he would not be  called
      upon to provide services as a spy or informant until shortly before he
      was due to leave the United  Kingdom.  The  expert  witness  offers  a
      contrary view, explaining:
           "... Since President Rohani took  office  in  August  2013,  the
           number of executions- including public  executions-  had  soared
           and  regular  demonstrations  and  protest  marches  were  being
           organised in the UK and specifically London. There was increased
           activity outside the  Iranian  Embassy  in  London  as  well  as
           demonstrations outside Downing Street. It is  possible  that  in
           view of the Embassy being closed and reduced  staff  in  the  UK
           this was the time they wanted [RZ] to act as their eyes and ears
           as he was dutybound to do."
   7. Counsel for the appellant made specific reference to this, and  other,
      sections of the report both in his skeleton argument and in  his  oral
      submissions, but there is no reference, at all, to the report anywhere
      in the determination. As the grounds accept, the judge was  not  bound
      to accept the view expressed by this expert witness but the  appellant
      was entitled to see that this evidence had been taken into account and
      to understand why, if the judge did consider it, it was rejected.


   8. The grounds complain also the judge  fell  into  error  in  making  no
      attempt to engage with other lines of argument advanced in  submission
      made on the appellant's behalf, an example of which is that  the  term
      "spy" may be misleading, given what the appellant was actually  saying
      about what had been required of him. There is no indication  that  the
      judge gave consideration  to  that  submission.  At  paragraph  94  he
      observed only that he did not think that  the  appellant  "would  have
      presented as an attractive candidate as  a  spy,  given  his  previous
      failures to comply with the request of the Basije".

   9. Drawing all of this together, in my judgment  this  is  sufficient  to
      establish that it was an error of law for the judge not  to  have  had
      regard, adequately or possibly at all,  to  the  case  actually  being
      advanced before him on behalf of the appellant. As I do not know if he
      even had regard to the expert report or, if he did, what  he  made  of
      it, I cannot be sure  that  if  he  had  done  so  the  outcome  would
      necessarily have been the same. Therefore,  the  error  of  law  is  a
      material one which means that  his  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
      cannot stand. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal succeeds to the  extent
      that  the  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
      determined afresh.
Summary of decision:

  10. The determination of this appeal discloses a  material  error  of  law
      error of law and the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Blake  is
      set aside.


  11.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  determined
      afresh.




                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 28 July 2017

