
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07151/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11th June 2019                    |On 17th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                Mr Yusuf [S]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mark Davies, promulgated on 26th March 2019 following  a  hearing
    at Manchester Piccadilly on 14th March 2019.  In the determination, the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born on  26th  June
    1995.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent refusing  his
    claim to asylum and to humanitarian protection  pursuant  to  paragraph
    339C of HC 395.

 3. At the hearing before me on 11th June  2019,  Mr  Bates,  appearing  as
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, conceded that this  was  a  case
    where there was an error of law in the determination of the  judge  for
    two reasons.

 4. First, the judge had stated in  his  conclusions  that,  "I  have  made
    reference to the evidence flying in the face of the evidence  given  by
    the Appellant's mother at  her  appeal  hearing"  (paragraph  38)  when
    deciding that the Appellant was not a person of credibility.   However,
    there had been no reference by the judge  at  all  to  the  Appellant's
    mother's evidence at the appeal hearing.  Therefore,  given  that  this
    was the basis upon which the Appellant's credibility had been impugned,
    it failed to disclose the precise reason for why the Appellant was  not
    believable.

 5. Second, the judge had stated that, "I have received no evidence  as  to
    the basis upon which the  Appellant's  family  members  in  the  United
    Kingdom were granted refugee status,  if  indeed  that  was  the  case"
    (paragraph 41), even though the Appellant's uncle gave evidence (as was
    also stated at paragraph 9 of his witness statement in the  Appellant's
    bundle at page 10).  Moreover, the Home Office confirmed the  grant  of
    refugee status (see the  Appellant's  bundle  at  page  18)  to  family
    members of the Appellant and this evidence was before the Tribunal  but
    not considered by the judge.  The uncle had given evidence that he  had
    been granted refugee status due to the risk to him as a member  of  the
    [S] tribe and this had not been challenged by the Home Office.

 6. The Appellant, however, was not in attendance, and  neither  was  there
    anyone on his behalf in attendance.  Instead, I had received an  email,
    sent through Field House dated 7th June 2019,  but  received  only  the
    night before, out of hours, to the effect that the Appellant would  not
    be able to attend the hearing because those representing him previously
    were not available,  and  nor  was  he  able  to  get  any  alternative
    representation.   In  that  letter,  the  Appellant  had  requested  an
    adjournment.

 7. Given the fact that the  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  Mr
    Bates, had today conceded that the decision  of  the  judge  below  did
    indeed fall into error of law, I saw no reason to grant an adjournment,
    since the effect of my decision today is in favour of the Appellant.

 8. Since the very issue that the Appellant seeks to have determined before
    me is now resolved in  his  favour,  I  conclude  that  the  appeal  is
    allowed, and that  the  matter  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be determined by  a  judge  other  than  Judge  Davies  in
    Manchester.



Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal amounted to an  error  of  law.
    It falls to be set aside.  I set aside the  decision  of  the  original
    judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This  appeal  is  set  aside
    pursuant to paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Directions and is remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined by a judge other  than
    Judge Davies in Manchester.

10. No anonymity direction is made.

11. This appeal is allowed.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2019

