
                                    [pic]


    Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07730/2019




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




    |Remote Hearing by Skype              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th March 2021 and 4th May 2021   |On 28th June 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA




                                   Between


                                     F B
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Ms M Butler, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
    Solicitors
    For the Respondent:    Ms F Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("the FtT").   As
the appeal raises matters regarding a claim  for  international  protection,
it is appropriate for an anonymity direction to be made.  Unless  and  until
a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her  or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction


 1. The  appellant  is  an  Albanian  national.   Her  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision  of  9th  July  2019  to  refuse  her  claim  for
    international protection and leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds
    was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes for reasons  set  out
    in his decision promulgated on 7th February 2020.


 2. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on one  ground  only  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on  18th  May  2020.   That  is:   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parkes had  arguably  failed  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant's removal to Albania would be  contrary  to  Article  3  ECHR
    because of the suicide risk.  The 'error of law' appeal was decided  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic under Rule  34  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, on the papers.  At paragraph [13]  of  her
    decision promulgated on 28th September 2020, she said:


         "The appellant's evidence clearly raised an Article 3  claim  based
         on the risk of suicide. There is medical evidence that  pointed  to
         that and the judge's Record of Proceedings show that this was  also
         raised in Counsel's submissions. Further, the risk of  suicide  was
         addressed in the skeleton  argument  produced  in  support  of  the
         hearing (at paragraphs 22 and 23 where article 3 suicide cases were
         cited, and at 55-56).  The judge has failed entirely to engage with
         this  aspect  of  the  appellant's  case.  Mr  Marvin   points   to
         shortcomings with the psychiatric report.  That  may  well  be  the
         case, but it was for the judge to consider the evidence  and  point
         out any concerns he had with it. It is not for others  to  try  and
         remedy the failings in the judge's assessment and decision making."


 3. Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic refused to remit the appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing and directed  that  the  appeal  is
    retained in the Upper Tribunal for a  judge  to  consider  and  make  a
    decision upon the appellant's article 3 claim of suicide risk.


 4. Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic expressed  the  provisional  view  that  the
    resumed hearing of the appeal can and should be held remotely on a date
    to be fixed.  She gave the  parties  the  opportunity  to  express  any
    objection to a remote hearing. By letter dated 5th  October  2020,  the
    appellant's solicitors objected to a remote hearing and submitted  that
    a  face-to-face  hearing  is  required  because  of   the   appellant's
    vulnerabilities and the need  to  give  evidence  via  an  interpreter.
    Upper Tribunal Judge L Smith considered  the  representations,  and  on
    21st October 2020, she directed that  the  resumed  hearing  should  be
    listed for a face-to-face hearing.


 5. The appeal was listed for a face-to-face hearing on 22nd  January  2021
    at Field House but could not proceed because of measures implemented on
    5th January 2021  to  reduce  the  spread  of  Covid-19.   The  hearing
    therefore proceeded as a  Case  Management  Review  Hearing.   At  that
    hearing, Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson canvassed  whether  it  would  be
    possible  for  facilities  to  be  provided  at  the  offices  of   the
    appellant's solicitors, to enable the appellant to give evidence  in  a
    comfortable and secure environment, remotely.  On  22nd  January  2021,
    the appellant's solicitors wrote  to  the  Tribunal  in  the  following
    terms:


         "The appellant does not  object  to  the  hearing  being  a  remote
         hearing, although I understand that this is not  ideal,  given  her
         vulnerabilities and mental health  issues.  The  appellant's  legal
         representatives are willing to  assist  the  appellant  to  utilise
         their offices to enable her to participate  in  a  remote  hearing,
         given that it  is  relatively  close  to  the  appellant  and  will
         hopefully pose less of a risk in terms  of  travelling  during  the
         Covid 19  pandemic.  The  appellant  wishes  to  attend  her  legal
         representatives offices in Birmingham to be able to participate  in
         a remote hearing."


 6. The hearing before me on 9th March 2021  took  the  form  of  a  remote
    hearing using skype for business. There  was  no  objection  by  either
    party. I sat at the Birmingham  Civil  Justice  Centre.  The  appellant
    joined the hearing remotely from the offices of  her  solicitors.   The
    appellant and an interpreter arranged by the Tribunal both communicated
    with each other and I was satisfied that the appellant and  interpreter
    were able to see and hear each other throughout the hearing,  and  that
    they  clearly  understood  each  other.  I   was   addressed   by   the
    representatives in exactly the same way as I would  have  been  if  the
    parties had attended the hearing together.  I was  satisfied  no  party
    has  been  prejudiced;  and  that,  insofar  as  there  has  been   any
    restriction on a right or interest, it is justified  as  necessary  and
    proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice
    and in accordance with the  overriding  objective  to  proceed  with  a
    remote hearing because of the present need to take precautions  against
    the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I  was  satisfied  that  a
    remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and  justly
    in a way that is proportionate to  the  importance  of  the  case,  the
    complexity of the issues that arise,  and  the  anticipated  costs  and
    resources of the parties.


The appeal


 7. The appellant has appealed under s82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 against the decision of the  respondent  to  refuse
    her claim for asylum and humanitarian protection. The appellant  claims
    to be a refugee whose removal from  the  UK  would  breach  the  United
    Kingdom's   obligations   under   the    1951    Refugee    Convention.
    Alternatively, she claims that her removal to Albania would be contrary
    to Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.


 8. The appellant bears the burden of proving that  she  falls  within  the
    definition of "refugee".  In essence, the appellant  has  to  establish
    that there are substantial grounds for believing, more simply expressed
    as a 'real risk', that she is outside of her  country  of  nationality,
    because of a well-founded fear of persecution for a refugee  convention
    reason and she is unable or unwilling, because of such fear,  to  avail
    herself of the protection of  that  country.   Paragraph  339C  of  the
    immigration rules provides that an applicant who does not qualify as  a
    refugee will nonetheless be granted humanitarian  protection  if  there
    are substantial grounds for believing that if returned, they will  face
    a real risk of suffering serious harm and they are unable, or, owing to
    such risk, unwilling to avail themselves  of  the  protection  of  that
    country.


The hearings before me


 9. In readiness for the resumed hearing of the appeal, the appellant  made
    a further witness statement dated 19th November  2020.   The  appellant
    gave evidence at the hearing on 9th March 2020.  During the  course  of
    her evidence the appellant claimed she had provided her solicitors with
    evidence to support some of the claims made in her  witness  statement,
    including a copy of the Facebook post that is referred to in  paragraph
    [11] of her witness statement, and a recording of the  threat  made  to
    her, that is referred to in paragraph [13] of the statement.  After the
    appellant had finished giving evidence, and before hearing the  parties
    closing submissions I was informed by Ms Butler that she had spoken  to
    her instructing solicitors and  they  had  indeed  confirmed  that  the
    appellant had provided the material to them, but they had decided,  for
    reasons that were neither apparent nor explained, that the material did
    not need to be disclosed and exhibited to the  witness  statement.   Ms
    Butler submitted that I should either adjourn the hearing  part  heard,
    for that material to be filed and served, and for the parties to return
    to make their closing  submissions,  or  alternatively,  the  appellant
    should have permission to file and serve the documents and the  parties
    should make written submissions regarding that material.  I  considered
    the  latter  to  be  a  wholly  unsatisfactory  way  of  proceeding  in
    circumstances where neither the Tribunal nor the respondent has had any
    opportunity of seeing the  material  that  has  been  provided  by  the
    appellant to her solicitors.  In  the  circumstances  the  hearing  was
    adjourned, part heard, so that the material could be disclosed, and the
    Tribunal could hear the parties closing submissions once  the  material
    is available.


10. Prior to the resumed hearing before me on 4th May 2021, the appellant's
    representatives filed a witness statement made by Liza Tilley dated 9th
    April 2021.   The  statement  confirms  that  on  16th  May  2020,  the
    appellant informed her representatives that she had been threatened  by
    her ex-husband, who I shall refer to as AC in  this  decision,  and  on
    18th May 2020, the appellant sent her, via WhatsApp,  messages  from  a
    woman who had threatened her, and video recordings of  the  appellant's
    phone calls with AC.  The appellant also provided a copy  of  a  police
    report filed in Tirana, by the appellant's brother.   On  5th  November
    2020, the appellant provided, again via WhatsApp, a  single  screenshot
    of AC's profile on Facebook.  The failure to provide the Tribunal  with
    evidence that was relevant to the issues is explained as an 'oversight'
    and error caused by a failure to seek advice from her supervisor.   The
    appellant's representatives  have  confirmed  that  they  will  not  be
    charging the public purse for the costs of preparation for the  further
    hearing.


11. The appellant's representatives filed and  served  the  documents  that
    they had been provided with by the appellant.  The  matter  was  listed
    before me to hear the parties closing  submissions  on  4th  May  2021,
    remotely.  The appellant did not join that hearing.  At the  outset  of
    the hearing, I informed Ms Butler that the 56-page bundle of  documents
    filed with the Tribunal was in a format that was difficult  to  follow.
    There were a number of photographs that on their own, were  meaningless
    and the translations of a WhatsApp exchange  were  difficult  to  read.
    Arrangements were made for the appellant's solicitors to deliver a copy
    of the bundle relied upon by the appellant to the Tribunal.  I received
    a clearer copy of the  bundle.   At  the  end  of  the  hearing  I  was
    satisfied that both parties had been able to participate fully  in  the
    proceedings.


The appellant's vulnerability


12. It is also appropriate to record at this point that I was invited by Ms
    Butler to  treat  the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness,  and  the
    appellant has throughout been treated as a vulnerable witness.  I  have
    helpfully been provided with a report  from  Dr  Nuwan  Galappathie,  a
    Consultant  Forensic  Psychiatrist  dated  12th  November  2020.    The
    appellant has been diagnosed as suffering from a 'recurrent  depressive
    disorder', 'generalised anxiety disorder'  and  'post-traumatic  stress
    disorder'.  My attention was drawn to paragraphs [148] and [149] of the
    report in which Dr Galappathie expresses concern  about  the  appellant
    giving evidence in relation  to  her  past  experience  of  trauma.  He
    recommended that there should be a  sensitive  and  non-confrontational
    approach with the appellant, and she should be asked questions one at a
    time, using ordinary language and allowed time to answer each question.
    He recommended, if possible, questions relating to her past history  of
    trauma are avoided as they are likely  to  be  highly  re-traumatising.
    Those recommendations were adopted during the course  of  the  hearing.
    The appellant was also given appropriate breaks  when  she  was  giving
    evidence and when she was visibly distressed.  I have also  had  regard
    to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of 2010: Child, Vulnerable
    Adult and Sensitive  Appellant  Guidance,  and  my  assessment  of  the
    appellant's credibility has been considered in the  round,  taking  due
    account of the medical evidence and making due allowances for the  fact
    that many asylum seekers that have been subjected to  abuse  will  have
    problems giving a coherent account.


The evidence


13. I have before me various bundles:


           i) The respondent's bundle


         ii) The appellant's bundle comprising of 207 pages that was before
             the First-tier Tribunal


        iii) The manuscript letters from the  appellant's  mother  and  her
             brother forwarded by the appellant  to  Liza  Tilley  on  19th
             December 2019, together with translations


         iv) The statement of Liza Tulley dated 24th January 2020


          v) The appellant's  supplementary  bundle  attaching  the  expert
             report of Dr Enkeleida Tahiraj that was filed in readiness for
             the hearing before the FtT listed on 27th January 2020


         vi) The appellant's bundle of new evidence filed  in  response  to
             directions made by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson  dated  27th
             January 2021


        vii) The appellant's  bundle  of  evidence  filed  in  response  to
             directions made by me on 9th March 2021


14. A full account of the evidence and the submissions made  before  me  is
    set out in my record of proceedings.  At the end of the hearing  before
    me, I reserved my decision. I informed the  parties  that  my  decision
    will follow in writing, and this I now do. In reaching  my  decision  I
    have fully considered all the evidence that was  before  the  Tribunal,
    whether it is expressly referred to in this decision or not.


The evidence of the appellant


15. At the outset of the hearing before me on 9th  March  2021,  Ms  Butler
    confirmed that the appellant relies upon the evidence set  out  in  her
    witness statement dated 19th  November  2020,  the  psychiatric  report
    prepared by Dr Nuwan Galappathie, three letters  from  the  appellant's
    GP, Dr F Ahmed (dated 19th February 2020, 6th and 13th  October  2020),
    and the country expert report  of  Dr  Enkeleida  Tahiraj,  dated  21st
    January 2020 that was before the First-tier Tribunal previously.


16. The appellant was called to give  evidence.   She  confirmed  that  she
    understood the interpreter. The appellant adopted her witness statement
    dated 19th November 2020 and confirmed that the statement had been read
    to her in a language that she  understands,  and  the  content  of  the
    statement is true and correct.   In  cross-examination,  the  appellant
    confirmed that the last time that she got in touch with her brother was
    on 16th May 2020 when he had sent her a photograph, by social media, of
    a report that he had made to the police in Albania regarding the events
    of 16th May 2020. She confirmed that she had not spoken  to  him  since
    that photograph was sent to her.  She confirmed that she had received a
    call on 17th May 2020 from a woman that had  threatened  her.  She  was
    asked whether she had contacted the registry office in Albania  on  the
    same day. She initially said she contacted  them  several  days  after.
    When it was put to her that that is  not  what  she  had  said  in  her
    witness statement, she said that she had  made  the  contact  with  the
    registry office one or two days afterwards.   The  appellant  confirmed
    that she speaks to her son every two or three days. He  does  not  have
    his own mobile phone and she communicates with him using  her  mother's
    mobile telephone number. She maintained that she thinks her  family  do
    not want her son to speak to him even though they allow her to speak to
    him every two or three days.  She  was  asked  whether  she  had  heard
    anything about her ex-husband since the events in May  2020.  She  said
    that she has not heard anything about him since, and neither  does  she
    wish to.


17. After cross-examination, I informed the appellant and the parties  that
    I had a few questions for the  appellant  to  ensure  that  I  properly
    understood the evidence set out in her most recent  witness  statement.
    I was conscious of the appellant's vulnerability and the distress  that
    was apparent when she spoke about her family  and  in  particular,  her
    son. I adjourned the hearing for the appellant to have  an  opportunity
    to get some fresh air, compose herself, and to have some  lunch  before
    the hearing continued.


18. When the hearing resumed, the appellant confirmed she was  well  enough
    to continue.  I asked the appellant about her contact with her son. She
    said that primarily, it is she that calls him and  that  she  does  so,
    almost every day. She said that sometimes he will not answer  and  when
    others are around, he only speaks to her a little. However, when he  is
    alone, he opens up and tells her that he loves her and misses  her.  He
    asks her when they will be together again. The appellant said  she  had
    asked her son why he sometimes avoids her, and he had said to her  that
    he doesn't want to communicate when others are around.  She  said  that
    when others are around, he does not openly  express  his  love  towards
    her.  Her evidence was that her son will occasionally call her when  no
    one else is at home, and that is why she believes it is her family that
    force him not to be close with her. She said that her son does not  say
    anything about the family and that is what  makes  her  suspicious.   I
    asked the appellant whether her mother is present during the calls,  if
    her son is using her mobile phone. She said that when other people  are
    around, her son will say "what do you want", "I am doing my  homework",
    and he appears to be distant.  However she is able to speak to him when
    others are not around, because her mother's mobile phone is left in the
    house if she is in the garden or out shopping. The appellant said  that
    her mother never picks the mobile phone up, and she  had  come  to  the
    realisation that her mother does not wish to know of her existence when
    she heard of the statement that had been made by her mother previously.


19. After a further short break, I asked the appellant about  the  Facebook
    posts.  She confirmed that a false Facebook account had been set up  by
    her previously to aid the police in the arrest of  AC.  It  was  closed
    after his arrest in 2016. She confirmed that when her son was about 9 �
    years old, he had persuaded her to open a  Facebook  account  for  him,
    because all his schoolfriends had a Facebook account.   She  maintained
    access to the Facebook account.  On the morning of 16th  May  2020  her
    son had seen a photograph of the appellant  that  had  been  posted  on
    Facebook by AC. When her son had told her that morning of  the  picture
    that he had seen and the derogatory comments made,  the  appellant  had
    viewed the post herself.  It was a new post and not something that  had
    been posted or published previously. I asked her whether a copy of  the
    Facebook post was available, and she said that she had taken  the  post
    to be a threat  and  provided  copies  of  the  Facebook  post  to  her
    solicitors in May 2020.  She had closed down her son's Facebook account
    but had been able to access the posts from the Facebook  account  of  a
    friend. The appellant said that AC had also re-posted pictures that had
    previously  been  published/posted  of  him  carrying  a  weapon.   The
    appellant believes that AC had posted/published the photograph  of  her
    with derogatory remarks on 16th May 2020, as a way of intimidating her.


20. The appellant said that she had contacted her cousin the same  day  and
    her cousin had called  her  back  providing  her  with  AC's  telephone
    number. The appellant had then contacted AC the same day, and the  call
    had been recorded because she was scared about what he was saying.  The
    appellant said that she had provided her solicitors with the recording.
     That day, she had also contacted her brother, but he  did  not  answer
    her calls. She therefore sent messages to him asking him to answer  her
    calls.  She could  see  that  he  was  reading  the  messages  but  not
    replying.  She sent several messages to him and told him that  she  had
    been threatened by her ex-husband. She had told  her  brother  that  AC
    would be unable to harm her because she is so far away, but the  family
    should take care of themselves.  She said that she sent him the  videos
    that she had recorded and said that he should go to  the  police.   She
    herself then contacted the Albanian police but was told that she  could
    not  lodge  a  report.   The  appellant  said  that   her   last   ever
    communication with her brother was the picture that she  received  from
    him of the report that he had made to the police. She has not contacted
    him since. She said that to the best of her recollection, the last time
    she spoke to her brother and her mother was in January 2020.





Other evidence


21. in reaching my decision I have had regard to the  report  of  Dr  Nuwan
    Galappathie, which I address in my  consideration  of  the  appellant's
    Article 3 claim and the three  letters  from  the  appellant's  GP,  Dr
    Ahmed. I have also regard to the evidence that  was  previously  before
    the First-tier Tribunal including the medical reports of Dr Arnold  and
    Dr Waheed.  I have also considered, in particular,  the report of Dr  E
    Tahiraj  dated  21st  January  2020  that  was   in   the   appellant's
    supplementary bundle filed in readiness for the hearing on 27th January
    2020.  I have also carefully considered the evidence  set  out  in  the
    appellant's  bundle  filed  following  the  directions  made  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gleeson dated 27th January 2021 and the directions  made
    by me on 9th March 2021.


Findings and Conclusions


22. In reaching my decision I have  had  the  opportunity  of  hearing  the
    appellant and seeing her evidence tested in cross-examination.  Matters
    of credibility are never easy  to  determine,  particularly,  as  here,
    where the appellant's evidence is received through an interpreter,  and
    where the appellant is a vulnerable witness.  I acknowledge that  there
    may be a danger of misinterpretation, but I was careful to  explain  to
    the appellant, that questions and answers  must  be  broken  down  into
    short sentences so as to ensure that she understood the  question,  and
    the interpreter had  a  proper  opportunity  to  translate  the  answer
    provided.  I have also borne in mind the fact that events that may have
    occurred some time ago, can impact on an individual's ability to recall
    exact circumstances.  I also recognise that there may be a tendency  by
    a witness to embellish evidence because although the core of the  claim
    may be true, he/she believes that by embellishing their  evidence,  the
    claim becomes stronger.  In reaching  my  decision  I  have  also  been
    careful not to find  any  part  of  the  account  relied  upon,  to  be
    inherently incredible, because of my own views on what  is  or  is  not
    plausible.  I have considered the appellant's claims and the story as a
    whole, against  the  available  country  evidence  and  other  familiar
    factors, such as consistency with what the appellant has said before.


23. As I have stressed from the  outset,  when  assessing  the  applicant's
    credibility, I have been particularly mindful of the psychiatric report
    of Dr  Nuwan  Galappathie  and  the  diagnosis  made.   Dr  Galappathie
    recommended adjustments are made so that counsel take a  sensitive  and
    non-confrontational approach with her. She should  be  asked  questions
    one at a time using ordinary language and be  allowed  time  to  answer
    each question. The relevant adjustments were  made  and  neither  party
    drew my attention to any concerns regarding the conduct of the hearing.
     Although the appellant clearly found talking about her family, and  in
    particular her son, difficult and upsetting, after  the  appellant  had
    given evidence on 9th March 2021, I was satisfied  that  the  appellant
    had had the opportunity to properly participate in the hearing  without
    any undue distress.  My assessment of the appellant's  credibility  has
    been considered in  the  round,  taking  due  account  of  the  medical
    evidence and giving due  allowances  for  the  fact  that  many  asylum
    seekers will have problems, giving a coherent account and  particularly
    so, when the individual is vulnerable.


The claim for asylum / humanitarian protection


24. Having found that First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes had erred in failing
    to address the Article 3 claim based upon suicide  risk,  at  paragraph
    [15] of her decision, Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic said:


              "The following findings are, therefore, preserved:


               i) that the appellant would be able  to  seek  and  access  a
                  sufficiency of protection from the Albanian authorities;


              ii) that there was no evidence that the appellant's ex-husband
                  had  been  released  from  prison  early  due   to   state
                  corruption;


             iii) that the appellant has her parents, a brother, and her son
                  in Albania;


              iv) that she would have the support of her family on return;


               v) that no action had  been  taken  by  the  appellant's  ex-
                  husband against their son or her family members;


              vi) that the Facebook evidence does not  show  any  intent  to
                  target the appellant;


             vii) that the appellant could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
                  paragraph 276ADE and that her circumstances do not  engage
                  article 8;


            viii) that she has a subjective fear of her former  husband  and
                  was a victim of domestic violence.


25. In her statement of 19th November 2020, the appellant claims she has no
    ongoing contact with her family and that there was an incident on  16th
    May 2020 in which she was subjected to further  threats  from  her  AC.
    The incident obviously postdates the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    and it is appropriate for me to consider whether there is  anything  in
    the claim now made by the appellant that is capable of undermining  the
    findings previously made and preserved.


26. I reject the appellant's claim that she has no  on-going  contact  with
    her family.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes had before  him  the  two
    letters written in manuscript from the appellant's mother  and  brother
    that were forwarded by the appellant to her representatives, by  email,
    on 19th December 2019.  The appellant's mother refers to  the  incident
    that occurred in December 2016 and the  effect  upon  the  family.  She
    refers to her husband (i.e. the appellant's father)  suffering  from  a
    heart condition caused by the appellant.  She states;  "I  have  stated
    that I have disowned her as my daughter because she has caused so  much
    trouble and put us all at risk...".  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parkes
    also had before him the witness statement of  Liza  Tilley  dated  24th
    January 2020 in which she refers to a telephone call that she  made  to
    the appellant's mother in  January  2020  with  the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter. At paragraph [22] of his decision, Judge Parkes said:


         "The witness statement from  the  appellant's  solicitors  suggests
         that the family would not be willing to support the  appellant.  It
         does not appear that there have been any recent incidents regarding
         the family with the appellant's ex-husband and so it is  not  clear
         what it is that would have precipitated such  a  change  given  the
         support she had between 2012 and 2016, and then 2018 for the period
         he was in prison, until she came to the UK."


27. Dr Nuwan Galappathie refers to  the  appellant's  personal  history  at
    paragraph [20] of his report.  The appellant  described  a  "difficult"
    childhood and said that she  felt  unwanted  by  her  parents,  and  at
    paragraph [22] of the report, he refers to the  appellant  telling  him
    that although she had friends at school,  she  was  also  bullied.   At
    paragraph [27] of his report, Dr Galappathie notes  that  although  her
    family did not approve of her marriage to AC, she  moved  into  a  one-
    bedroom apartment with him, which was close to  her  parents  and  next
    door to her uncle.  At paragraph [34]  of  his  report  Dr  Galappathie
    records the appellant having told  him  that  she  is  fearful  of  her
    family, that she does not speak to them anymore, and that the appellant
    told him she has effectively lost her family.


28. In her witness statement dated 19th November 2020, the appellant claims
    that the last time that she spoke to  her  brother  was  when  she  was
    threatened on 16th May 2020.  She claims she never talks to anyone else
    in her family other than her son, because they do not want to speak  to
    her.  In her oral evidence before me, the appellant confirmed that  she
    is able to speak to her son every  two  or  three  days  and  that  she
    communicates with him via her mother's mobile telephone number.


29. Although the appellant had a difficult childhood,  the  appellant  left
    her ex-husband in 2012 and returned to  live  with  her  family.   They
    supported her until 2016 following the breakdown of  her  marriage  and
    despite the threats that she was subjected to.  They also supported the
    appellant whilst AC was in prison, and until she left Albania.  On  her
    own account, her family were supportive of her decision not  to  return
    to her ex-husband.  The appellant's frequent contact with  her  son  is
    maintained via her mother's mobile telephone number and  I  reject  her
    evidence that she does not speak to members of her family.


30. If, as the appellant believes, her family do not want her son to  speak
    to her son, it would be very easy for them to cease all contact  or  to
    limit the contact, but it is clear that they have not taken  any  steps
    to do so.  On her own account, her family allow the appellant  to  have
    frequent contact with her son.  It  is  in  my  judgement  contrary  to
    common sense and experience of human  behaviour  that  the  appellant's
    family, who clearly supported her when she was living in Albania, would
    have cut off all communication with her in the  way  that  she  claims.
    Her son may well be guarded in the conversations that he has  with  the
    appellant, and the conversations may be short, but that  would  not  be
    altogether surprising for a child of that age,  speaking  to  a  parent
    with whom he has no physical contact.


31. I have considered the appellant's evidence holistically and even to the
    lower standard, I reject her claim that she was threatened on 16th  May
    2020.  Judge Parkes found, at paragraph [21] of his that  the  Facebook
    evidence does not show any intent to target the appellant.  That  is  a
    preserved finding.


32. The appellant claims that on  Saturday  16th  May  2020,  her  son  saw
    pictures of her that AC had posted on Facebook.  She states that he had
    "written offensive words beneath  the  pictures,  such  as  "bitch"  or
    "whore".  The appellant viewed the  Facebook  post  for  herself.   The
    picture posted by AC was one that had not been published previously but
    the  appellant  considered  the  photo  of  her,  as  being  a  way  of
    intimidating her.  She confirmed in her oral evidence that the Facebook
    post was a  picture  of  her,  with  derogatory  words  calling  her  a
    whore/prostitute.  She confirmed  that  the  picture  in  which  AC  is
    swearing at her, had been provided to her solicitors.


33. In the bundle of documents filed and served  following  the  directions
    made by me on 9th March 2021, there are 8 "Facebook photo's", at  pages
    17 to 24.  The only one that even begins to  resemble  the  description
    provided by the appellant is the copy that appears at  page  17.   That
    appears to show that on 6th May (the year is not  shown),  AC  "updated
    his cover photo".  The here are two pictures.  The picture on the  left
    appears to be of a woman sitting on the edge of a bed.   Alongside,  to
    the right, is a picture of a woman, but her face is entirely covered by
    an angry emoji.  There is no text visible  on  either  picture.   There
    appear to have been "4 comments", but I have not been provided  with  a
    screenshot of the comments made. There are no offensive  words  beneath
    or elsewhere on the pictures, such as "bitch" or "whore" or anything to
    demonstrate the 'Facebook Post' or update to AC's cover photo is in any
    way directed to the appellant.  The remaining pages (pages  18  to  24)
    appear to be updates to AC's cover or profile picture, showing him with
    weapons or of weapons, but again  do  not  disclose  anything  directed
    towards the appellant  in  particular.  I  note  that  those  'Facebook
    photos' had previously been included in the appellant's bundle that was
    before the First-tier Tribunal at pages 30 to 34 and were considered by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes when he concluded  that  the  Facebook
    photographs of AC do not by themselves show an  intent  to  target  the
    appellant. As a starting point, the Facebook photos that  I  have  been
    provided with, do not support the appellant's claim that AC had  posted
    a picture(s) of the appellant with offensive words such as  "bitch"  or
    "whore".


34. The appellant claims that she contacted her ex-husband  the  same  day,
    having obtained his telephone number through her  cousin.   She  claims
    that although she was scared to contact him, his actions were upsetting
    their son, and she felt safe because he does not  know  where  she  is.
    She claims he started threatening her, saying he  would  find  her  and
    kill her.  He also threatened to kill their son, her  brother  and  his
    son. She claims to have recorded the calls. At pages 12 to  15  of  the
    bundle filed by the appellant in response to directions made by  me  on
    9th  March  2021,  the  appellant's   representatives   have   provided
    transcripts of 5 video clips (pages 10  to  15).   The  transcripts  of
    'audio recordings' are certified as having been prepared on 11th  March
    2021. The dates upon which the audio/ video clips were recorded is  not
    identified  in  the  transcripts.  That  information  would  have  been
    apparent from the metadata recorded on the digital files that were sent
    to the appellant's solicitors.  In any event,  I  have  considered  the
    contents of the transcripts that are to be found at pages 12 to  15  of
    the bundle (transcript of video 2, 3, 4 and 5), said to be  transcripts
    of the appellant's conversation with AC on  16th  May  2020.   Although
    that conversation arose because of the appellant's concern regarding  a
    picture of the appellant posted by AC and the insults she  claims  were
    directed towards her,  there is no reference in any of the  transcripts
    to the Facebooks posts that caused the appellant to contact AC. I  note
    that in 'Video 4', the appellant is recorded to say, "Will you  log  in
    on Facebook for a little bit", but there is no reference whatsoever  in
    the transcripts to the appellant having any concerns about any Facebook
    activity directed towards  her.   There  is  an  exchange  between  the
    appellant and a male and I  accept  that  threats  appear  to  be  made
    towards the appellant and her family in that exchange.  However, in the
    end, I am not satisfied, even to the lower  standard,  that  these  are
    transcripts of a telephone conversation between the appellant and [AC],
    or that if they are, they are anything more than an attempt to  bolster
    a claim for international protection that  has  previously  failed.   I
    attach little weight to the transcripts as evidence of genuine  threats
    towards the appellant.  The  conversation  does  not  in  my  judgement
    appear to be a conversation between someone who is traumatised  by  the
    past events that she has been subjected to, at the hands of the  person
    that she is speaking to.  The appellant's concern in  the  conversation
    is the lack of financial contribution made by AC to the  upbringing  of
    their son.  Curiously, during 'Video 2' the appellant is noted to  have
    said "..keep the phone close to you and try to speak clearly..".   That
    is a very odd observation to make during such a telephone conversation.




35. In her oral evidence, the appellant said that she  last  spoke  to  her
    mother and brother in  January  2020.   The  appellant  claims  in  her
    witness statement that she  called  her  brother  after  she  had  been
    threatened by AC on 16th May 2020 but was unable to speak to  him.  She
    claims he did not answer her call because he is not talking to her  and
    has cut off contact with her.  She  claims  she  sent  a  text  to  her
    brother.  She claims  her  brother  went  to  the  police  station  and
    reported the threats that had been made against the appellant and  him,
    because he was scared for himself and  for  his  son.  She  claims  her
    brother took a photo of the police report.  Copies of the text(s)  sent
    by the  appellant  to  her  brother  and  the  communication  from  him
    providing a copy of the  police  report  have  not  been  provided.   I
    acknowledge that there is  a lower standard in  asylum  claims  and  no
    requirement for corroboration, but if  there  is  no  good  reason  why
    evidence that should be available is not produced,  I  am  entitled  to
    take that into account in the assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the
    account.  In any event, the appellant's account  of  the  communication
    between her and her brother is also inconsistent with the  report  made
    to the police by the appellant's brother.  I have been provided with  a
    translation of the statement that he is said to have made to the police
    at 19:30 on 16th May 2020.  The appellant's brother states:


         "...Today on 16/05/2020 my sister called and told me that  her  ex-
         husband [AC] had called her and had threatened her family,  he  had
         threatened that he will kill me  together  with  the  other  family
         members. She was very scared because [AC] always drinks alcohol and
         is  very  aggressive,  it  has  been  proven  that   he   is   also
         violent.....I have come to the police  department  because  I  feel
         threatened and scared.  [AC] has called her on her phone  with  the
         number [phone number set out], using this number he has  threatened
         her. My sisters telephone number is [phone number set out]. I  also
         want to say that my sister has recorded them and I  will  make  all
         threats available for you...." (my emphasis)


36. Contrary to what is said by the appellant regarding the lack of contact
    with her brother since January 2020,  and  that  her  brother  did  not
    answer her calls on 16th May 2020, it is clear from the statement  made
    by the appellant's brother to the Police in Tirana, that  there  was  a
    telephone conversation between the appellant  and  her  brother  during
    which he was  informed  of  the  alleged  threats.   I  also  note  the
    appellant's brother makes no reference to any threats towards his son.


37. The appellant claims  that  she  also  contacted  the  Albanian  police
    herself about the threats and I have been provided with a transcript of
    a conversation (video 1) between a male and female in which the  female
    is told that she needs to report the crime at  the  police  station  or
    police headquarters, and that she must be present in  order  to  report
    and she cannot report the incident over the telephone.  Again, the date
    and time that audio/video clip was recorded, is not identified  in  the
    transcript. The appellant claims that  she  recorded  her  conversation
    with AC as she was scared about what  he  was  saying.   The  appellant
    provides no explanation for why she would need to  record  a  telephone
    conversation that she had with the Albanian police.


38. Finally, the appellant claims that the following  day  (i.e.  17th  May
    2020) she was called by a woman claiming to  be  AC's  wife,  who  also
    threatened her.  There is no recording of such a call, but I have  been
    provided with a translation  of  a  series  of  messages  exchanged  on
    WhatsApp.  In her witness statement dated 9th April 2021,  Liza  Tilley
    states that WhatsApp messages were provided by the appellant to her  on
    18th May 2020.  A careful review of that evidence discloses that it  is
    again, inconsistent with the appellant's account of events.


39. The WhatsApp messages start with a message sent by  the  appellant  (at
    11:11hrs) stating "Please delete the picture from Facebook because  [A]
    has seen it, and I don't know why you threaten to kill us on the  phone
    leave me alone nobody has  stopped  the  boy  from  you,  you  have  no
    responsibility for him so get on  with  your  own  life".   Above  that
    message, there appear to have been  two  'missed  calls'  the  previous
    evening, at 18:41 hours.  The message sent by the appellant at 11:11hrs
    was met with no reply and the following day,  at  09:52hrs,  there  was
    another missed call, immediately followed by  a  message  sent  by  the
    appellant stating "write",  followed by an exchange of messages between
    11:17hrs and 15:05hrs.  I have carefully read that exchange of messages
    and note that there were also missed  (I  assume,  incoming)  calls  at
    11:32, 14:32, 14:33, 14:34, 15:02, 15:05 and a short incoming  call  at
    14:33.  The exchange appears to have been instigated by the  appellant.
    Contrary to what is said by the  appellant,  the  initial  exchange  of
    messages does not read as an exchange of messages between the appellant
    and a woman claiming to be the wife of AC.  The first response  to  the
    message sent by the appellant was "why did you  report"  to  which  the
    appellant responded, "why did you threaten me it serves you well".   It
    seems  the  appellant  believed,  at  least  initially,  that  she  was
    communicating with AC.  As  the  exchange  progresses,  the  individual
    identifies herself as the wife of AC and  the  focus  of  the  exchange
    thereafter appears to be a report the appellant claimed to have made to
    the police and contact between the appellant's son and his father.


40. On the one hand, the appellant claims that she was unable to report the
    threats she received on 16th May 2020 to the  Albanian  Police  because
    she needed to be present in person before she could report the  matter,
    but in the exchange of messages, there is reference  to  the  appellant
    having reported matters  to  the  police  and  the  female  asking  the
    appellant to withdraw the report.


41. Having considered  the  evidence  now  relied  upon  by  the  appellant
    regarding matters that post-date the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes in the round, I find that the appellant has  not  received
    any genuine threat directed towards  her,  her  son,  or  her  brother.
    Whatever occurred on 16th May  2020,  the  appellant  has  remained  in
    regular contact with her son, and I find, with her family, and there is
    no evidence of AC having made any attempt to contact them  or  to  harm
    them in any way.  Looking at the evidence as a whole, there  is  in  my
    judgement nothing that  undermines  the  preserved  findings  made,  as
    recorded in paragraph [15] of the  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Kekic:


             (iv) that the appellant would have the support of  her  family
             on return;


             (v)  that no action had been  taken  by  the  appellant's  ex-
                  husband against their son or her family members;


              vi) that the Facebook evidence does not  show  any  intent  to
                  target the appellant;


Article 3


   42. I then turn to consider whether the removal of the appellant would be
       in breach of Article 3 by reason of the appellant's mental health and
       because of the risk of suicide. The appellant claims she would commit
       suicide if she were returned to Albania and a decision to remove the
       appellant would violate her Article 3 rights.  Ms Butler submits the
       appellant faces a serious, rapid and irreversible deterioration in
       her mental health on return to Albania, resulting in intense
       suffering and or a reduction in life expectancy due to the risk of
       suicide.  The appellant draws upon the opinions expressed by Dr
       Galappathie, in particular.


   43. It is now well established that what is required is an assessment of
       the risk at three stages, prior to anticipated removal, during
       removal, and on arrival.  I have carefully considered whether the
       suicide risk is such that a removal of the appellant to Albania would
       be in breach of Article 3 by reference to the test set out in J v
       SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 as clarified in Y and Z (Sri Lanka) v SSHD
       [2009] EWCA Civ 362, noting in particular that giving the judgment of
       the court in Y and Z (Sri Lanka), Sedley LJ said:


         "16. One can accordingly add to the fifth principle in J that what
         may nevertheless be of equal importance is whether any genuine fear
         which the appellant may establish, albeit without an objective
         foundation, is such as to create a risk of suicide if there is an
         enforced return."


The report of Dr Nuwan Galappathie


44. Dr Galappathie is a consultant forensic psychiatrist who was instructed
    by the appellant's solicitors to address the appellant's mental  health
    and in particular the risk of suicide in light of  her  mental  health.
    For the purposes of his report Dr Galappathie conducted an  examination
    of the appellant on 5th October 2020 over a period of  two  hours.  The
    background is set out at paragraphs [18] to  [38]  of  his  report.  Dr
    Galappathie refers to the appellant's current medication.  At paragraph
    [45], he notes the  appellant  told  him  that  she  has  had  previous
    thoughts about jumping in front of a train if the decision is  made  to
    return her to Albania.


45. Dr Galappathie refers  to  the  appellant's  past  medical  history  at
    paragraphs [46] to [78], helpfully drawing upon the appellant's medical
    records and the previous reports prepared by Dr  Frank  Arnold  and  Dr
    Waquas Waheed.  The appellant's more recent mental health is  addressed
    at paragraphs [79] to [82] of the report.  The appellant told  him  she
    has been feeling low in mood since her asylum application  was  refused
    in 2019.  She described hearing voices during the night inside her head
    which she recognises as AC, making her feel very  anxious.  He  records
    that  the  appellant  describes  suffering  from  anxiety  and  feeling
    worried. She had started to  feel  anxious  after  being  assaulted  in
    Albania.  Thoughts about  self-harm  and  suicide  increased  when  her
    asylum claim was initially refused, and she  described  suffering  from
    worsening thoughts about self-harm and  suicide  but  appeared  visibly
    distressed and reluctant to disclose her thoughts.  At  paragraph  [81]
    he states:


         "....[The appellant] appeared reluctant to  disclose  her  thoughts
         about self-harm and suicide. She said that she has them  every  day
         but does not like to think about them. She does not have a specific
         plan to harm herself but  told  me  that  she  has  previously  had
         thoughts to throw herself in front of a train if she is not granted
         asylum within the UK. She said, "I don't  have  anything  here,  no
         son".  She told me that she had previous thoughts to  harm  herself
         but has not acted upon them when she has thought about her son."


46. Dr Galappathie records in his report that he completed a  mental  state
    examination, and it was notable that  the  appellant  was  anxious  and
    distressed during the interview. At paragraph [86] of  his  report,  he
    states that the appellant described  subjectively  suffering  from  low
    mood  and  objectively  appeared  depressed  with   reduced   emotional
    reactivity. She reported ongoing thoughts about self-harm  and  suicide
    but no current plans to harm herself. He states there was  no  evidence
    of any delusional beliefs. He states:


         "... Her predominant thoughts were related to her past  history  of
         trauma, missing her son and fear of being returned to Albania where
         she feared being  found  and  killed  by  her  ex-husband  and  not
         welcomed by her family."


47. Dr Galappathie addresses the questions asked of him at paragraphs  [88]
    to [151] of his report. In his  opinion,  the  appellant  suffers  from
    recurrent depressive disorder indicated by  her  account  of  suffering
    from low mood and depressive symptoms which have been  worsening  after
    her application for asylum was refused in 2019.  He  also  states  that
    the appellant suffers from generalised  anxiety  disorder  and  in  his
    opinion, the appellant's generalised anxiety disorder is  severe  given
    the extent of her anxiety -related symptoms and  the  impact  that  her
    symptoms have had  upon  her.  Dr  Galappathie  also  states  that  the
    appellant suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder and the  severity
    of her PTSD is severe given the number and extent of the symptoms  that
    she has experienced and the level of  psychological  distress  that  is
    present.  He expresses the opinion that the appellant's  mental  health
    by  way  of  depression,  anxiety  and  PTSD  appears  to  continue  to
    significantly deteriorate since her arrival in  the  UK.  At  paragraph
    [108] of his report he expresses the opinion that the deterioration  in
    the appellant's mental health has occurred due to a number of different
    factors, the most significant of which are  her  uncertain  immigration
    status and fear of being returned  to  Albania.  In  his  opinion,  the
    prolonged period of time the appellant has been separated from her  son
    would have also significantly contributed to her ongoing  deterioration
    in her mental state. He expresses  the  opinion  that  the  appellant's
    mental health problems have now become chronic, treatment resistant and
    have continued to  deteriorate.   He  states  the  appellant's  current
    symptoms and mental health problems are likely to  have  been  directly
    caused by her past history of trauma  and  the  current  situation.  He
    states that the ongoing threats and violence  by  her  ex-husband  will
    have worsened her PTSD and she is likely to have developed anxiety  and
    depression in  the  aftermath  of  the  long-standing  trauma  she  has
    experienced. He also expresses the opinion that it is likely  that  her
    separation from her son when she had to flee Albania will have worsened
    her mental health problems and in particular her depression, leading to
    feelings of despondency and hopelessness.  Dr  Galappathie  is  of  the
    opinion that the mental health problems  that  the  appellant  presents
    with are genuine, and consistent with the views of other  experts,  her
    mental health symptoms and conditions are clinically plausible.


The letters from the appellant's GP


48. The appellant relies upon three letters from Dr F Ahmed, a  GP  at  the
    Meridian Practice, Stoney Stanton Road, Coventry.  Dr Ahmed confirms in
    his letter dated 19th February 2020 that the  appellant  is  a  patient
    registered at the practice since May 2018. He provides a summary of  an
    assessment he made on 12th February 2020, following which the appellant
    was referred to the CRISIS team for support. He sets out the medication
    prescribed to the appellant.  In his letter Dr Ahmed states "..Also she
    had expressed concerns about safety of her child who is left  with  her
    husband.  She was shattered to be separated from her son..".   Although
    Dr Ahmed understands  the  appellant's  son  has  been  left  with  the
    "appellant's husband", for the purposes of this decision I accept  that
    to be an error in translation or in his understanding.   The  appellant
    has maintained throughout, that her son was left in Albania in the care
    of her family.  Dr Ahmed also states  the  appellant  was  referred  to
    counselling, but the counsellor noted that after completion of therapy,
    the appellant remained moderately depressed,  and  her  anxiety  levels
    remained high.  As part of the  assessment  for  depression,  Dr  Ahmed
    reports that in February 2019 the appellant was very positive about not
    committing suicide, but that had changed by the date of his  letter  in
    February  2020,  by  which  time  the  appellant  was  aware   of   the
    respondent's decision to refuse her claim for international protection.
    When she was assessed in April 2019, her mood  remained  low,  and  her
    medication was adjusted. By April 2019 it is said  that  the  appellant
    was having  panic  attacks  because  she  was  worried  about  possible
    detention and removal.  The appellant was seen in May 2019,  June  2019
    and November 2019, without any apparent improvement  in  her  symptoms.
    Dr Ahmed states:


         "Looking at the trend and reviewing her medical notes it seems that
         her depression is chronic now, her anxiety symptoms are worse every
         time there is stress. She has no much avail (sic) with  counselling
         and does not seem suitable to continue till her immigration  status
         is settled.


         She is very unwell now and not suitable to be deported or detained,
         she has given very clear direct threat of "taking  her  life".  She
         would need continued medical support and it seems unlikely that she
         would be able to come off her medication in near future."


49. In his letter dated 6th October 2020,  Dr  Ahmed  states  that  he  had
    received notification from the appellant's  solicitors  asking  for  an
    urgent medical review as the appellant is suicidal. It appears he  made
    contact with the appellant who was noted  to  be  extremely  upset  and
    contemplating suicide. He states that she was very clear  in  her  mind
    that she would commit suicide if her appeal  were  rejected.  Dr  Ahmed
    states that in his opinion, even though  the  appellant  did  not  have
    practical suicide plans if her appeal is rejected, she would  be  at  a
    very high risk of committing suicide.  In his letter dated 13th October
    2020, Dr Ahmed states that in May 2020 he had  another  encounter  with
    the appellant. She presented as very distressed when she  had  received
    threats from her ex-husband towards  her  son.   Dr  Ahmed  states  the
    appellant was very scared about the safety of her child in Albania  and
    when assessed, she was very fearful and believed that he was in danger.
     He states the appellant had  features  of  panic  attacks  and  needed
    strong medication to settle her symptoms.


Discussion on the Article 3 risk


50. As a starting point, I acknowledge that the appellant was the victim of
    domestic violence during her marriage to AC.  The violence that she was
    subjected to, is summarised in paragraph  [27]  of  the  report  of  Dr
    Galappathie.  It is uncontroversial  that  there  was  an  incident  in
    December 2016 and that both the appellant and her brother were  stabbed
    by AC, leaving the appellant with a 2cm scar above her left  hip.   The
    appellant assisted the authorities in Albania with their  investigation
    that ultimately resulted in the  conviction  of  AC,  and  a  five-year
    sentence of imprisonment being imposed.   I have set out  at  paragraph
    [24] above, the preserved findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
    have found there to be nothing in the  evidence  before  me  now,  that
    undermines the preserved findings made, as recorded in  paragraph  [15]
    of the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic.


51. Dr Nuwan Galappathie is a Consultant  Forensic  Psychiatrist,  and  his
    expertise and experience are  not  challenged  by  the  respondent.   I
    accept  his  opinion  that  the  appellant  suffers  from  a  recurrent
    depressive disorder, severe generalised anxiety disorder and  PTSD  for
    the reasons set out at paragraphs [ [93] to [107]  of  his  report.   I
    also accept his opinion  that  the  appellant's  current  symptoms  and
    mental health problems are likely to have been directly caused  by  her
    past history  of  trauma  and  the  current  situation,  and  that  her
    uncertain immigration status and fear of being returned to Albania  are
    likely to be the most significant factors that have caused  an  ongoing
    deterioration in her mental health.  I  accept  his  opinion  that  the
    mental health problem that she presents with are genuine and  there  is
    no indication to suggest that  she  is  exaggerating  or  feigning  her
    current mental health problems.


52. Dr Galappathie is of the opinion that if the appellant  is  advised  of
    any adverse immigration decision, that is likely to lead  to  an  acute
    deterioration in her mental health and increase the risk  of  self-harm
    and suicide. Any  pre-removal  detention  is  likely  to  significantly
    worsen her mental state.   In  his  opinion  the  transit  to  Albania,
    particularly if this is by plane, will be highly  distressing  for  the
    appellant.  Dr Galappathie states the appellant  is  likely  to  become
    increasingly unstable and present with a risk  of  resisting  restraint
    and she will present with a high risk  of  self-harm  and  suicide  and
    destructive behaviours during transit.  On arrival in Albania,  she  is
    likely to be highly fearful of harm from AC and that will  lead  to  an
    immediate deterioration in her mental state and increase  the  risk  of
    self-harm and suicide. Upon release in Albania, she is likely  to  have
    difficulty seeking help and support given her fragile mental state  and
    she will present with an ongoing deterioration in mental state  leading
    to increased risk of self-harm and suicide.  At paragraph [151] of  his
    report, Dr Galappathie concludes:


         "In my opinion, if she is returned to Albania  this  is  likely  to
         lead to a significant deterioration in her mental health related to
         depression, anxiety and PTSD.  She is fearful of being returned  to
         Albania as she fears being found and killed by [AC].  In my opinion
         if she is returned to Albania her mental health would be likely  to
         deteriorate leading to worsening depression, anxiety and  PTSD  and
         high  risk  of  self-harm  and  suicide.  I  have  considered   the
         availability of mental health treatment  in  Albania  as  described
         within the  Home  Office,  Country  Policy  Note,  Albania:  mental
         healthcare.  In my opinion, whilst the  document  highlights  there
         are treatments available within  Albania  for  her  current  mental
         health problems, I would be concerned that she would not be able to
         engage with these treatments as her mental state would be likely to
         deteriorate in Albania given that she fears being harmed and killed
         by [AC] in Albania. In my opinion,  she  needs  to  feel  safe  and
         secure in order to be able to benefit from the treatment  that  she
         requires for her current mental health problems."


53. I have carefully considered the evidence  before  me  and  I  give  due
    weight to the opinions expressed by  Dr  Galappathie.   Dr  Galappathie
    expresses the opinion that the appellant presents with a high  risk  of
    self-harm and suicide, indicated by the number of risk factors for self-
    harm and suicide that are present.


54. However, in the end, I do not consider the  medical evidence, taken  at
    its highest, demonstrates a real risk that the appellant  would  commit
    suicide in the UK.  I accept the  appellant's  mental  health  is  very
    closely associated with the domestic violence that she was subjected to
    in Albania and in particular the incident in  December  2016,  together
    with her ongoing separation from her son and  her  fears  around  being
    removed from the UK as set out in paragraphs [136]  and  [137]  of  the
    report of Dr Galappathie.


55. The review of the appellant's medical records establishes the appellant
    had thoughts about self-harm in 2016 but did not act on them as she has
    a child.  When she was seen by her GP  on  30th  August  2019  she  was
    feeling stressed, after her claim had been  refused.    Her  claim  for
    international protection had been refused by the respondent for reasons
    set out in a decision dated  9th July 2019.  Her GP, Dr Ahmed noted the
    appellant  had  no  thoughts  about  self-harm  although  she  appeared
    irritable in mood and flat.  Dr Ahmed confirms in his letter dated 19th
    February 2020 what when he assessed  the  appellant  on  12th  February
    2020, she was contemplating suicide and referral was made to the CRISIS
    team.  It was noted that  in  February  2019  the  appellant  was  very
    positive about not committing suicide but by  February  2020,  she  was
    contemplating suicide.


56. The appellant is receiving support  and  cooperates  with  the  medical
    authorities in the UK. When precautionary steps have had to  be  taken,
    those steps have been  taken  and  I  find  that   any  risk  upon  the
    appellant learning of any decision to remove her  would  be  adequately
    managed in the UK by the relevant authorities.  Any risk that manifests
    itself during removal, is capable of being managed  by  the  respondent
    and in the knowledge that no harm has come to the appellant, her son or
    her family, since the events of December 2016.


57. I therefore approach my assessment  on  the  basis  that  it  would  be
    possible for the respondent to return the appellant to Albania  without
    her coming to harm, but once there, she would be in the  hands  of  the
    mental health services in  Albania.  The  risk  here,  results  from  a
    naturally occurring illness.  I acknowledge that an  Article  3  claim,
    can in principle succeed, in a suicide case.


58. The Tribunal has found that the appellant has her parents,  a  brother,
    and her son in Albania and that she  would  have  the  support  of  her
    family on return.  It has also found the appellant  would  be  able  to
    seek  and  access  a  sufficiency  of  protection  from  the   Albanian
    authorities, that no action has been taken by AC against their  son  or
    her family members, and that the Facebook evidence does  not  show  any
    intent to target the appellant.  The fear that  the  appellant  has  is
    therefore  not  objectively  well-founded.   However,  I   accept   the
    appellant has a genuine fear, and I  must  therefore  consider  whether
    that genuinely held fear is such that it creates a risk of  suicide  if
    the appellant is returned to Albania.


59. Dr Galappathie expresses the opinion that  the  applicant's  return  to
    Albania is likely to lead to a significant deterioration in her  mental
    health.  Having  considered  the  Home  Office,  Country  Policy  Note,
    Albania:  mental  healthcare,  although  he  acknowledges   there   are
    treatments available within Albania for the appellant's current  mental
    health problems, he is concerned that she would  be  unable  to  engage
    with these treatments because her  mental  state  would  be  likely  to
    deteriorate given she fears being harmed by AC in Albania.   He  states
    the appellant needs to feel safe and secure in  order  to  be  able  to
    benefit from the treatment that she requires.


60. In his report, Dr Galappathie refers, at paragraph [32] to the  threats
    the appellant claimed to have received from AC on 16th  May  2020.   At
    paragraph [135], he  states  the  further  threats  the  appellant  has
    experienced will have acutely worsened her mental health  problems  and
    made her fearful of being harmed by him in the  future.   There  is  no
    reference by Dr Galappathie to  the  audio/video  recordings  that  the
    appellant claims to have made of her conversation with AC in May  2020,
    or to the exchange of WhatsApp message with a  female  claiming  to  be
    AC's partner.  In reaching his conclusions,  Dr  Galappathie  does  not
    consider the extent to which the appellant has been able to take steps,
    at her own instigation, to get in touch with AC and voice her concerns.
     I accept that any communication instigated by the appellant  with  AC,
    has been instigated from the safety of  the  UK,  but  her  ability  to
    contact AC  and  express  her  concerns  and  feelings  in  the  manner
    disclosed by the transcripts is a relevant factor  in  considering  her
    overall presentation.


61. I note that Dr Galappathie  states,  at  [133],  that  even  if  family
    support was available to the appellant, she would still fear harm  from
    AC leading to her mental  health  worsening.   In  that  paragraph,  Dr
    Galappathie was considering the abusive treatment the appellant claimed
    to have received from her family, and the  extent  to  which  that  has
    contributed to the appellant's  ongoing  mental  health  problems.   He
    accepts that  if,  as  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  found,  the
    appellant did have family support  in  Albania,  that  would  not  have
    contributed to her worsening  mental  health,  albeit  she  would  have
    suffered from the trauma that she  reports  due  to  the  problems  she
    encountered with AC.


62. In my judgement, in his final analysis, Dr Galappathie  fails  to  have
    adequate regard to the preserved findings of the Tribunal regarding the
    support that would be available to the appellant from her  family,  who
    supported her in the past, and the appellant's love and devotion to her
    son, which acted as an incentive to  the  appellant  in  the  past  and
    prevented the appellant from acting on her thoughts about self-harm  in
    2016.  They are all factors  that  would  in  my  judgment  act  as  an
    incentive for the appellant to engage  with  the  treatments  that  are
    available to her in Albania.  Similarly,  Dr  Galappathie  did  not  to
    consider the communications between the appellant and AC in  May  2020,
    and what they disclose about her presentation.  I accept the submission
    made by Ms Petterson that despite the appellant's vulnerability, on her
    own account, when she was concerned that her son was upset by something
    posted on Facebook by AC  in  May  2020,  the  appellant  was  able  to
    confront AC.  Although she did so from the security of the UK,  she  is
    likely to have been aware of the potential impact that would have  upon
    the safety of her brother, her son  and  her  family  in  Albania.  The
    appellant's family have not encountered any difficulties  from  AC  and
    neither has AC made any further attempt to contact the appellant.


63. I have very limited evidence  before  me  regarding  the  provision  of
    mental health care in Albania.  I note that at  paragraphs  [2.9.9]  to
    [2.9.38] of her  report  Dr  Tahiraj  sets  out  in  broad  terms,  the
    provision of mental health services in Albania, noting  in  particular,
    that mental health facilities in Tirana's  regions  are  still  heavily
    focused on institutional provision.  Dr Tahiraj is  unable  to  address
    the specific needs of the appellant, albeit she notes in general  terms
    that were the appellant  to  need  access  to  mental  health  services
    immediately upon return, she will face an extremely underfunded  health
    service, inadequately trained staff, poor quality service at best,  and
    at  worse  long-term  institutionalisation.  Dr  Tahiraj   states,   at
    [2.9.18], that the prospects of being able to access quality  care  are
    highly likely to be worse for the appellant, having no family  support.
    The Tribunal has found that the  appellant  has  her  parent's,  and  a
    brother in Albania and that she would have the support  of  her  family
    upon return.  Those findings impact upon the weight  I  attach  to  the
    evidence of Dr Tahiraj in that respect.   Dr  Galappathie  accepts,  at
    paragraph [151] of his report, that the background material  considered
    by him highlights there are treatments available within Albania for the
    appellant's current mental health problems. I prefer the evidence of Dr
    Galappathie  who  is  qualified  to  express  an  opinion   about   the
    appellant's mental health problems and the treatment that she is likely
    to require.


64. I have also had regard to the respondent's decision of  9th  July  2019
    and in particular, paragraphs [135] to [139] regarding the availability
    of mental health treatment in Albania.  As  I have  already  said,  any
    risk that manifests itself during removal itself, is capable  of  being
    managed by the respondent.  Having considered all the evidence  in  the
    round, I am quite satisfied that medical treatment and assistance would
    be available to the appellant in Albania, albeit not  to  the  standard
    available in the UK and that  the  appellant  has  every  incentive  to
    engage with the services available, as she has in the UK.  In  Albania,
    she will have the additional support of her family, and  the  appellant
    will  have  the  comfort  and  reassurance  that  is  provided  by  her
    relationship with her son.


65. The appellant's subjective fear arises in large part from the  incident
    in December 2016 when she was stabbed by AC.  The  appellant  does  not
    have a fear  of  the  Albanian  authorities  or  the  state  apparatus,
    including the police, officials or of those involved in  the  provision
    of healthcare.   The  Albanian  authorities  have  provided  sufficient
    protection to the appellant in the past and will undoubtedly do  so  in
    the future.  There is in my judgment no reason for the appellant to not
    engage with the treatment available with the stability and support  she
    will have from her family. I have found the appellant has not  received
    any genuine threat  directed  towards  her,  and  considering  all  the
    evidence in the round, giving due weight to the opinions  expressed  by
    Dr Galappathie, I do not accept that the genuine subjective  fear  held
    by the appellant, is such that it creates a risk of suicide  on  return
    to Albania.


66. In the end I am not satisfied that the appellant has  established  that
    there are substantial grounds for believing that she would face a  real
    risk of being exposed to  either  a  serious,  rapid  and  irreversible
    decline in  the  state  of  her  mental  health  resulting  in  intense
    suffering or the significant reduction in life expectancy as  a  result
    of either the absence of treatment or lack of access to such treatment.
     The 'suicide risk' is not in my judgement such that the removal of the
    appellant to Albania would be in breach of Article 3.


67. It follows that I dismiss the appeal.


Decision


   68. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed   V. Mandalia                Date              20th June 2021


 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia







