
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07369/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 February 2018                           |On 27 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                    M A R
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M West, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.  He  appeals,  with  the
    permission of the First-tier Tribunal, against a decision of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  Seelhoff,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  a
    decision of the respondent Secretary of State to refuse his  protection
    and human rights claims.

 2. The judge found the appellant had not established to the lower standard
    that he would be at  risk  on  return  to  Bangladesh  because  he  had
    witnessed a crime.  His  primary  finding  was  that  the  account  was
    untrue. He continued:

    "34. Even if the Appellant were telling the truth ... about the pending
         case I would not accept that he would be at risk  on  return  as  a
         consequence of being a witness  in  these  proceedings.  The  first
         thing that is apparent from the papers is that the police have been
         willing to investigate and  prosecute  the  attackers.  The  second
         thing to note is that the assault in question is a relatively minor
         one, effectively young men beating up a local rival.  The  injuries
         described whilst unpleasant are not especially serious and this  is
         the sort of assault case  that  might  not  necessarily  result  in
         prison time. The Appellant remained in  Bangladesh  for  two  years
         after the attack without ever being physically targeted himself and
         without being able to point to  specific  details  of  any  threats
         being made against him. It is important to note  that  one  of  the
         people accused is said to be a distant cousin of the Appellant  who
         knew his family. In those circumstances it seems likely that if the
         accused truly wanted  to  threaten  the  Appellant  or  locate  the
         Appellant they would have been able to do so but they did not.

    35.  I am not satisfied that the events that the  Appellant  claims  to
         have witnessed would be considered to be serious enough to  justify
         doing him serious harm to derail the proceedings particularly as he
         is just one of four witnesses  in  the  case  in  addition  to  the
         victim. The  Appellant's  insistence  that  he  is  at  risk  in  a
         situation like this actually undermines his credibility  as  it  is
         not a rational inference from the facts of this case."

 3. The judge concluded there was  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the
    appellant and he could live safely elsewhere  in  Bangladesh  to  avoid
    harm.

 4. The second limb of the appellant's claim related to his activities as a
    "blogger". The judge found it was unlikely anyone  could  identify  the
    appellant as the author of the posts he had made on Facebook.  Nor  was
    he satisfied the appellant had been  threatened  as  a  result  of  his
    posts.

 5. Regarding article 8, the judge found the appellant could not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the rules.

 6. Permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Andrew  to
    argue all ten points made in the grounds.

 7. No rule 24 response has been filed.

 8. I heard submissions from the representatives on the  issue  of  whether
    the judge's decision was erroneous. Mr West relied on most of  the  ten
    points set out in the grounds. Mr Bramble then  conceded  the  decision
    should be set aside and re-made. In the circumstances that the  parties
    have agreed to this outcome, it is  only  necessary  to  provide  brief
    reasons.

 9. In my judgment, there is much to commend in the judge's  reasoning  and
    it may well be that another judge hearing the case will come to similar
    conclusions. However, it is of fundamental importance to show that  all
    the evidence has been considered and understood.

10. There is confusion in  the  judge's  application  of  Ahmed  (Documents
    unreliable and forged) Pakistan [2002]  UKIAT  00439  Starred  (Tanveer
    Ahmed)  in  paragraph  32  of  the  decision   because   the   document
    verification report at annex F of the respondent's  bundle  appears  to
    show the documents do relate to a real case, albeit the author  of  the
    report misunderstood the nature of the appellant's claimed involvement.



11. The judge's conclusion in paragraph 36 that the police  would  be  able
    and  willing  to  offer  protection  did  not  take  into  account  the
    background evidence of police corruption and inefficiency.  It  may  be
    that the judge meant to say that he had had regard  to  the  background
    evidence cited in counsel's skeleton argument but, in the light of  the
    police's actions already in the case, this  was  insufficient  to  show
    protection to the Horvath [2000] UKHL 37 standard  was  not  available.
    However, the paragraph as worded does not make that clear.

12. The judge's questioning of the provenance of the  posts  the  appellant
    claims he made on Facebook overlooked the fact the reasons for  refusal
    letter accepted the appellant had submitted Facebook posts.

13. The judge's finding on the absence of threats to  the  appellant  as  a
    consequence of his posts was not made in the context of the  background
    evidence cited in counsel's skeleton argument and overlooked the threat
    contained in the post copied on page 52 of the appellant's bundle.

Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and  his
decision dismissing the appeal is set aside. The appeal must be heard  again
in the First-tier Tribunal by another judge with none  of  Judge  Seelhoff's
findings preserved.

An anonymity direction has been made.

Signed                                  Date 21 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
