
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07445/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd March 2020                    |On 20th March 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                   mr S.R.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a  protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, date of birth 18th  September
    1954.  He arrived in the UK on 11th September 2012 and  claimed  asylum
    on this date. The claim was refused by the Respondent for  the  reasons
    set out in a decision dated 30th January 2013.  An appeal against  that
    decision was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McAll,  for  the
    reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 15th March  2013.  Adverse
    credibility findings were made by Judge McAll.  In particular  he  made
    the following findings:

          i. the Appellant had not been arrested and detained in Sri  Lanka
             as claimed;

         ii. the Appellant was not  suspected  of  assisting  the  LTTE  as
             claimed; and

        iii. the Appellant did not leave Sri Lanka illegally as claimed

    Drawing these strands together the judge found the Appellant was not at
    any real risk of serious ill-treatment upon his return  to  Sri  Lanka.
    By 17th May 2013 the Appellant was appeal rights exhausted.

 2. In August 2013, February 2016 and April 2017 the Appellant made further
    submissions to the Respondent.  These applications  were  refused.   On
    20th December 2018 the Appellant lodged further submissions and  it  is
    these submissions which form the basis of the  matter  before  me.  The
    Appellant maintained that he feared to return to Sri Lanka  on  account
    of his previous connections to the LTTE, and in support  of  his  claim
    produced further documentary evidence which had  not  been  before  the
    original Tribunal. The further  documentary  evidence  consisted  of  a
    medical diagnosis ticket, letter from the Red Cross dated 2009,  and  a
    letter from a cousin stating that the Authorities  in  Sri  Lanka  were
    interested in knowing the whereabouts of the Appellant.

 3. The Appellant also claimed, in his further  submissions,  that  he  had
    been  involved  in  sur  place  political  activities  in  the  UK.  In
    furtherance of this claim the Appellant submitted a  witness  statement
    saying he had previously engaged in voluntary work for the TGTE.  In  a
    decision dated  16th  July  2019,  the  Respondent  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was a  "low  level  helper"  of  the  TGTE  whose  activities
    included local community  work.   The  Appellant  also  submitted  some
    photographs which, he claimed, showed his attendance at a demonstration
    on behalf of the TGTE.   Nonetheless,  the  Respondent  concluded  that
    there is no evidence that the Sri Lankan authorities are aware  of  the
    Appellant's sur place activities. Thus the  Respondent  concluded  that
    the Appellant would not be at risk upon return, and the application was
    refused.

The First-tier Tribunal

 4. The Appellant appealed the refusal and the matter  came  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lodge.  In a decision promulgated on  17th  October
    2019, the FtTJ dismissed  the  appeal.   He  heard  evidence  from  the
    Appellant and had before him the documentary evidence that  formed  the
    basis of the further submissions.  The FtTJ took as his starting  point
    the previous decision made by Judge McAll.  He made findings  that  the
    further evidence produced by the Appellant was not reliable and did not
    assist his claim that he had left Sri Lanka because of his  involvement
    with the LTTE.

 5. The FtTJ further  found  that  as  the  documentary  evidence  was  not
    reliable, it did not impact upon the findings made by Judge McAll.   He
    also discounted the evidence put forward by the Appellant regarding his
    TGTE membership as "an entirely self-serving project" [43].

 6. The Appellant challenges the decision on a number of grounds which  are
    best summarised by reference to First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane's grant
    of permission to appeal dated 9th December 2019, as follows:

         "The judge arguably failed to take into consideration evidence
         which might materially have borne on a resolution of the issue of
         the appellant's credibility and accordingly on the outcome of the
         appeal.  The judge accorded weight to the previous decision of a
         First-tier Tribunal Judge as the judge was bound to do.  The judge
         then went on to consider further evidence submitted by the
         appellant at paragraphs 22 to 38 inclusive of the decision.  The
         judge concluded that upon his return to Sri Lanka the appellant
         would not come to the adverse attention of the authorities.  Before
         arriving at such a finding the judge did not consider background
         evidence of conditions prevailing in Sri Lanka to which the author
         of the grounds copiously referred.  In fairness to the judge at
         paragraph 40 of the decision the judge did refer to background
         evidence when considering a specific submission made by Counsel for
         the appellant.  However, by then the judge had already rejected the
         appellant's core claims which concerned material which came into
         existence after the date of the first Tribunal Judge and the judge
         arguably should have taken into consideration the background
         evidence before arriving at a finding that the appellant had not
         given a credible account that at the date of the hearing before the
         judge the Sri Lankan authorities would entertain an adverse
         interest in him."

 7. Permission having been granted the matter comes  before  me  to  assess
    whether the decision discloses an error of  law,  and  to  re-make  the
    decision or remit to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing if  I  find
    an error.

Error of Law Hearing

 8. At the hearing before me at the Tribunal, Mrs Aboni  acknowledged  that
    there was no Rule 24 response,  but  she  was  seeking  to  defend  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. In his submissions Mr Howard sought to rely on the grounds of appeal as
    drafted.  He handed up the most recent CPIN fact finding mission on Sri
    Lanka dated  20th  January  2020.   He  said  that  he  would  rely  in
    particular on 4.1.1 and 4.3 of that document.

10. The main thrust of his submissions centred on  the  FtTJ's  credibility
    findings relating to the further evidence which had been  submitted  to
    the Tribunal.  Mr Howard said that the FtTJ had discounted the  further
    evidence as being not credible.   In  doing  so  the  judge  had  dealt
    unfairly with the Appellant because it was clear that  he  had  reached
    his credibility  findings  without  first  looking  at  the  background
    evidence which had been submitted.  The judge had therefore  failed  in
    his task of looking at the evidence in the round.

11. Mr Howard said, as the grant of permission pointed out, that there  was
    a great deal of background evidence which had  been  submitted  on  the
    Appellant's  behalf  and  it  appeared  that  the  judge   had   simply
    sidestepped that evidence. This had led  the  judge  to  make  findings
    which were outwith a consideration of all of the evidence  put  forward
    in support of the Appellant's claim.  This is the wrong approach.

12. Mr Howard then referred to the judge's findings at [43] which, he  said
    was simply wrong.  In view of the background material,  the  judge  has
    failed to provide adequate reasons for  concluding,  as  he  did,  that
    there are no grounds to find that the Appellant is likely to be stopped
    or questioned at the airport in Sri Lanka.  That  is  contrary  to  the
    Respondent's own CPIN which  agrees  that  failed  asylum  seekers  are
    likely to be questioned at the airport. There are no findings  made  on
    the credibility or otherwise of the Appellant's membership of the  TGTE
    and thus no consideration of  whether  the  extent  of  his  membership
    places him at risk on return. The decision was therefore unsustainable;
    it should be set aside and remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

13. In her submissions, Mrs Aboni said that the FtTJ had  directed  himself
    appropriately.  He had  referred  to  Judge  McAll's  decision  as  the
    starting point and had given consideration  to  the  previous  evidence
    which had been before that judge.  The FtTJ  had  made  findings  which
    were adequately reasoned.   Those  findings  showed  that  the  further
    documentary evidence put forward on behalf of the Appellant  could  not
    be relied upon. It was open to the judge to  find  therefore  that  the
    Appellant had no significant role in the LTTE such as to bring  him  to
    the notice of the authorities on return.  The decision was  sustainable
    and should stand.

Discussion

14. I find that  I  am  persuaded  that  there  is  force  in  Mr  Howard's
    submissions. I find that the judge  has  correctly  used  the  previous
    decision as his starting point in his consideration of the  credibility
    of the Appellant's claim.  He sought to measure  the  further  evidence
    that had been submitted against the findings made by Judge McAll in his
    decision.   The  difficulty  is  that  he  has  performed   that   task
    incompletely.

15. FtTJ Lodge has clearly made reference to those  aspects  of  the  newly
    submitted evidence that were specific to the Appellant's  circumstances
    e.g. the medical diagnosis ticket, vehicle registration  document  etc.
    [22-38].  However I am unable to see that the  FtTJ  has  brought  into
    this equation  a  consideration  of  the  background  evidence  of  the
    conditions prevailing in Sri Lanka. This  is  evidence  that  was  also
    submitted on the Appellant's behalf.  It is  vital  that  the  specific
    evidence is considered in the context  of  the  general.   Therefore  I
    cannot discount that, had a proper consideration  of  all  the  further
    evidence been undertaken, it may  have  led  to  different  credibility
    findings being made.

16. I am reinforced in this view by the judge's findings at  [43].   Having
    found against the Appellant so far as the further evidence that related
    to the period that predated his arrival in the  UK  is  concerned,  the
    judge appears thereafter to have lost focus  with  regard  to  risk  on
    return.  At [42] the judge says the following:

         "Judge McAll previously found there were no grounds for  suspecting
         that the Appellant was involved in LTTE activity or that  he  would
         be suspected of such activity. That was on the basis that he had no
         connection to the LTTE in Sri Lanka and  had  not  left  Sri  Lanka
         illegally."

17. Further at [43], the judge makes a finding:

         "I am satisfied there are no grounds to find that the appellant  is
         likely to be stopped or questioned at the airport in Sri Lanka.  In
         any event, I am satisfied that even if that  was  the  case,  given
         that the appellant had no connection with the LTTE  in  Sri  Lanka,
         his membership of the TGTE is  an  entirely  self-serving  project,
         being undertaken simply to bolster his asylum claim."

18. It has always been the Appellant's claim that he is  a  member  of  the
    TGTE.  Indeed at [43] the judge seems to accept that to  be  the  case.
    It is the Respondent's case that the Appellant is a  low  level  member
    and therefore not at risk of detection. The FtTJ seems  to  agree  with
    that.  However I find it is difficult  to  see  the  reasoning  process
    which led him to  the  conclusion  that  he  made,  that  is  that  the
    Appellant's membership of the TGTE is  entirely  self-serving.  I  find
    that there has been insufficient analysis of the evidence  relating  to
    this part of the Appellant's claim.

19. As Mr Howard pointed out, the Respondent's own CPIN note  (referred  to
    by the judge at [40]) sets out that  returning  failed  asylum  seekers
    would likely be questioned at the airport by immigration officials  and
    may be passed to the criminal investigation department (CID)  based  at
    the airport. The Appellant's position needs to be fully considered even
    if it ultimately leads to a conclusion that his claim is self serving.

20. For the foregoing reasons therefore I find that the decision of the FtT
    cannot stand and it must be set aside  and  reheard.   I  did  consider
    whether I was able to preserve any of the findings made by the FtTJ but
    on reflection I conclude it would be unsafe to do so. The  matter  will
    be remitted for  a  further  hearing  de  novo  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 17th October 2019  is
set aside for material error. The decision will be remitted  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal (not Judge Lodge) for that Tribunal to re-make the decision.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts   Date 14 March 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

