

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07434/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th May 2017                       |On 12th May 2017                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                    MD M R
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
 ANONYMITY ORDER MADE

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Hyder   (Simon Noble solicitors)

For the Respondent: Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this matter is Mr MR. I shall refer to the parties  as
    "the appellant" and "the respondent." This is an error of law  hearing.
    The appellant appeals against a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Oliver)("FTT") promulgated on 1st  March  2017   in  which   the
    appeal was dismissed on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.

Background

2.    The Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.   He  appealed  on  the
    grounds of his sexuality, that he was gay and would face persecution on
    return to Bangladesh where  homosexuality  is  criminalised.   The  FTT
    accepted that appellant's claim that he was gay but found that he faced
    no real risk on return. The FTT found that the  appellant  was  not  an
    activist campaigner for gay rights, that there was a buoyant gay  scene
    in Bangladesh and that the appellant would be able to  live  openly  in
    Bangladesh [28].


Grounds of appeal

3.  In grounds of  appeal  the  appellant  argued  that  the  FTT  erred  by
    failing to consider the guidance in HJ(Iran) as to risk on return,  the
    background material and other  evidence.   The  FTT  made  inconsistent
    findings as to risk on return by finding the appellant was not at  risk
    because he was not an activist in gay rights.

Permission to appeal

4.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  (UT)  was  granted  by  DFTJ
    Macdonald on 24th March 2017.  In granting permission  the  DUTJ  found
    that the FTT's findings on the critical issues were brief [28] and that
    it was arguable that the  FTT  failed  to  consider  all  the  relevant
    background material and failed to properly apply (HJ(Iran)).

Rule 24 response

5. The respondent opposed the appeal and argued  that  the  FTT  found  that
    there was discrimination but not persecution in Bangladesh.  There is a
    buoyant gay scene on the internet and  the appellant would be  able  to
    live there openly.

Submisssions

6. At the hearing before me Mr Hyder  argued that the  FTT  found  that  the
    appellant would be perceived as gay and face persecution  [26].   There
    was ample background evidence to show that there was  a  real  risk  in
    Bangladesh and the FTT failed to specifically engage  with  the  issues
    raised in HJ(Iran).    Mr Hyder relied on his grounds of appeal and his
    skeleton argument together with background material.  The FTT  made  no
    clear findings on the risk from the appellant's family  (paragraph  4.2
    grounds). The  critical  issue  was  whether  in  the  event  that  the
    appellant lived openly he would  face  persecution.   Whilst  accepting
    that section 377 of the Criminal Code in Bangladesh was rarely if  ever
    enforced the authorities in Bangladesh used other sections of  the  law
    against LGBT persons.

7.  In response Mr Tufan contended that the FTT made  no  error  because  it
    dealt with the issues of risk on return albeit briefly at  [28].   Much
    of the material relied on by the appellant was  historical.   Mr  Tufan
    relied on the 2016 Home office guidance. The appellant would be able to
    live in Dhaka where there was a gay community and the  appellant  would
    face no risk.  The background evidence relied on by the  appellant  was
    not objective.

8.    Mr Hyder responded that the appellant relied  on  background  material
    that had also been used as a reliable source by the Home  office.   The
    appellant would not be protected by the police if he were harmed by non
    state agents. The appellant's case was presented on the basis  that  he
    was beaten by his uncle and that  he  feared  recriminations  from  his
    family and  Islamists.

Discussion and conclusion

 9.   I decided that there was a material error of law in the  decision  and
reasons.  The FTT assessment of the critical issue of  risk  on  return  was
dealt with very briefly and appears to have been  decided  on  the  discrete
issue that the appellant was not an activist and therefore  would  not  face
ill treatment even if he lived openly as a gay man.  The FTT  made  specific
reference to HJ(Iran) at [26] finding that the appellant was  gay  and  will
be persecuted on return. In the  following  paragraphs  the  FTT  considered
background material.  There was no proper analysis  with  reference  to  the
guidance in HJ(Iran)  which in my view amounts to a material error  in  law.
 Whilst accepting that an activist would undoubtedly  face  a  risk  of  ill
treatment that is  by  no  means  the  whole  picture  as  set  out  in  the
background material.

10.  There is a material error of law in the decision  which  shall  be  set
aside in so far as the FTT fails to deal with risk on return at [28].

Re making the decision

11.  I heard submissions from both representatives as to  the  applicability
of the guidance in HJ(Iran).  There is  no  country  guidance  case  dealing
with the issue of sexual orientation in  Bangladesh.  It  is  accepted  that
homosexuality is criminalised but that  section 377 of  the  Penal  code  is
not enforced  to prosecute  gay  persons.   I  conclude  that  there  is  no
evidence of any systematic and sustained persecution by  the  State.   There
is some level of discrimination and harassment towards gay  persons  by  law
enforcement officers and the public.  It is accepted by the respondent  that
LGBT persons form a Particular social group(PSG) but that  the  question  to
be considered will be  whether  or  not  the  particular  person  will  face
persecution  on  account  of  membership  of  that  group.   This   involves
consideration of whether or not a gay person will be  able  to  live  freely
and  openly  and  if  not  why  not.   The  Home  office  guidance  entitled
Bangladesh: sexual orientation  and  gender  identity  2016  concludes  that
there is no real risk of prosecution under the law (paragraph  2.3.7),  with
which I agree. However, I  have  considered  the  guidance  at  6.2.2  which
quotes the USSD report 2015 "Although the law that  criminalises  homosexual
relationships is not systematically applied it reinforces a general  climate
of homophobia and  impunity  for  those  who  persecute   LGBT  individuals.
Moreover the law  is  applied  in  an  unofficial  manner  without  recorded
prosecution by state and non state agents".   The background  evidence  also
establishes that gay people do not report incidents to the police  for  fear
of having to reveal their sexuality (7.1.1).  Further a Human  rights  watch
report April 2016 found that  LGBT  persons  interviewed  stated  that  they
faced  threats  of  violence,  particularly  after  homophobic  comments  by
Islamic leaders and  that  activists  were  at  particular  risk  for  their
personal safety (7.1.7).  Whilst there is also reference  to  the  existence
of a gay community  in  Dhaka,  it  is  not  described  as  public  or  open
community.  Having considered  the  evidence  in  the  light  of  the  FTT's
conclusion that the appellant is  gay  and  that  he  will  live  openly  in
Bangladesh,  it is my view that in so doing he faces a real  risk  from  non
state  agents  of  persecutory  behaviour  including  violence  from  family
members for which there is no sufficient state protection. The FTT  accepted
the appellant's evidence as credible and whilst making no specific  findings
about his family and the threats made,  I proceed  on  the  basis  that  the
appellant's claim in its entirety was accepted by the FTT. On  the  evidence
the appellant would not be able to live openly in his home area nor  in  any
other place in Bangladesh where he faces a risk from non  state  agents  and
there is inadequate State protection given the background evidence that  the
police act with impunity and act  unofficially in law  enforcement.  I  have
also taken into account the background evidence that shows social  exclusion
is prevalent in society and  that  fundamentalist  values  have  created  an
environment where the gay  community  is  prevented  from  living  freely  (
Global Human rights defence report 2015 2.2.2).  I  am  satisfied  that  the
limbs in HJ(Iran ) are made out and that the appellant will not be  able  to
live freely or openly in Bangladesh for fear of persecution.

Decision

12. I allow the appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.






                               Signed                     Date 11th May
                                   2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


NO FEE AWARD






                               Signed                     Date 11th May
                                   2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


