

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/07101/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 27 April 2017                |                                |
|Prepared on 3 May 2017          |on 11 May 2017                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    R. M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iraq,  entered  the  United  Kingdom
           illegally and claimed asylum on 24 May  2014.  That  application
           was refused on 6 August 2004, and the Appellant's appeal against
           that decision  was  dismissed  by  decision  of  an  Adjudicator
           promulgated on 17 December 2004 [E1].
        2. On 31 July 2007 the Appellant lodged further submissions. Before
           they were  considered  or  determined  by  the  Respondent,  the
           Appellant was convicted on 4 September 2009  of  an  offence  of
           possession of a sharply pointed blade in a public place, so that
           on 23 October 2009 he was sentenced  to  an  immediate  term  of
           thirty months imprisonment. He was as a  result  served  with  a
           notice  of  liability  to  deportation  which  prompted  further
           submissions to  the  Respondent  on  28  February  2011  and  20
           December 2011. At the same time the Appellant was  convicted  of
           another offence, but that second conviction was overturned  upon
           appeal and thus no more need be said about it.
        3. On 30 March 2012 the Appellant was  served  with  a  deportation
           order and the reasons for the decision to make it. His appeal to
           the First  tier  Tribunal  ["FtT"]  against  that  decision  was
           dismissed by decision promulgated on 18 July 2012 [N1]. Although
           granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal his challenge
           based upon the approach taken by the FtT to the  fact  that  the
           second conviction had been quashed, and section 72 of  the  2002
           Act, was dismissed by decision  of  a  Vice  Presidential  panel
           promulgated on 14 May 2013 [Q1].
        4. The Appellant then submitted further representations on 11  July
           2013  which  were  treated  as  an  application  to  revoke  the
           deportation order. That was refused on 25 February 2014, and the
           application was certified as clearly unfounded by  reference  to
           section 94 of the 2002  Act.  On  15  April  2014  he  submitted
           further representations, which were rejected on 27 May 2014. Yet
           further representations were submitted on 17 October 2014 and  5
           May 2016, and these prompted  a  formal  decision  to  refuse  a
           protection and human rights claim on 28 June 2016.
        5. It was the decision of 28 June 2016 that was the subject  of  an
           appeal to the FtT on 10 November 2016, and which was allowed  on
           Article 8 grounds by decision promulgated  on  19  January  2017
           because of the Appellant's  mental  health,  the  other  grounds
           having been dismissed.
        6. Of 8 February 2017 the  Respondent  was  granted  permission  to
           appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis it  was  arguable  the
           FtT had erred in its approach to the Article  8  appeal.  Having
           dismissed  the  Article  3  appeal  because  the  relevant  high
           threshold was not met, and since there was no reference  to  the
           guidance to be found in GS (India) & Others v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA
           Civ 40, it was considered arguable the Article 8 appeal had been
           allowed on the basis of an impermissible comparison between  the
           health services available in Iraq with those  available  in  the
           UK.
        7. The Appellant has filed no Rule 24 Notice  in  relation  to  the
           grant of permission to the Appellant, and has lodged  no  cross-
           appeal, and has made no application to adduce  further  evidence
           to the Upper Tribunal.
        8. Thus the matter comes before me.


      The Appellant's protection claim
        9. The Judge delivered his decision in advance of the  guidance  to
           be found in BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT  18.  It
           is plain from the Tribunal file that the appeal was not advanced
           on the basis that the Appellant faced a risk of harm in  Baghdad
           simply as a Sunni Kurd;  no  evidence  or  submissions  to  that
           effect having been advanced to the FtT. Indeed the Judge records
           that Ms Cleghorn (who also appeared below) expressly declined to
           pursue any argument by reference to the Refugee Convention.
       10. The Judge cannot be criticised for failing to deal with  matters
           that were not advanced before him, and in  any  event  no  cross
           appeal has been  raised  in  the  light  of  BA.  I  refused  Ms
           Cleghorn's  unparticularised  oral  application  to   lodge   an
           application for permission to cross appeal  out  of  time,  made
           during the course of her submissions in response to those of the
           Respondent. No good reason  was  offered  for  the  Tribunal  to
           extend time for such an application, and it was quite clear that
           no thought had been given in advance of the commencement of  the
           hearing to whether such an application should be made, or indeed
           to what the grounds for such an application might be.
       11. The only risk of serious harm identified by the Appellant to the
           Adjudicator in 2004 arose because he had claimed that his family
           was involved in a blood feud with another family. Both  families
           were said to be based in Kirkuk,  the  city  the  Appellant  had
           always identified as  his  home.  The  Appellant's  evidence  in
           relation to the alleged blood feud was  rejected  as  untrue  in
           2004, but the FtT, correctly, felt obliged  to  deal  with  this
           issue once again because it was a matter raised once more by the
           Appellant in the course of his evidence. Once again the  account
           of a blood feud was rejected as  untrue  [42-5].  The  Appellant
           identified no other risk of persecution for a Refugee Convention
           reason to the FtT.
       12. Through his representatives the Appellant did argue that  Kirkuk
           remained, at the date of hearing in November 2016, one of  those
           areas within Iraq that was subject to a state of internal  armed
           conflict, so that there were substantial grounds  for  believing
           that any civilian returned there would be at real risk  of  harm
           simply by their  presence,  for  the  purposes  of  a  claim  to
           humanitarian protection. It would appear from the Tribunal  file
           that the  Judge  was  not  alerted,  by  either  party,  to  the
           existence of the August 2016 COI  reports  that  indicated  that
           although this was undoubtedly once true of  Kirkuk,  it  was  no
           longer the position generally in  Kirkuk  by  the  date  of  the
           hearing.
       13. Whilst that is a matter of concern, I am satisfied that  nothing
           turns on it because the Judge concluded that  he  was  bound  to
           take as his starting point the conclusion of the FtT in 2012, as
           confirmed by the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  2013,  that
           the  Appellant  was  excluded  from  a  grant  of   humanitarian
           protection as a result of the operation of  section  72  of  the
           2002 Act, following his sentence to  a  term  of  thirty  months
           imprisonment, and the failure to rebut the presumptions therein.
           Having examined the evidence before him the Judge concluded that
           he was  not  satisfied  that  he  should  revisit  the  previous
           findings of the Tribunal and reach any contrary  view.  Thus  he
           proceeded on the basis that the Appellant had been convicted  of
           a particularly serious crime, and, that he was a danger  to  the
           community. Neither party suggests he made any error in  reaching
           that conclusion.
       14. As a result of the available evidence  upon  the  issue  of  the
           Iraqi identity documents held by the Appellant and  his  ability
           to obtain the issue of further documents the Judge  went  on  to
           conclude that the Appellant's return to Iraq was not feasible.
       15. Thus, for all these reasons, the humanitarian protection  ground
           of appeal that was advanced before the FtT was dismissed.
       16. The claim that the Appellant faced a real risk of  a  breach  of
           his Article 3 rights was also dismissed. The claim based upon  a
           blood feud having been rejected as untrue, the  second  limb  to
           the Article 3 claim was the Appellant's  current  mental  health
           and the foreseeable consequences of cessation or interruption to
           the treatment he enjoyed in the UK.
       17. That second limb to  the  Article  3  claim  was  also  rejected
           following an analysis of the  medical  evidence  that  had  been
           placed before the FtT (which  included  the  evidence  that  the
           Appellant had not engaged with the  counselling  treatment  that
           had been offered to him, although he was said to be  taking  the
           medication prescribed to him) in the light of the guidance to be
           found in N v UK [2008] 47 EHRR 39 and Paposhvili v Belgium (Appn
           41738/10, 13.12.16).
       18. In the course of reviewing the medical evidence the FtT accepted
           that the Appellant did suffer from a significant mental  illness
           for which he was receiving treatment, and that there was a  real
           risk given the state of healthcare in  Iraq,  and  his  lack  of
           documentation, and his vulnerability, that he would be unable to
           access appropriate treatment in Iraq even if it were  available.
           An inability to access treatment upon return would be likely  to
           cause his health to deteriorate. Additionally  the  humanitarian
           problems  faced  by  IDPs   would   be   magnified   given   his
           vulnerability and the social stigma attached to  mental  illness
           [60]. Nevertheless, on the available evidence, it was  concluded
           that the Appellant's position did not pass the  high  Article  3
           threshold because any deterioration would not be serious, rapid,
           and irreversible, resulting in intense suffering [62].
       19. Again neither  party  suggests  the  Judge  made  any  error  in
           reaching that conclusion.


        The Appellant's Article 8 claim
       20. The Judge rejected as untrue the Appellant's claim made  in  the
           course of his evidence that he  was  genuinely  in  a  committed
           relationship with the British citizen he identified  [65-6].  In
           doing so the Judge noted the absence of any evidence, written or
           oral from the individual in question. There was no  other  basis
           advanced to the Judge upon which the Appellant claimed  to  have
           established "family life" in the UK for the purposes of  Article
           8.
       21. It followed therefore  that  any  Article  8  claim  could  only
           succeed on the basis of the right to respect for the Appellant's
           "private life". That begged the question of what its true nature
           and strength was. Although the Appellant  had  asserted  in  his
           witness statement of 1 November 2016 that  he  had  developed  a
           "very strong private life" in the UK  I  am  satisfied  that  he
           entirely failed in his evidence before the FtT  to  identify  in
           the proper level of detail its nature.  There  was  no  material
           therefore upon which the Judge could have concluded that it  had
           any particular substance beyond the treatment he  was  receiving
           for his mental health.
       22. Indeed I am satisfied that the  Appellant's  case  was  advanced
           quite baldly in this respect. It is however possible to identify
           that once his claim to  have  a  girlfriend  was  rejected,  the
           Appellant's case in  relation  to  his  "private  life"  was  in
           reality limited to his mere presence in the  UK  for  13  years,
           and, the medical treatment he continued to receive from time  to
           time for his  mental  health  in  the  form  of  the  prescribed
           medication which he took. There was no  evidence  of  any  close
           relationship with a counsellor, because the  Appellant  had  not
           engaged  with  counselling.  Nor  did  the  evidence  extend  to
           demonstrating a close relationship with, or  regular  attendance
           upon, a general practitioner. Nor did the evidence identify  any
           friend(s) upon whom he depended for support when  his  mood  was
           low, or when the symptoms of his mental illness affected him.
       23. The Judge noted that the Appellant's  presence  in  the  UK  had
           throughout been unlawful, deriving as it  had  from  an  illegal
           entry in May 2004, and that although his presence in the UK  had
           endured for 13 years, that period did not amount to half of  the
           Appellant's life.
       24. In  all  the  circumstances  the  Judge  concluded,  undoubtedly
           correctly, that the Appellant derived  no  benefit  from  either
           paragraph 399 or 399A of the Immigration Rules [68].
       25. The Judge made no reference to section 117A-D of the  2002  Act,
           and the clear public interest in the Appellant's removal, in the
           course of his decision. That was undoubtedly an  error,  because
           both  section  117B(4)  and  section  117C(3)  applied  to   the
           Appellant; even if it were not material because the Judge can be
           taken to have had  the  correct  principles  in  mind  from  his
           reference to paragraphs 398, 399 and  399A  of  the  Immigration
           Rules.
       26. The result of the application of  section  117B(4)  and  section
           117C(3) was that Parliament had directed that little weight  was
           to be given to any "private life" the Appellant had  established
           whilst  present  unlawfully.  Since  the   Appellant   had   not
           established that either Exception 1 or Exception  2  applied  to
           him, the public interest required his  deportation.  That  could
           not however be the end of the matter, since "little  weight"  is
           not to be equated with "no weight".
       27. The relevant medical evidence placed before the FtT were the two
           reports dated 6 August 2014, and 28 December 2015, of Dr Quinton
           Deely, a Consultant Psychiatrist. Although Ms Cleghorn  asserted
           in the course of  her  submissions  to  me  that  this  was  not
           evidence that had been relied upon by the Appellant  in  support
           of his appeal, it is, as I pointed out  to  her,  impossible  to
           reconcile that assertion with the fact that the 2015 report  was
           served upon the FtT by fax from his solicitors on the day of the
           hearing, and the 2014 report was served upon the  Respondent  in
           the course of the submissions made on his behalf on 5  May  2016
           [V1].
       28. Again, although Ms  Cleghorn  asserted  in  the  course  of  her
           submissions to me that these  were  reports  prepared  upon  the
           Appellant at the instigation of the Respondent as  part  of  her
           duty to assess the Appellant's suitability for detention, it  is
           impossible to reconcile that assertion with the introductions to
           the two reports, which make it quite clear that  Dr  Deeley  was
           instructed on  the  Appellant's  behalf  to  offer  his  opinion
           evidence as part of the preparation for a claim for  damages  by
           way of  compensation  for  the  decline  in  mental  health  the
           Appellant claimed had resulted  from  one  or  more  periods  of
           immigration detention (as opposed to his imprisonment), and,  in
           an  effort  to  prevent  any  further  period   of   immigration
           detention.
       29. It is in my judgement quite clear from  those  reports  that  Dr
           Deeley was not informed in the course  of  his  instructions  on
           behalf of the Appellant that the FtT had rejected as untrue  the
           Appellant's claim to be involved in a blood feud with the family
           of his sister's husband. Equally it is quite  clear  from  those
           reports that Dr Deeley did not attempt to undertake any analysis
           of the medical facilities the Appellant might be able to  access
           in the event of his future deportation to Iraq. Contrary  to  Ms
           Cleghorn's submissions, Dr Deeley did not  offer  evidence  upon
           whether anti psychotic medication was available either  in  Iraq
           generally, or, in Baghdad in particular. (I  am  satisfied  that
           there was no  obvious  need  to  consider  the  availability  of
           counselling because Dr Deeley recorded that  the  Appellant  had
           not engaged with such treatment when it had been offered to  him
           in the UK.)
       30. Dr Deeley's opinion  was  that  the  focus  of  the  Appellant's
           paranoid psychotic was upon UKBA, and in consequence upon  those
           individuals he perceived to be  its  officers  and  agents.  The
           Appellant claimed to believe that UKBA had planted a  device  in
           his head, and, that UKBA were seeking to provoke  and  humiliate
           him to the point that he became so mentally unwell that he would
           kill himself. That begged the question of how he  would  respond
           after removal to Iraq. This was not  an  issue  that  Dr  Deeley
           engaged with in the first report. The extent to which he did  so
           in the second report is limited to  the  short  conclusion  that
           because the Appellant believed he would face a murder attempt in
           a blood feud, the anxiety and sense of  helplessness  associated
           with his removal  would  most  likely  cause  his  condition  to
           deteriorate.
       31. There is no criticism on the part of the Judge in the course  of
           his  decision  to  the  approach  taken  by  Dr  Deeley  to  the
           information available, and the Respondent for her part does  not
           seek before me to criticise the Judge's thorough analysis of the
           medical evidence that was placed before him.
       32. It was common ground before the FtT that failure of a protection
           claim on health grounds under  Article  3  did  not  necessarily
           entail failure of a claim on health ground under Article 8,  and
           the Respondent's challenge does not suggest otherwise. Not every
           action which adversely affects moral or physical integrity  will
           interfere  disproportionately  with  the  right  to  respect  to
           private life guaranteed by Article  8,  although  mental  health
           must be regarded as a crucial part of private  life,  since  the
           preservation   of   mental   stability   is   an   indispensable
           precondition to effective enjoyment of the right to  respect  to
           private life; Bensaid v UK [2001] 33 EHRR 205.
       33. It is however instructive to recall that Mr Bensaid  was  unable
           to demonstrate a violation of his Article 8 rights in the  event
           of his removal from the UK to Algeria as a result of any  likely
           future  deterioration  in  his  serious  psychotic  illness   of
           schizophrenia. That conclusion was reached despite the fact that
           the condition was managed in the UK by medication, and his claim
           that it would relapse in the event of his removal, and  that  he
           would be unable to access the same  level  of  medical  care  in
           Algeria so that any relapse would not be adequately treated. His
           ability in practice to access within Algeria the  same  drug  he
           received in the UK, and which  he  would  need  to  continue  to
           access in Algeria to avoid deterioration in  his  condition  was
           said to be imponderable. Thus the effect of the removal was said
           to be highly likely to result in a deterioration in  his  mental
           health, but even so his circumstances did not result in a breach
           of his Article 8 rights.
       34. As explained in GS, and in MM (Zimbabwe) [2012]  EWCA  Civ  279,
           once an Article 3 claim based on health grounds has  failed,  an
           Article 8 claim based on health grounds cannot  prosper  without
           some separate or additional factual element sufficient to engage
           Article 8. Thus, a claim based simply upon the inadequacy of the
           medical facilities available in the country of return  is  bound
           to fail. It is the acknowledged failure of  the  Judge  to  make
           reference to this jurisprudence that is said by  the  Respondent
           to demonstrate the error of law in the approach to the Article 8
           claim that requires me to set aside the decision and  to  remake
           it.
       35. I note that Ms Cleghorn on behalf of the Appellant  argues  that
           the failure is immaterial, and in  the  alternative  that  there
           should be a remittal to the FtT for the appeal to be reheard  in
           its entirety. Neither argument has merit. It is quite plain from
           the submissions made that the ambition is simply to  reopen  the
           Article 3 appeal. There is no need to make any further  findings
           of primary fact  in  relation  to  the  Article  8  appeal,  the
           decision can be remade on the basis of the unchallenged findings
           of fact of the FtT.
       36. The rationale for the application of Article 8 to mental  health
           cases was identified  in  GS  as  "the  preservation  of  mental
           stability  is  an  indispensable   precondition   to   effective
           enjoyment of  the  right  to  respect  for  private  life".  The
           reasoning identified in Bensaid  being that mental stability  is
           integral to an individual's identity  and/or  their  ability  to
           function socially as a person. In MM it was noted that since the
           decision in Bensaid it was not possible to identify any  example
           of a successful  Article  8  claim  in  a  mental  health  case,
           following failure of an Article 3 claim. I take that however  to
           be a comment in relation to the outcome of  the  proportionality
           balancing exercise, rather than a comment upon whether Article 8
           was in principle engaged by the particular circumstances of  any
           individual claimant.
       37. The claimant in MM had a history of serious mental illness,  and
           he too had been diagnosed with a psychotic illness, most  likely
           schizophrenia. With a break in the continuity of  the  treatment
           he received in the UK there was a substantial risk  of  relapse,
           and with each relapse his baseline level  of  functioning  would
           deteriorate. Thus the prognosis upon deportation to Zimbabwe was
           considered to be extremely poor because he would receive neither
           appropriate  medication,  nor  support.  The  Tribunal  was  not
           satisfied that he had established "family life" in the  UK,  and
           identified his "private life" as not  arising  because  of  work
           friendships or social ties, but because of his  dependency  upon
           family members, his clinicians, and prescribed medication  as  a
           result of his illness. Thus the Tribunal turned to the  question
           of proportionality, recognising  that  this  was  a  deportation
           case, and so balancing  his  interests  against  the  legitimate
           public interest in the prevention of crime, rather  than  simply
           in the maintenance of effective immigration controls.
       38. There are in my judgement two potential points of distinction in
           principle between the position of this Appellant and that of the
           claimant in  MM.  Both  suggest  however  that  the  balance  of
           proportionality in  this  case  is  tipped  more  in  favour  of
           deportation than it  was  in  MM.  First  the  Judge  found  the
           Appellant had failed to rebut the presumptions that he had  been
           convicted of a particularly serious crime, and, that he posed  a
           danger to the community. No such findings were made in  relation
           to the claimant in MM. Second, the evidence  did  not  establish
           that the Appellant's illness was pivotal to, or a central  cause
           of his offending, whereas that was the position of the  claimant
           in MM.
       39. In MM the Court of Appeal concluded that the Upper Tribunal  had
           erred not in the approach taken to whether Article 8 was engaged
           as a result of the "private life" of the claimant, but the Upper
           Tribunal had erred in then becoming diverted from  an  important
           aspect of the issue of whether it was proportionate  to  deport,
           through a failure to engage with the evidence that the offending
           was the result of the illness. That had resulted in a failure to
           reach clear conclusions upon whether there was a continuing risk
           of further offending, given the illness was well  controlled  by
           the medication he had subsequently received.  That  is  not  the
           position in this case, as the Judge's findings  in  relation  to
           section 72 of the 2002 Act identified.
       40. In MM attention was drawn to the jurisprudence  that  emphasised
           how exceptional the circumstances would  have  to  be  before  a
           disproportionate breach of Article 8 was established,  with  the
           caution that it was not easy to think of a foreign  health  care
           case that could succeed under Article 8 if it had  failed  under
           Article 3. The "no obligation to treat" principle had  to  apply
           equally to Article 8 cases as it did to Article 3 cases.  In  my
           judgement these comments go to the proper approach to  be  taken
           to the issue of proportionality, and not merely to the issue  of
           whether or  not  a  claimant  established  that  Article  8  was
           engaged. Thus Moses LJ concluded;
                 "The only cases I can foresee where the absence of adequate
                 medical treatment in the country to which a person is to be
                 deported will be relevant to Article 8, is where it  is  an
                 additional factor to be weighed in the balance, with  other
                 factors which by themselves engage Article 8.  Suppose,  in
                 this case, the appellant had established firm  family  ties
                 in  this  country,  then  the  availability  of  continuing
                 medical treatment here, coupled with his dependence on  the
                 family here for support, together establish "private  life"
                 under Article  8.  That  conclusion  would  not  involve  a
                 comparison between medical facilities  here  and  those  in
                 Zimbabwe. Such a finding would  not  offend  the  principle
                 expressed above that the  UK  is  under  no  obligation  to
                 provide medical treatment here when it is not available  in
                 the country to which the appellant is to be deported."


      Conclusions
       41. The Judge did fall into error  in  the  approach  taken  to  the
           Article 8 claim in a manner that requires me to set  aside  that
           aspect of his decision, and remake it. I do so on the assumption
           that  Article  8  is  probably  engaged  as  a  result  of   the
           Appellant's "private life" in the UK, although it  is  difficult
           to identify any aspect to that "private life" beyond his  mental
           health and the medication he is  prescribed  for  that  illness,
           coupled with his thirteen year residence in this country.
       42. I note that the  Appellant's  "private  life"  has  been  formed
           following illegal entry, and that the Appellant has always  been
           in the UK unlawfully. In the light of the unchallenged  findings
           that this  was  a  particularly  serious  crime,  and  that  the
           Appellant constitutes a danger to the  community,  it  is  plain
           that it continues to be the case that  Parliament  has  directed
           that the public interest requires his deportation. This is not a
           case in which the offending was a feature of the illness, or one
           in which the treatment the Appellant has  accepted  has  removed
           the risk of further offending.
       43. After taking full  account  of  the  guidance  to  be  found  in
           particular within  MM  and  Bensaid  I  am  satisfied  that  the
           decision to deport was not disproportionate and  the  Article  8
           appeal must be  dismissed.  That  is  the  only  aspect  of  his
           decision with which I am seized, and the Judge's conclusions  in
           relation to the other grounds of appeal therefore stand.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 3 May 2017

