
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07313/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th November 2017                         |On 6th December 2017          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    [M J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss E Norman of Counsel instructed by Harbans Singh
                    & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge  O'Hagan  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 12th September 2017.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to him as the claimant.

 3. The claimant is an Iranian citizen born [ ] 1983.   He  claimed  asylum
    based upon his conversion to Christianity.  The application was refused
    by the Secretary of State on 11th July 2017, and the claimant's  appeal
    was heard by the FtT on 31st August 2017.  In a decision promulgated on
    12th September 2017 the FtT allowed the appeal, having  heard  evidence
    from the claimant and two witnesses.  The  FtT  was  satisfied  to  the
    required standard that the claimant had converted to Christianity,  and
    therefore would be at risk if returned to Iran.

 4. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  It was contended that the appeal  entered  by  the  claimant
    turned on credibility.  It was noted that the FtT attached no weight to
    the fact that the claimant struggled to answer questions about the  Ten
    Commandments and no weight to the fact that the claimant was unable  to
    name the gifts brought to  Jesus  in  the  Gospel  on  account  of  the
    nativity.

 5. The Secretary of State submitted that this  conclusion  amounted  to  a
    material error of law.  It was submitted that it was open to the FtT to
    attach limited weight to the claimant's evidence but it was not open to
    the FtT to attach no weight  to  that  evidence.   The  claimant  in  a
    previous appeal in 2010 had found to be lacking in credibility.  It was
    contended that the failure to  attach  any  weight  to  the  claimant's
    evidence infected the FtT consideration of credibility in the round and
    made the findings unsafe.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Boyes by way  of  a  succinct
    decision, finding the Secretary of State's grounds to be arguable.

 7. Following the grant of permission the claimant did not lodge a response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  Directions were issued  making  provision  for  there  to  be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me Mrs Aboni relied upon  the  grounds  contained
    within the application for permission to appeal.  It was submitted that
    the FtT was wrong to attach no weight to the  claimant's  inability  to
    answer questions about the Ten Commandments, and his inability to  name
    the gifts brought to Jesus.

 9. Miss Norman submitted that the FtT decision disclosed no error of  law.
    I was asked to find that the FtT had carefully  analysed  the  evidence
    and was aware of the previous  adverse  credibility  findings  made  in
    relation to the claimant.  Miss Norman submitted that the FtT had  made
    findings open to it on the evidence, and the decision should stand.

My Conclusions and Reasons

10. I find that the grounds submitted by the  Secretary  of  State  do  not
    disclose a material error of law in the FtT decision.  My view is  that
    the FtT carefully analysed all relevant evidence.  It is clear that the
    FtT took into account in accordance  with  the  Devaseelan  guidelines,
    findings that had been made in a previous appeal in December 2010.  The
    FtT records that the Tribunal on that occasion found the claimant to be
    wholly lacking in credibility, and a finding of dishonesty was made.

11. The FtT correctly applied the Devaseelan guidelines  at  paragraph  36.
    It was noted that the previous  Tribunal  had  considered  a  different
    claim from that being considered in this appeal.  However the FtT found
    the factual findings  to  be  made  by  the  previous  Tribunal  to  be
    relevant, and correctly concluded that it would be wrong to ignore  the
    previous findings, and equally wrong to treat those  historic  findings
    as being determinative of the current claim.

12. The Secretary of State has challenged the findings made by the  FtT  at
    paragraph 39.  It is within this paragraph that the  FtT  records  that
    "the  Appellant  struggled  to   answer   questions   about   the   Ten
    Commandments.  I attach no weight to that".  The FtT also records, when
    considering the gifts brought to Jesus, it "tells me nothing  that  the
    Appellant was unable to name the gifts".

13. However the FtT, in my view, makes a relevant point in paragraph 39, in
    expressing the view that caution must be shown when  trying  to  assess
    the credibility of an individual's  claimed  faith,  based  upon  their
    level of theological knowledge.  The FtT, again in my  view,  correctly
    makes the point that the problem with  such  an  approach  is  that  it
    conflates faith with  knowledge,  and  a  poorly  educated  person,  or
    somebody whose intellectual functioning is low, may struggle to  answer
    theological questions  but  nonetheless  may  be  a  sincere  believer.
    Equally, a well educated and intelligent person may be very capable  of
    answering questions, but may be a completely cynical witness.

14. The FtT expresses the view that the Ten Commandments are not a  central
    part of Christian teaching and may well not have figured  significantly
    in any teaching to which the claimant was exposed.   As  to  the  gifts
    brought to Jesus, the FtT makes the  point  that  this  story  will  be
    "culturally familiar to anyone  who  has  grown  up  in  this  society,
    irrespective of belief.  To someone who has not, that will not  be  the
    case".

15. I find that the FtT has adequately explained within paragraph  39,  why
    the  approach  was  taken  not  to  attach  weight  to  the  claimant's
    difficulty in answering questions about the Ten  Commandments,  and  in
    relation to the gifts brought  to  Jesus.   In  addition,  the  FtT  at
    paragraph 40 made the valid point that a convert to  Christianity  must
    be able to explain what attracted them to convert,  and  to  understand
    the significance to Christians of the death and resurrection  of  Jesus
    as that is the core of  Christian  belief.   The  FtT  found  that  the
    claimant  was  able  to  give  an  accurate,  although  unsophisticated
    account, and found this to be consistent with genuine faith.   The  FtT
    found that the claimant  was  able  to  explain  why  he  had  embraced
    Christianity.

16. At paragraph 41 the FtT considered  letters  supporting  the  claimant,
    expressing belief that he is  a  sincere  convert.   The  FtT  did  not
    attribute significant weight to those letters, on the  basis  that  the
    authors had  not  attended  the  hearing  to  answer  questions.   This
    indicates that the FtT was taking a balanced view when considering  the
    totality of the evidence.

17. At paragraphs 42-46 the FtT analyses with care, evidence given  by  two
    witnesses who attended the hearing to confirm  their  belief  that  the
    claimant is a genuine convert.  I find that adequate reasons are  given
    by the FtT for placing weight upon that evidence.   The  FtT  found  it
    significant that the witness Mr  Bright  had  known  the  claimant  for
    approximately fourteen months, and the FtT was, in my view, entitled to
    place significant weight upon his evidence.

18. I conclude that the FtT has carefully  analysed  the  evidence,  taking
    into account some factors which do not assist the claimant, such as the
    previous adverse credibility findings, but  also  taking  into  account
    factors which do assist the claimant's case, such as  the  evidence  of
    the two witnesses who attended the  hearing.   The  FtT  gave  adequate
    reasons for attaching no weight to the inability  of  the  claimant  to
    answer questions regarding the Ten Commandments, and the gifts to Jesus
    and I find no error of law disclosed on that issue.

19. The grounds submitted by the Secretary of State display a  disagreement
    with the conclusions reached by the FtT, but do not disclose a material
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a  material  error  of  law.   The
decision of the FtT is not set aside and the  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of
State is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and no anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date         4th December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the decision of the FtT stands, so does the decision not to  make  a
fee award.






Signed                              Date         4th December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal


