
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07121/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 December 2019                  |On 14 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     W K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Emma Daykin instructed by Rashid & Rashid
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Swinnerton promulgated on 6  September  2019  dismissing
    his appeal on protection and human rights grounds.   The  appellant  is
    Kurdish and arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  2015.  His  immigration
    history is as set out in Judge Swinnerton's decision  at  paragraph  6.
    There is no need to repeat that here.

 2. In summary it is evident that  the  appellant  did  not  give  evidence
    before the judge on the basis  he  was  unfit  to  do  so,  that  being
    confirmed by a psychiatric report by Dr Ahwe dated  18  February  2019.
    The judge did not accept that the appellant was  at  risk  nor  did  he
    accept that the appellant would not be able to  relocate  within  Iraq.
    The judge did not however address Article 8 or  the  Immigration  Rules
    other than through the means of assessing the protection claim.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal on  two  grounds,  the  first
    being in effect that the judge had misdirected himself in terms of  the
    assessment of credibility, that he had failed to  have  regard  to  the
    UNHCR handbook and failed properly to treat Section 8 of the  2004  Act
    and a few other matters of generic nature.  The second ground  is  that
    the judge failed to consider Article 8 this is expressed as  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules.  There is no attempt to address  Article
    8 within the Rules.

 4. Permission was granted by Judge Chohan on 8 November  2019,  the  judge
    stating there is no substance in the first ground  in  respect  of  the
    issue of Article 8 although the judge refers to it in dealing with  the
    burden and standard of proof however, no further consideration has been
    given in the decision.  It is  not  clear  from  the  judge's  decision
    whether Article 8 was duly argued during the hearing.  Nevertheless, it
    may be open to argument the judge erred in failing to consider  Article
    8.

 5. Dealing with ground 1 as Ms Daykin fairly accepted there was  no  grant
    of permission on that ground and she also fairly conceded and this  was
    correct, that there is no merit within ground 1.   That  ground  is  in
    effect in its entirely  generic  and  fails  to  address  any  specific
    instances in which it could be said that there  had  been  an  improper
    assessment of credibility.  Worryingly the ground  is  also  framed  in
    terms of the authorities in Albania rather than Iraq.

 6. Turning to ground 2 as was pre-figured in the grant of permission,  the
    issue is whether the point was put to the judge.  It is conceded by  Ms
    Daykin that there is nothing she can rely on to show that article 8 was
    addressed in the skeleton argument.  It  is  unclear,  there  being  no
    evidence either way, if it was addressed in submissions  and  whilst  I
    accept that there is a degree of consideration of Article 8 within  the
    fresh claim submissions and also in the refusal letter, the  references
    to it in the grounds of appeal to the First Tribunal are formulaic  and
    generic. In any event, taking the case at its  highest  the  appellant,
    lives with his family members in the United Kingdom.

 7. I am not satisfied that submissions on article 8 were properly made  to
    the judge.  A judge is  not  required  to  indulge  in  a  wide-ranging
    analysis of whether removal would be in breach of article 8 when it has
    not been the focus of submissions or detailed grounds of appeal  as  is
    the case here.  Second, and in any event, it is difficult  to  see  how
    any error in failing to deal with Article 8 on the facts of  this  case
    could be material.  There is in my view no basis on which it  could  be
    said that taking the appellant's case at its highest that  his  removal
    would be disproportionate in terms of Article 8 and for these reasons I
    conclude that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error of law and I uphold it.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
    an error of law and I uphold it


Signed                                  Date 9 January 2020
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

