
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07233/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11 December 2018                 |On 15 February 2019                   |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                     RKH
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hodson, Elder Rahimi, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born in 1991.  He appealed against a
    decision of the respondent made on 27 May 2018 to refuse him asylum.

 2. The basis of his claim  is  that  he  is  a  Sunni  Muslim  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity.  His father was a supporter of the KDPI and  was  killed  by
    the authorities when the appellant was very young.  The appellant's own
    involvement with the KDPI came about as a result of his friendship with
    a man called Davoud.  Despite initial unwillingness because of what had
    happened to his father long before, he agreed to meet up with Davoud in
    July 2015 to distribute leaflets for the KDPI.  As they were  doing  so
    in the evening, Davoud was captured by the authorities.  The  appellant
    managed to run to a friend's house.  Soon after arrangements were  made
    for him to leave Iran.

 3. The respondent did not accept that the appellant was involved with  the
    KDPI or that he faced adverse attention from the Iranian authorities.

 4. He appealed.

    First tier hearing

 5. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 9 July 2018 Judge of the  First-
    Tier Tribunal Manyarara dismissed the appeal.

 6. Her findings are at paragraph [33]ff.  First, it was "not credible that
    despite taking such a firm position about not wanting  to  be  involved
    with an organisation that he attributes  his  father's  death  to,  the
    appellant would have involved himself in propaganda activities" [33].

 7. Second, he had not maintained a consistent account about the nature  of
    his association with the KDPI.  At screening interview he said he was a
    "member", but at interview said he was a "supporter" [34-35].

 8.  Third,  his  account  of  being  apprehended  by  the  soldiers  while
    distributing leaflets lacked credibility.  He said at interview it had,
    at the time, been dark, but information relied  on  by  the  respondent
    established it would not have been dark.

 9. He sought permission to appeal which was granted on 2 November 2018.

    Error of law hearing

10. At the error of law hearing before me Mr Kandola agreed with Mr  Hodson
    for the reasons raised in the  application  that  the  decision  showed
    error of law such that the case must be heard again.

11. I also agreed.

12.  The  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  three  adverse
    credibility findings.  On the first, what led to the appellant deciding
    to become involved in the KDPI, her finding at [33], namely, that "upon
    meeting a friend known as Davoud, he took the decision to  be  involved
    in  advertising  KDPI  propaganda,"  was  inadequate.   The   appellant
    indicated at interview and in his statement that he  had  known  Davoud
    since childhood and as such Davoud had often spoken to  him  about  the
    Kurdish cause and issues; there was no single chance meeting as opposed
    to a natural process.  At no point in making this (or any other adverse
    credibility finding) did  the  judge  refer  to  the  contents  of  the
    appellant's statement.  She failed to grapple with the specific account
    set out therein as to how he moved from a position when he was  younger
    of following the advice of his family not to be involved in the KDPI to
    one in which he was finally persuaded by Davoud to assist at  least  in
    distributing leaflets.

13. As for the second adverse finding (whether he was a member or supporter
    of KDPI) in finding that he was a member, the judge relied wholly on  a
    single entry in the Screening Interview Record (SCR) [4.1] in which the
    appellant was asked to explain briefly his reasons why he cannot return
    to Iran.  The purported answer is crammed into the box provided on  the
    form with several insertions and crossings out.  The grammar and  sense
    is uncertain in places.  The word "active"  has  been  inserted  before
    "member."  It is  inappropriate  to  treat  the  SCR  without  more  as
    equivalent to  the  contents  of  the  Asylum  Interview  Record.   The
    difference  between  the  use  of  the  word  "member"  as  opposed  to
    "supporter" may be a matter of nuance and choice by an  interpreter  in
    giving the sense of what an appellant  is  saying  in  terms  of  being
    active for and/or involved with a political party.  The judge took none
    of this into account.  Nor did  she  take  into  account  the  guidance
    provided on the degree of reliance  that  can  properly  be  placed  on
    details of a SCR provided in YL (Rely on SEF) China  [2004]  UKIAT  145
    (at [19]) to which the judge's attention was drawn.    In  that  regard
    the judge failed to engage with the evidence on  the  circumstances  of
    the SCR both before and after it was held; on the former  that  he  had
    been forced to change his original solicitor and had not  been  through
    the SCR with his subsequent representative, on the latter that  he  had
    given a detailed account of the difficult journey he had undergone just
    prior to the conduct of the SCR.

14. Third, the appellant never claimed to have set his clock  by  the  time
    when he and Davoud met.  In his statement he said it was  "after  8pm".
    In his AIR he said it was "around 8.30pm in the evening" [Q95] when  he
    and Davoud started distributing leaflets.  The  Presenting  Officer  at
    the First tier hearing provided a chart which indicated that sunset  in
    the area was around 8.50pm.  In his statement he  said  they  had  been
    engaged in leafleting for "about 15 minutes" when the soldiers arrived.
     By that account it must have been "evening" as the appellant stated.

15. Further, the judge was wrong to find that the appellant had  relied  on
    the sun having set to explain how this enabled him, at [38], "to remain
    discreet and escape."  He never suggested this in his written accounts.
     His explanation was that it was his ability to run back into the  maze
    of small side streets behind the bazaar which allowed him to escape.

16. In addition, the appellant did not claim that he had, at [38]  "managed
    to outrun the jeep" despite being "in the  vicinity"  when  Davoud  was
    arrested.  He never claimed to be pursued by "the jeep" (referred to as
    a pickup in his statement).  Further, when Davoud was  stopped  by  the
    soldiers (who had got out of the pickup) the appellant's claim is  that
    he was at the other end of the bridge and able  from  there  to  double
    back into the streets at that end.

17. The judge materially erred by failing adequately  to  engage  with  and
    analyse the evidence.   As  a  result  her  decision  shows  inadequate
    reasoning.

18. By consent the decision was set aside to be remade.  It was agreed that
    the case be remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal for a de novo  hearing.
    This is because entirely new findings  are  required  on  all  material
    matters.

Decision

19. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  nature  of
    the case is such that it is appropriate  under  section  12(2)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice  Statement  7.2
    to remit to the First-Tier Tribunal for an entirely fresh hearing.   No
    findings stand.  The member(s) of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  chosen  to
    consider the case are not to include Judge Manyarara.

20. An anonymity order is made.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise, the appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   Failure  to
    comply with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 14 January 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Conway





