
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/07451/2018
                                                               PA/07454/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 May 2019                       |On 18 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                    SHANGAR ALI MAMODE (FIRST appellant)
                HALAWA MOHAMMED HAMADAMINE (SECOND appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants, who claimed to be nationals of  Iran,  have  permission
    to challenge the decision of Judge Howard of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (FtT) sent on 15  August  2018  dismissing  their  appeal  against  the
    decision  made  by  the  respondent  on  27  May  2018  refusing  their
    protection claim.  Permission was granted essentially on  two  grounds:
    that the judge failed to make properly reasoned findings on  the  issue
    on whether the appellant and her daughter are nationals  of  Iran;  and
    secondly, that he failed to properly consider risk  on  return  to  the
    appellants given their Kurdish ethnicity.

2.   The appellants attended in person and confirmed that  their  solicitors
    would not attend to represent them.  I explained to them that  I  would
    try and ensure they were able to put their case and that their case was
    considered fairly.  I then heard from Mrs Pettersen who reiterated  the
    points already made by the respondent  at  the  previous  hearing.   Ms
    Mamode then made several points emphasising that she and her mother had
    done all they could to provide the respondent  with  information  about
    their nationality and home area.  She said her mother was ill  and  her
    memory was poor  and  this  affected  the  answers  she  had  given  at
    interview.

3.   Given that the appellants' grounds were drafted without legal help  and
    that they appeared before me unrepresented, I have sought  to  consider
    all points that can be raised in their favour.

4.   Dealing first with the issue of nationality, the  respondent's  refusal
    decision set out a number of reasons why it  was  considered  that  the
    appellants had  failed  to  show  that  they  were  nationals  of  Iran
    including lack of substantiation, incorrect or inaccurate responses  at
    interview when compared  to  the  background  information  about  Iran,
    inability to use the Iranian calendar, inability to  describe  anything
    about Mahabad despite claiming to have been in  that  town  immediately
    before travelling to the UK, wrongly describing  denominations  of  the
    Iranian currency (Rial).  At the hearing the judge heard from the first
    appellant  (and  briefly  from  the  second).   He   considered   their
    explanation for the above shortcomings in terms of lack  of  education,
    the remoteness of their  home  and  the  subsistence  nature  of  their
    livelihood.  At paragraphs 20-22 the judge stated:

         "20. The appellants' evidence is at best confused.  The  inaccurate
             answers they gave to the  respondent's  questions  seeking  to
             establish their nationality might be explained by  a  lack  of
             education and living an isolated life.  However, the  evidence
             of the first appellant was that their village is a  45  minute
             drive away from a city and in that city at  least  one  family
             member lives.  They are clearly in regular contact  with  that
             family member as  they  made  an  unannounced  visit  on  him.
             Further the second appellant  had  gone  to  the  city  for  a
             hospital appointment.  Such appointments must be arranged  and
             paid for.


         21.  This evidence speaks of a much greater exposure to  mainstream
             life in Iran than they assert.  My concern  is  therefore  how
             they can have such limited knowledge of things Iranian if they
             live in such close proximity to a city and have  the  kind  of
             links to the city of which they speak.  The simple  answer  is
             that they are not from rural Iran.


         22.  Accordingly I am not satisfied they are Iranian as claimed".

5.   I discern no arguable error of law in the assessment made by the  judge
    in these  paragraphs.   It  is  suggested  by  the  judge  who  granted
    permission that the judge was inconsistent in stating on the  one  hand
    that the appellants had shown "limited knowledge  of  things  Iranian",
    yet on the other hand that their evidence "speaks of   a  much  greater
    exposure to mainstream life in Iran than they assert".  I am unable  to
    agree.  It is clear from paragraphs 20-22 read  as  a  whole  that  the
    judge did not find the appellants' explanation for the shortcomings  in
    the evidence they gave regarding their nationality (in terms  of  being
    from rural Iran) to be consistent with the answers they gave indicating
    knowledge  to  be  expected  of  persons  from  an   urban/"mainstream"
    background.  The judge did  not  mean  by  "much  greater  exposure  to
    mainstream life in Iran" that the appellants had in fact demonstrated a
    credible degree of knowledge of Iran.

6.   Turning to the second ground, it was accepted by the judge (as  it  had
    been by the respondent) that the appellants  were  ethnic  Kurds.   The
    judge's treatment of where this accepted fact left their claim was  set
    out at paragraph 23:

         "23. The appellant's not being Iranian the remainder of their claim
             falls away as it is predicated on the  notion  that  the  male
             family members are Iranian Kurds who have been killed  by  the
             authorities for their separatist  activities  and  those  same
             authorities are no looking for the appellants.  I  am  further
             fortified in the finding the appellants are not Iranian when I
             consider the evidence of the first appellant.  Her account  of
             travelling to her cousins and then learning  of  her  father's
             and brother's arrests she contradicted  in  her  own  account.
             When she sought to elaborate on events she moved further  away
             from her initial assertion that they had gone to the city  out
             of fear.  She then contradicted herself on who it was that had
             told them of the arrests once at the cousin's home".

7.   Again, I discern no legal error in the judge's assessment.   There  was
    no medical evidence before the judge to indicate that either  appellant
    had memory difficulties. Clearly the core of the appellants'  claim  to
    be at risk depended upon them  having  been  targeted  by  the  Iranian
    authorities by virtue of the alleged activities  of  their  father  and
    brother in smuggling political material into Iran.  If  the  appellants
    were not Iranian they would not face a real risk of being  returned  to
    Iran.  The only  caveat  to  that  could  be  if  the  appellants  were
    stateless persons whose country of former habitual residence  is  Iran,
    but on the judge's findings of fact, whatever country  they  originated
    from it was not Iran.  Hence it was  not  incumbent  on  the  judge  to
    engage with whether the appellants would be at risk  because  of  their
    Kurdish ethnicity.  The fact that the  country  guidance  case  of  SSH
    (Iran) CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC)  was  considered  by  the  judge  who
    granted permission to deal only with the position of males, is  not  to
    the point, as the appellants had failed to show that  Iran  was  either
    their country of nationality or former habitual residence.

Decision

8.   The decision of the judge is free of legal error and must stand.

9.   The circumstances of the appellants' case illustrate the dilemmas  that
    confront both applicants and the authorities when there is insufficient
    and/or unsatisfactory evidence relating to nationality.  The compass of
    any asylum-related appeal must be confined to  the  issue  of  risk  on
    return, yet the burden of proof to establish the country  of  reference
    rests with applicants.  Even so, where (as  here)  no  country  can  be
    identified,   there   will   inevitably   remain   issues    concerning
    returnability.  Such issues are not within the scope  of  this  appeal,
    but the appellants would  be  wise  to  seek  expert  legal  help  from
    solicitors (it is not obvious to me that their present solicitors  have
    taken steps to assist them in obtaining further evidence)  as  to  what
    steps they can now take so that they do not remain in limbo.

10.    Whilst I do not have sufficient information before  me  to  know  the
    precise position of the appellants within the asylum support system,  I
    find it worrying that the two appellants and child are clearly a family
    unit but have not been housed in the same  accommodation,  despite  the
    second appellant clearly needing the emotional support of her  daughter
    and her daughter having to manage  as  a  single  mother.  Particularly
    given that it is likely  to  take  some  time  for  the  respondent  to
    establish the returnability of the appellants, there  is  an  important
    issue of their right to respect for family life as a family unit  in  a
    country where both appellants have no one else to turn to for support.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 14 June 2019
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
