
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07118/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2020                   |On 24 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 SIYOUM [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, instructed by Parker, Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 7 October 1991 and claims to be a citizen  of
    Eritrea. By a decision promulgated on  12  June  2019,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Plimmer found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  and
    set aside its decision. She found  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    established two grounds of appeal, namely that the  judge  had  applied
    the incorrect standard of proof when determining  whether  or  not  the
    appellant is entitled to Israeli citizenship [4] and  had  allowed  the
    appeal without considering 'the absence of any attempt on the  part  of
    the appellant to confirm with the Israeli embassy that  he  is  not  an
    Israeli citizen and cannot be removed there.'

 2. Following the making of a transfer  order,  the  resumed  hearing  took
    place before me at Bradford on 13 January 2020. I heard  evidence  from
    the appellant who  spoke  Tigrinya  and  gave  his  evidence  with  the
    assistance of an interpreter.  The  appellant  explained  that  he  had
    visited the Israeli Embassy twice, most recently on 11 September  2019.
    He told an official at the embassy that he had resided  in  Israel  and
    asked for  proof  of  that  residence.  His  request  was  denied.  The
    appellant explained that his passport remained with  the  Home  Office.
    The appellant says that he was informed by the official that  he  would
    not be given any 'written information' because he was 'an illegal.'

 3. The appellant's evidence seems to me to plausible. I was not  asked  by
    Mr Veety, who appeared for the Secretary of State, to find that he  had
    not attended the Israeli Embassy. I accept that the account he gave  me
    was true and accurate.

 4. The issue in this case it is a narrow  one.  As  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Plimmer recorded [3] the Secretary  of  State  has  accepted  that  the
    appellant is a citizen of Eritrea. In particular, he accepts  that  the
    appellant was born in Eritrea and, if returned to that  country,  would
    face a real risk  of  persecution.  It  is  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position that the appellant is entitled to the surrogate protection  of
    Israel because he is an Israeli citizen. As a consequence,  he  is  not
    entitled to refugee status.

 5. The problem in the case arises from the  passport  document  which  the
    appellant brought with  him  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  which  is
    currently in possession of the Secretary of  State.  The  Secretary  of
    State takes the view that this document is a genuine Israeli  passport.
    There is before  the  Tribunal  an  email  correspondence  between  the
    Secretary of State and the Israeli  Embassy  in  London.  The  passport
    itself has not been examined by Israeli officials although  details  of
    it have been provided. On the basis of those details  (presumably,  the
    passport number in particular) an Israeli official has stated that  the
    passport is likely to be genuine. In addition, one of the Secretary  of
    State's own document examiners  has  concluded  that  the  document  is
    genuine and that the photograph of the appellant in  the  passport  was
    placed there at the time the document was issued and not  subsequently.
    The problem for the Secretary of State is that his assertion  that  the
    passport shows that the appellant is an Israeli citizen, in addition to
    being an Eritrean citizen, appears to be contradicted on  the  face  of
    the passport itself; the appellant's place of birth is shown as Israel.
    Both the appellant and the Secretary of State agree that the  appellant
    was not born in Israel, but in Eritrea. The appellant contends that the
    incorrect place of birth supports his claim that the  passport  is  not
    genuine that he purchased it as a forgery.

 6. The question as to whether the appellant is, in  addition  to  being  a
    citizen of Eritrea, also a citizen of Israel  must  be  tested  on  the
    evidence on the standard of the balance of probabilities.  On  the  one
    hand, we have the evidence of the Israeli official that the passport is
    genuine. However, that opinion has been reached without  sight  of  the
    original document. In addition,  there  is  the  document  verification
    report to which weight should  be  given  as  expert  opinion  evidence
    although it does not seem that the expert who examined the passport had
    specific knowledge of Israeli passports; rather, his evidence is  based
    upon his knowledge of passports  generally  and  in  identifying  those
    which have suffered interference and amendment  after  they  have  been
    (genuinely) issued. On the other hand,  there  is  the  patently  false
    statement in the passport that the appellant was born in  Israel  which
    neither of the parties believes to be the case. In addition,  the  fact
    that the appellant speaks Tigrinya and does not speak  Hebrew  suggests
    strongly that he was not born in Israel.

 7. The evidence of the document expert can be reconciled with that of  the
    appellant. The passport may  be  a  genuine  document  which  has  been
    improperly issued to the appellant by an official Israeli state agency.
    Such an event is not wholly implausible; although I  have  no  evidence
    specific to Israel, I am aware that such practices do occur in passport
    offices operated by other governments. Having said that, it is striking
    that both the document expert  (who  examined  the  passport)  and  the
    Israeli official (who did not) both agree that it is genuine.

 8. I am, however, drawn back to the fact that both  parties  unequivocally
    agree that the passport contains false details. That  it  does  heavily
    supports the appellant's contention that the document is  not  genuine.
    Moreover, it is possible that the appellant might return to Israel  and
    gain entry using the passport. However, the fact that he might be  able
    to enter does not mean that he has any right to reside in Israel. I was
    provided with no information regarding Israeli nationality law though I
    find that it is likely that, given the  circumstances  surrounding  the
    foundation of the state of  Israel,  nationality  may  extend  in  some
    circumstances to those born outside the country's borders.  However,  I
    am reminded that the appellant will be a refugee in the United  Kingdom
    if he cannot return safely to his country of nationality; the fact that
    he may be able to gain entry to Israel does  not  mean  that  he  is  a
    citizen of the country. Having considered the evidence very  carefully,
    my misgivings regarding the passport  lead  me  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant's possession of the document does not establish that he is  a
    dual citizen of both Israel and Eritrea. Since it is  not  been  proved
    that he is a citizen of Israel, then he would be  returned  to  Eritrea
    where the Secretary of State accepts that he would be at real  risk.  I
    have concluded that he is a refugee. I make no firm finding as  to  the
    manner in  which  the  passport  document  came  into  the  appellant's
    possession but I do find that the Secretary  of  State  has  failed  to
    prove, on the balance of  probabilities,  that  the  appellant  is,  as
    respondent asserts, an Israeli citizen.  It  follows  that  his  appeal
    should be allowed



    Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent dated  29
    May 2018 is allowed  on  asylum  and  human  rights  (Article  3  ECHR)
    grounds.


Signed                              Date 20 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
