
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07172/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 October 2017                        |On 23 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    NAAM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms S Nawaparast of NLS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  we  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State,  for  convenience
    we will hereafter refer to the parties  as  they  appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Libya who was  born  on  [  ]  1979.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 December 2013  and  claimed  asylum.
    The basis of his claim was that he was  at  risk  on  return  to  Libya
    because he had  previously  been  a  member  of  the  Gaddafi  Security
    Services.

 4. On 21 June 2016, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

 5.  As  regards  the  appellant's  international  protection  claims,  the
    Secretary of State concluded that the appellant was excluded  from  the
    Refugee Convention under Art 1F(a) because he had  aided  or  otherwise
    assisted the torture of opponents of the Gaddafi regime whilst  working
    for the security services.  He was also, as  a  result,  excluded  from
    humanitarian protection.  In addition, the Secretary of State  rejected
    the appellant's account that he had been arrested and detained  by  the
    Ansar Al- Shari group  following  the  death  of  Colonel  Gaddafi  and
    seriously ill-treated because  of  his  association  with  the  Gaddafi
    regime.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 17 February 2017, Judge Price  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum grounds.  First, she did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  was
    excluded from the Refugee Convention by virtue of Art 1F(a) because she
    was not satisfied that he had been knowingly involved in the torture of
    opponents  of  the  Gaddafi  regime.   Secondly,   she   accepted   the
    appellant's account that he had been a member of the  Gaddafi  Security
    Forces and that, following the death of Colonel Gaddafi,  he  had  been
    detained and seriously ill-treated by the Ansar  Al-Shari  group  as  a
    result of that involvement.

 7. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 9  June  2017,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Pedro)
    granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before us.

Discussion

 9. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Richards relied upon the  three
    grounds on which permission to appeal had been granted.

10. First, he submitted that the judge had erred in law took issue with the
    finding that the appellant was not aware  that,  as  a  result  of  his
    activities  with  the  security  services  in  Libya,  detainees   were
    tortured.  In reaching that conclusion the judge had, in  Mr  Richards'
    submission, erred in preferring the appellant's evidence in a  verbatim
    transcript of his asylum interview over that recorded in the  Secretary
    of State's record of the asylum interview.  Mr Richards submitted  that
    the  transcription  did  not  provide  any  evidence  of   professional
    accreditation and the judge gave no reason for preferring it.

11. We did not invite Ms Nawaparast to respond to this ground which, in our
    judgment, is wholly unsustainable.

12. Faced with a conflict as to what was said  at  the  appellant's  asylum
    interview,  in  the  absence  of  any  reason  to  believe   that   the
    transcription was inaccurate, the judge was fully entitled to rely upon
    it.  Mr Richards did not suggest that it was inaccurate.   Despite  the
    Secretary of State's challenge on this ground, she has  not  sought  to
    obtain a further transcription of the interview  and  demonstrate  that
    the transcription before the judge was  inaccurate.   Consequently,  we
    reject this ground.

13. Secondly, Mr Richards submitted that, even if the  transcribed  version
    was taken at face value, the judge erred in assessing  the  appellant's
    exclusion and asylum claim in two respects.

14. First, the  judge  had  failed  properly  to  consider  the  background
    evidence.  Mr Richards submitted that at para 51, the judge paraphrased
    the US State Department Country Report on  Human  Rights  Practices  in
    Libya in 2009 (at page 173 of the respondent's bundle) as stating that:
    "there were no confirmed reports that  the  government  or  its  agents
    committed arbitrary or unlawful killings in  the  year  of  study"  and
    cited the statement in the report to the effect that "the law prohibits
    practices of torture and other inhumane, or degrading treatment".   The
    judge then went on to say in para  52  that:  "in  the  light  of  this
    background evidence, the appellant's account that he believed practices
    had changed when he took up  employment  in  the  security  forces,  is
    plausible."  Mr Richards submitted that this was a  distortion  of  the
    background evidence in that the report itself, at page 173 went  on  to
    say in relation to torture and other mistreatment:

         "The  law  prohibits  such  practices,   but   security   personnel
         reportedly routinely tortured and abused  detainees  and  prisoners
         during interrogation or as punishment.  Detainees often  were  held
         incommunicado.  Foreign observers noted that incidents of torture -
         used as a punishment in Internal Security Service prisons - seem to
         have increased over the year."

15. Likewise, Mr Richards pointed out that the 200 page bundle contained  a
    number of documents highlighting the use of torture  and  ill-treatment
    by the Gaddafi regime covering, inter alia, the period during which the
    appellant worked for the security services.

16. Mr Richards submitted that the judge's conclusion and reasons in  paras
    51-53, that it was not established that the appellant had been involved
    in torture or knew such acts took place, were flawed.

17. We  accept  Mr  Richards'  submissions.   Even  if,  as  Ms  Nawaparast
    submitted, some of the evidence is supportive of the appellant's claim,
    some plainly does not.  It was for the judge to grapple  with  all  the
    relevant background evidence and make findings upon it.  It is clear to
    us that the judge  failed  to  consider  all  the  relevant  background
    evidence which, in a number of  respects,  supported  the  respondent's
    case that torture was used by the Gaddafi regime at the  relevant  time
    when the appellant worked for the security services.

18. Secondly, Mr Richards contended that the judge's factual findings were,
    in part, based upon a misunderstanding of the respondent's position  in
    the refusal letter.  In para 55, Mr Richards  pointed  out,  the  judge
    stated that: "the respondent has accepted the core of  the  appellant's
    claim, for it to be able to go on to investigate if the appellant meets
    the criteria for exclusion."   Then, at para 56 the judge  went  on  to
    say: "I find that as  the  core  of  the  appellant's  claim  has  been
    accepted by the respondent then the documents provided by the appellant
    can  be  relied  upon."  Mr  Richards  submitted  that  was   not   the
    respondent's position in the refusal letter.  She did  not  accept  the
    factual matrix upon which the appellant's claim was based.

19.  Ms  Nawaparast  sought  to  persuade  us  that  the  judge   had   not
    misunderstood the respondent's position in the decision letter  but  to
    no avail.  We accept Mr Richards' submissions.  It is clear, on reading
    the refusal letter, that the Secretary of  State  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's claim, whether  the  "core"  elements  or  otherwise.   For
    example, at para 109 it is stated that: "it is not  believed  that  you
    were arrested and mistreated by Ansar Al-Shari for the reasons that you
    have alleged ...".  Likewise, at para 118 the respondent  states  that:
    "... it is not believed, with reference  to  paragraphs  88-117  above,
    that you were arrested, detained and mistreated by  Ansar  Al-Shari  as
    you claimed."   The judge erred in law in approaching the assessment of
    the appellant's claim on the false basis that the  respondent  accepted
    the truth of his account.

Decision

20. For these reasons, as we indicated at  the  end  of  the  hearing,  the
    judge's decision to allow the appellant's appeal involved the making of
    an error of law and cannot stand.

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is, accordingly, set aside  and
    the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    rehearing before a judge other than Judge Price.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           22, November 2017
