
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07858/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 March 2020                     |On 19 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE JOHNSON
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                  XIDI [X]
                       [ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Eaton, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a decision to which both judges have contributed.

 2. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Malcolm promulgated 25.11.19, dismissing on all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    30.8.19, to refuse his  protection  and  human  rights  claims  and  to
    maintain the decision of 5.5.17 to deport him from the UK to China.

 3. The grounds first argue that at [64] and [65] of the decision the judge
    erred in rejecting the expert report of Dr Kulantzick. Dr  Kulantzick's
    opinion was that the appellant's account of a land-grabbing dispute  in
    China leading to a gang attack on him was plausible. The judge rejected
    that evidence because it did not take into account the previous adverse
    credibility findings made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  an  earlier
    occasion, and because it was based on the appellant's account  and  the
    premise that his account is truthful. It is suggested that the approach
    of the First-tier Tribunal fell into the  "Mibanga  trap",  referencing
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367.

 4. A similar point is made in relation to the  treatment  of  the  medical
    evidence of Dr Arnold, dated 27.7.17, and, perhaps to a lesser  extent,
    the psychiatric report of Dr Thorne, dated 11.9.17.

 5. Resident First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Phillips  granted  permission  to
    appeal on 24.12.19, finding it arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge fell into the Mibanga trap of discounting the expert evidence  on
    the  basis  of  the  credibility  findings  of  the  previous  tribunal
    decision, pursuant to  Devaseelan  (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -  Extra-
    territorial Effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKAIT 00702: "It is arguable  that
    having accepted that the first decision  was  the  starting  point  the
    judge did not go on to consider whether the  expert  evidence  and  the
    medical evidence gave him any  reason  for  departing  from  the  first
    decision."

 6. The respondent's Rule 24 response, dated 14.1.20, argues that the First-
    tier Tribunal did not fall into error. It is pointed out that the judge
    referenced the new evidence, the expert reports between [23]  and  [27]
    of the decision,  together  with  the  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant  that  the  evidence  demonstrates   the   plausibility   and
    consistency with the appellant's factual claim. At [64] the judge  also
    considered the country background information. It is submitted that the
    grounds are no more than a complaint that the judge failed to  use  the
    expert evidence to overturn the findings of the previous  tribunal  and
    that there is no Mibanga point.

 7. We have  carefully  considered  and  taken  into  account  the  helpful
    submissions of both representatives and the undated  skeleton  argument
    of Ms Cunha handed in at the hearing.

Error of Law

 8. In the first instance we have to determine whether or not there was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 9. Mr Eaton's submissions are encapsulated in the grounds as  drafted  and
    need no elaboration. The essence of the grounds is that the judge  fell
    into the Mibanga error in relation to both the country expert  evidence
    and the medical expert evidence.

10. Ms Cunha submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  entitled  to
    rely on Devaseelan and then treat the new evidence with circumspection,
    given the adverse credibility findings in the 2017 appeal decision.  It
    was submitted, as set out at [8] of her  skeleton  argument,  that  the
    judge did no more than rely on the previous credibility findings  as  a
    starting point, "comparing these to those preferred to  Dr  Kulantzick.
    It was for the fact-finder to assess credibility and having  considered
    the new evidence was entitled not  to  depart  from  the  2017  adverse
    credibility findings." Ms Cunha  pointed  out  that  there  were  other
    factors relevant to credibility in the 2017 decision, for example,  the
    fact that the appellant had been found guilty by a jury, rejecting  his
    factual account. Whilst she accepted in the course of argument that the
    scarring report was potentially supportive of the claimed  injury,  she
    drew to our attention the observation in  the  2017  decision  that  in
    interview the appellant had  made  no  reference  to  being  beaten  or
    hospitalised as a result, which was part of  the  negative  credibility
    assessment. Ms Cunha submitted that in the  circumstances  it  was  not
    clear how the expert reports could justify departing from the  previous
    credibility findings.

11. In essence, Ms Cunha's argument was that all the new evidence had  been
    carefully considered and taken into account in determining  whether  to
    depart from the previous adverse credibility findings.

12. At [24] of the Mibanga decision, Wilson J stated:

         "It seems to me to be axiomatic that a fact-finder must  not  reach
         his or her conclusion before surveying all  the  evidence  relevant
         thereto. Just as, if I may take a banal  if  alliterative  example,
         one cannot make a cake with only one ingredient, so also frequently
         one cannot make a case, in the sense  of  establishing  its  truth,
         otherwise than by combination of a number of pieces of evidence".

13. However, in HH (medical evidence; effect of  Mibanga)  Ethiopia  [2005]
    UKAIT 00164, the Upper Tribunal cautioned:

         "The Tribunal considers that there is a  danger  of  Mibanga  being
         misunderstood. The judgments in that case are not intended to place
         judicial fact-finders in a  form  of  forensic  straightjacket.  In
         particular, the Court of Appeal is not to  be  regarded  as  laying
         down any rule of law as to the order in which judicial fact-finders
         are to approach the  evidential  materials  before  them.  To  take
         Wilson J's "cake" analogy, all its  ingredients  cannot  be  thrown
         together into the bowl simultaneously. One has to start  somewhere.
         There  was  nothing  illogical  about  the  process  by  which  the
         Immigration Judge  in  the  present  case  chose  to  approach  his
         analytical task."

14. The  Upper  Tribunal  went  on  to  conclude  in  that  case  that  the
    Immigration Judge had arrived at his conclusions as to  credibility  by
    looking at the evidence in the round.

15. Applying the principle and the caution set out above,  we  have  looked
    carefully at the First-tier Tribunal decision and  considered  whether,
    regardless of the order in which the evidence was addressed, it can  be
    said that the findings were made after consideration of the evidence as
    a whole. As the respondent has pointed out, the judge did not  overlook
    either the country expert or medical  expert  evidence.  It  is  clear,
    however, that at [64] the judge rejected the country expert evidence in
    relation to the plausibility  of  the  appellant's  land  grab  dispute
    account, on the basis that it did not take into  account  the  previous
    adverse  credibility  findings,  and  because  it  was  based  on   the
    appellant's account and the  premise  that  his  account  is  truthful.
    Contrary to the understanding of the judge, it is clear from the expert
    report that Dr Kulantzick had the previous tribunal decision  available
    to him and it was, therefore,  inaccurate  to  state  that  the  expert
    report did not take the  previous  adverse  credibility  findings  into
    account. Ms Cunha accepted this point in her submissions.

16. At [65] the judge acknowledged the country  background  information  of
    substantial evidence of land disputes but  stated,  "...  however,  the
    basic position  is  that  the  appellant's  previous  account  was  not
    accepted and whilst it is clear from background information that  there
    is a substantial problem with land disputes in China I do not  consider
    that the report provides any new information which would  allow  me  to
    depart from the findings of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Dhanji  on  the
    credibility of the appellant in relation to this matter."

17. Similarly, at [73] of the decision Judge Malcolm discounted the  expert
    medical evidence  stating,  "Given  the  findings  on  the  appellant's
    credibility I did not consider that  the  information  in  Dr  Thorne's
    report had any material bearing on  my  findings  as  set  out  above,"
    concluding at [74] "I do not consider  that  there  is  any  reason  to
    deviate from the previous First-tier Tribunal findings." There may have
    been some conflation by the judge between the two medical reports.  The
    medical evidence of physical injury in  Dr  Arnold's  report  had  been
    relied  on  to  the  limited  extent  of  demonstrating  that  injuries
    sustained  were  consistent  with  the  appellant's  account  of  being
    physically assaulted by a gang, arising out of the land-grab dispute. A
    similar point is made in relation  to  the  psychiatric  report  of  Dr
    Thorne. Mr Eaton pointed out that  the  report  detailing  anxiety  and
    depression opined that these were understandable  stress  reactions  to
    his immigration predicament, including immigration detention. Mr  Eaton
    submitted that this was relevant to the  adverse  credibility  findings
    from 2017 as well as the assessment of credibility  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in 2019.

18. Whilst the judge was correct to apply the Devaseelan principle to  take
    the first decision the starting point and as determinative of the facts
    on the basis of the evidence as it then was, we accept the argument put
    to us today that Judge Malcolm should have acknowledged and taken  into
    account that the expert evidence now  relied  on  was  not  before  the
    previous Tribunal Judge, and  there  may  also  have  been  no  country
    background evidence at all on the issue before the  previous  Tribunal.
    Given that fact, Judge Malcolm should  have  carefully  considered  the
    evidence as a whole to  determine  whether,  taken  together,  the  new
    expert and other evidence, which also included medical evidence showing
    injuries potentially consistent with the claim of being attacked  by  a
    gang, justified departing from the adverse findings from  the  previous
    appeal decision. We are satisfied that was not done.

19. Instead, it appears  that  Judge  Malcolm  used  the  previous  adverse
    credibility findings as justification to  undermine  the  new,  expert,
    evidence, both in relation to land grab disputes and, more clearly,  in
    relation to the medical evidence supporting previous physical injuries.
    We are less persuaded by Mr Eaton's argument in relation to the judge's
    consideration of the psychiatric report.

20. We are satisfied that the failings in  the  decision  identified  above
    amount to a material error of law, requiring the  decision  to  be  set
    aside to be remade in its entirety.

21. We have given careful consideration as to whether this is a case  which
    ought to be remade in the Upper Tribunal or in the alternative remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal, taking into account the submissions of  the
    two representatives on the point. Mr Eaton contended for a remittal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal with the decision to be made de novo. Ms  Cunha
    did not resist his submission on this point.

22. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal vitiate all findings of fact and the  conclusions  from  those
    facts so that there has not been a valid determination of the issues in
    the appeal. The effect of the error has been to deprive  the  appellant
    of a fair hearing of his case.

23. In all the circumstances, with the acquiescence  of  both  parties,  we
    relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal,  on
    the basis that this is a case which falls squarely  within  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. and that the nature or
    extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision
    in the appeal to be re-made is such that it  is  appropriate  to  remit
    this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to determine the  appeal  afresh
    with no findings preserved.

Decision

24. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     We set aside the decision.

                    We remit the appeal to be decided afresh in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.

     Signed


         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated 10 March 2020


Consequential Directions

25. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor
    House;

26. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

27. The ELH is 3 hours;

28. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judges Malcolm and Phillips;

29. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;

30. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further or alternative directions
    as are deemed appropriate.

Anonymity

We have considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, we make no anonymity order.


     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated: 10 March 2020

