
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07689/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2020                              |On 29 April 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     FP
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Collins, Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Chuna, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Beach ("the judge") promulgated on 11 September 2019
    dismissing the appellant's protection and human rights claim. The
    appellant is only appealing against the part of the decision concerning
    his private and family life under Article 8 ECHR and therefore I have
    only considered this aspect of the decision.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 4 June 1990.  She entered
    the UK in November 2010 using a counterfeit identity card.  She was
    convicted of possession and/or use of a false instrument and sentenced
    to eight months' imprisonment.  In June 2011 she was deported to
    Albania.  In November 2011 she re-entered the UK in breach of the
    deportation order.

 3. The appellant is married to a British citizen and has three young
    children. The oldest was born in January 2013, the second oldest was
    born in November 2014 and the youngest was born in October 2017.  All
    of the children are British citizens.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The judge's findings in respect of Article 8 are set out in paragraphs
    66 - 93 of the decision.  The judge stated that the appellant's Article
    8 claim is based on her relationship with her husband and her children.



 5. The appellant's husband is of Albanian ethnicity, speaks Albanian, and
    has connections to Albania.  The judge found that it would not be
    unduly harsh for him to relocate to Albania or remain in the UK without
    the appellant.

 6. With respect to the appellant's children, the judge considered a report
    by an independent social worker, Ms Brown.  The judge noted Ms Brown's
    view that it would not be in the children's best interests to be
    separated from either parent or to relocate as a family to Albania.
    The judge stated at paragraph 75:

         "Ms Brown noted that both the appellant and her husband did not
         want their children to relocate to Albania.  She states:

             'Should Mrs P be removed it is then inevitable that the
             children would become separated from their mother.  This would
             be a cruel and debilitating process of the children, who would
             view it as a bereavement, a death.  Mrs P's mental health is
             such that I am uncertain how she would manage alone in
             Albania'."

 7. The judge noted the evidence of Ms Brown that the family are extremely
    concerned about the development, and anxiety, of the oldest child, and
    that the child's school (referred to as nursery in the decision) had
    commented on the distress. The judge observed, however, that the
    correspondence from the school did not mention this, or indeed any
    concerns about the child.

 8. The judge considered the harshness of the children remaining in the UK
    without their mother.  At paragraph 76 she stated:

         "It is clear that there would be an emotional impact on the
         children if their mother were deported to Albania and they remained
         in the UK without her.  The appellant is their primary caregiver
         and they have an emotional bond with her which will be adversely
         affected by her absence.  Of course, visits to Albania cannot
         replicate their current contact and attachment to their mother.
         However, this is the case for many children whose parent faces
         deportation from the UK and the case law is clear in stating that
         there must be something above and beyond this effect for the
         effects of deportation to be considered unduly harsh."

 9. The judge then considered the implications for the children of
    relocating to Albania.  The judge concluded that it would not be unduly
    harsh, even if their father remained in the UK.

10. The judge, at paragraphs 84 - 85, considered medical evidence about the
    appellant including, in particular, that she had attempted suicide in
    2017.

11. At paragraph 88 the judge considered whether there were "very
    compelling or exceptional circumstances".  The judge stated:

         "I also consider whether there are very compelling or exceptional
         circumstances which would mean that the public interest in
         deportation were outweighed by the appellant's circumstances.  It
         was submitted that the appellant's offence was not one which caused
         serious harm and that deportation was not therefore appropriate.
         However, whether the offence was sufficient to engage deportation
         proceedings is not the issue before me.  The appellant's
         deportation took place in 2011 and it was decided at that stage
         that deportation was in the public interest.  Neither party
         provided me with a copy of that decision and so I cannot know the
         exact basis of the finding that deportation was in the public
         interest.  However, the issue before me is whether the deportation
         should be revoked."

12. The judge stated at paragraph 90:

         "It is not only that the appellant committed an offence at the age
         of 18 when I accept that she was still at a young age, but the fact
         that in 2011 she knowingly defied the deportation order and chose
         to enter the UK clandestinely following which she made no attempts
         to regularise her status until her eldest child had been born."

13. At paragraph 92 the judge concluded:

         "The decision is a harsh decision for her husband and children as
         well as for the appellant because none of them wish to uproot
         themselves from the UK and relocate to another country.  However,
         it is clear that the family are a close and supportive family unit
         who support and care for each other.  Whilst the appellant and her
         husband state that the appellant's husband and children will not
         relocate if the appellant has to leave the UK, the evidence does
         not show that such relocation would be unduly harsh or would lead
         to very compelling or exceptional circumstances.  That is a choice
         which will have to be made by the family."

Grounds of Appeal

14. There are three grounds of appeal.

15. First, it is argued that the judge applied the wrong test under the
    Immigration Rules.

16. Second, the grounds submit that the judge failed to properly or
    adequately consider the negative implications of the children being
    separated from their mother.

17. Third, it is argued that the judge failed to give proper or adequate
    consideration to the social worker reports dated 9 August 2017 and 27
    August 2019.

Analysis

18. The applicable test under the Immigration Rules is that set out in
    Paragraph 399D, which states:

         "Where a foreign criminal has been deported and enters the United
         Kingdom in breach of a deportation order enforcement of the
         deportation order is in the public interest and will be implemented
         unless there are very exceptional circumstances."

    As explained in SSHD v Saif Ullah [2017] EWCA Civ 1069 (a case which,
    like this one, concerned a deportee who, in breach of a deportation
    order, had returned to the UK) the test in Paragraph 399D is more
    stringent than the undue harshness test applicable where a person is
    yet to be deported, as set out in paragraphs 398 and 399 of the
    Immigration Rules. Richards LJ stated at paragraph 45 of Saif Ullah:

         "The difference in the language of paragraphs 398 and 399D,
         suggesting a more stringent requirement under paragraph 399D,
         reflects a real difference in the circumstances covered by each
         paragraph.  Paragraph 398 addresses the question whether a
         deportation order should be made, or existing order maintained,
         against a person who has yet to be deported, whereas paragraph 399D
         addresses the very different case of a person who has been deported
         and then re-enters illegally and in breach of the order.  In the
         latter case, any Article 8 claim that was raised by the deportee
         before his original deportation will, ex-hypothesis, have been
         decided against him.  It is readily understandable that in the
         cases covered by paragraph 399D the Secretary of State should have
         formed the view that there is a particularly strong public interest
         in maintaining the integrity of the deportation system as it
         applies to foreign criminals."  [Emphasis added].

19. The first ground of appeal submits that the judge mistakenly approached
    the appeal as if the relevant test was whether the appellant's
    deportation would be unduly harsh when the correct question to ask was
    whether there were very exceptional circumstances. Reference is made to
    paragraph 46 of Saif Ullah where it is stated:

         "In my view, the application by the FtT of the wrong paragraphs of
         the Rules was a material error of law, and it cannot be said that
         the FtT's decision will inevitably have been the same if the judge
         had directed himself to the correct passages."

20. I reject this argument for two reasons.  Firstly, I am satisfied that
    the judge applied the correct legal test.  At paragraph 88 the judge
    explicitly stated that she was considering whether there were very
    compelling or exceptional circumstances and at paragraph 92 she
    concluded that there were not very compelling or exceptional
    circumstances.  Very exceptional circumstances is the test in paragraph
    399D.  Therefore, it is apparent, on the face of the decision, that the
    correct test has been applied.

21. Secondly, even if (which I do not accept) Mr Collins is correct that
    the judge erred by failing to apply Paragraph 399D, the error was not
    material because, having found (applying the less stringent test under
    Paragraphs 398-399) that deportation would not be unduly harsh for the
    appellant's children, it is inevitable that the judge would have found
    (applying the more stringent test under 399D) that there were not "very
    exceptional circumstances". It is instructive to compare this appeal to
    Saif Ullah. In Saif Ullah the First tier Tribunal allowed the appeal
    having applied a less stringent test. It therefore could not be said
    that the First-tier Tribunal's decision would inevitably have been the
    same had the judge directed himself correctly. However, in this case,
    in contrast, the First tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal having
    applied a less stringent test and therefore it is inevitable that the
    same outcome would have been reached had the judge directed herself
    correctly.

22. The second ground of appeal submits that the judge did not "properly or
    adequately" address the "ramifications and consequential effect of the
    long-term separation of children this age from their mother, with whom
    each of them has lived the entirety of their lives". Mr Collins, in his
    submissions, argued that the judge had not paid adequate attention to
    the very close bond between the children and the appellant and the
    devastating impact of deportation, as recorded by the independent
    social worker, Ms Brown.  He also argued that the judge failed to
    address the "real word scenario" of the children staying with their
    father and being separated from their mother.

23. I do not consider this ground to have any merit.  The judge considered
    in detail the appellant's argument that she has a very close bond with
    her children and that deportation will have a devastating impact on
    them.  At paragraph 76 the judge acknowledged that the appellant is the
    primary caregiver and the children have an emotional bond with her.  At
    paragraph 92 the judge stated that it was clear that the family are "a
    close and supportive family unit who support and care for each other".
    At paragraph 75 the judge quoted from Ms Brown's report the evidence of
    Ms Brown that separation of the appellant and her children would be "a
    cruel and debilitating process for the children".  It is clear,
    therefore, that the judge has addressed the evidence as to the
    "ramifications and consequential effect" of long-term separation.

24. Having accurately recorded the evidence on this issue, it was for the
    judge to decide whether the serious implications of long-term
    separation, taken together with other factors, gave rise to "very
    exceptional circumstances" within the meaning of Paragraph 399D.  In
    reaching her conclusion it was necessary for the judge to have regard
    to the settled jurisprudence on undue harshness as this is relevant to
    whether there are very exceptional circumstances. Lord Carnwath in KO
    (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 stated:

         "One is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond what would
         necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of
         a parent"

25. The approach taken by the judge was entirely consistent with KO. The
    evidence before the judge was that the appellant's children would be
    devastated by separation from their mother and that it could have
    significant long-term consequences for them.  This is no more than the
    degree of harshness necessarily involved for any child faced with the
    deportation of a parent.

26. The appellant sought to establish something going beyond the normal
    harshness of deportation by arguing that the eldest child suffers from
    anxiety and developmental problems.  However, the judge considered
    this, and in the light of the absence of any supporting evidence from
    the child's school, did not accept that there were any such issues.

27. This ground of appeal is framed as a challenge on the basis of evidence
    not being "properly or adequately" addressed.  However, given that the
    judge has given extensive consideration to the evidence relevant to the
    separation of the children from the appellant, this is in reality a
    rationality challenge.  In the light of KO the conclusion that there
    are not "very exceptional circumstances" was one that was clearly open
    to the judge.  Indeed, it is difficult to see how any other conclusion
    could be reached given that KO concerned a less stringent test.

28. The third argument in the grounds of appeal is that the judge failed to
    give "proper or adequate consideration" to the evidence of the
    independent social worker, Ms Brown.  I reject this argument because it
    is clear from the decision that the judge considered Ms Brown's reports
    in detail including her firmly expressed opinion on the best interests
    of the children and the impact of separation on them, as set out in
    paragraph 75 of the decision.

29. At the hearing, Ms Chuna raised the issue of whether the appellant's
    removal would be contrary to Zambrano v Office nationale de l'emploi
    (case C-34/09) [2012].  However, Zambrano was not raised in the grounds
    and Mr Collins did not seek to pursue any such argument.  I have
    therefore not considered this matter.

Notice of Decision

30. The grounds of appeal do not identify an error of law. The appeal is
    dismissed and the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
|                                    |                                    |
|Signed                              |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan       |Dated: 31 March 2020                |
|                                    |                                    |


             ___________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email

