
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/07068/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22nd March 2018                       |   On 11th April 2018               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     mA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C Soloman, instructed by Halliday Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Davidson
    made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 24th August 2017.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 24th June 1994.  He  arrived
    in the UK clandestinely on 3rd August 2016 and claimed  asylum  on  the
    grounds that he was at risk of persecution in Iraq  due  to  his  anti-
    Islamic posts on Facebook and his anti-religious views.

 3. The application was refused by the Secretary of State on 13th July 2017
    and it was this refusal which was the  subject  of  the  appeal  before
    Judge Davidson.

 4. Judge Davidson accepted that the appellant had been active on  Facebook
    and social media  and  he  had  attracted  unpleasant  and  threatening
    comments.  However he did not accept that  the  appellant  was  in  any
    particular danger.  He said that the appellant,  who  is  from  Kirkuk,
    could reasonably relocate to the IKR region of Iraq  and  he  dismissed
    the appeal.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by Resident
    Judge Phillips on 28th December 2017.

 6. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge had  failed  to  take  into
    account substantial evidence contained in a supplementary bundle. There
    was no analysis or reference to the objective  evidence.  Having  found
    that the appellant was active on Facebook, the finding that he was  not
    in any particular danger was arguably inadequately reasoned.

 7. At the hearing Miss Solomon also pointed out that the judge had  failed
    to consider evidence that the appellant's two friends had been  granted
    asylum in France and Germany on the same basis as the appellant himself
    claimed.  Furthermore, he had not  taken  into  account  the  extensive
    evidence before him of the consequences of return as an atheist.

 8. Mr Tufan said that he could not concede the appeal  but  accepted  that
    there was a lack of anxious scrutiny  in  this  determination  both  in
    relation to the core of the appellant's claim and in  relation  to  the
    viability of his relocation to the IKR.

 9. The decision of Judge Davidson is set aside.  He erred in law.

10. First, the judge did not take into account all of the relevant evidence
    which was before him.  Second, the reasoning is  not  adequate.  Third,
    this brief determination  does  not  adequately  explain  why  internal
    relocation to the IKR would be practical or reasonable.



Notice of Decision

The decision will have to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  re-
made by another  immigration  judge  at  Hatton  Cross.   A  Kurdish  Sorani
interpreter is required.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008



Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
Signed[pic]                             Date 7 April 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
