
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07590/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|                                 |On 6 August 2020                 |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                 SWA (IRAN)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant is an Iranian national who was  born  in  May  2002.   He
    appeals, with permission granted by Judge  Keane,  against  a  decision
    which was issued by Judge Andrew on 21 October 2019.  In that decision,
    the judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal of the appellant's protection and human rights claims.

 2. The appellant claimed asylum on the day that he arrived in the  UK:  25
    June 2018.  He claimed to fear persecution from the authorities in Iran
    because of his imputed political opinion and also from his father being
    involved in a land dispute which had resulted in the death of a  member
    of another family.

 3. In her decision of 26 July  2019,  the  respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant was a minor of Kurdish ethnicity from Iran but  she  rejected
    the substance of his claim for  asylum,  concluding  that  the  account
    given was not credible.

 4. In her decision, the judge also found that the appellant had not  given
    a truthful account of the reasons why he had  left  Iran.   She  stated
    that she had made due allowance  for  his  age  at  the  time  but  she
    considered that aspects of the account were  implausible,  speculative,
    vague and unsupported by documentary evidence.  She found him to  be  a
    person with no political profile in Iran and did not consider  that  he
    would be at risk on return.  So it was that she dismissed the appeal on
    protection grounds.  Considering the appellant's limited Article 8 ECHR
    claim, the judge considered that the private life he had accrued  since
    his arrival was outweighed by the  public  interest  considerations  to
    which she was bound to have regard.

 5. Permission to appeal was sought on several grounds:

      i) The judge made  no  real  allowance  for  the  appellant's  age  or
         background in assessing his credibility;

     ii) The judge had overlooked aspects of the  appellant's  evidence,  in
         particular from his asylum interview, in rejecting his account;

    iii)  The  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  plausibility  of   the
         appellant's account against the backdrop provided  by  the  country
         evidence;

     iv) The judge had reached a finding regarding the appellant's exit from
         Iran which was at odds with the respondent's acceptance; and

      v) The judge's conclusion regarding the appellant's Kurdish  ethnicity
         was contrary to HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 430 (IAC).

 6. Permission was granted on each of these grounds by  Judge  Keane.   The
    appeal was due to be heard on 3 April 2020 but  the  pandemic  rendered
    that impossible.  Directions were duly sent  to  the  parties,  seeking
    their submissions on the merits of the appeal and on whether  it  might
    properly be disposed of without a hearing.  Both parties filed  further
    submissions.  The appellant sought an oral hearing.  The respondent did
    not.

 7. Given that the respondent accepts  that  the  judge's  decision  cannot
    stand, I see  no  reason  to  convene  an  oral  hearing,  remotely  or
    otherwise.

 8. In his concise written submissions for the respondent, Mr Kotas accepts
    that the judge erred in law and that her decision falls to be set aside
    for the following reasons.  At [20], the judge found that the appellant
    was simply speculating when he stated that his father was  involved  in
    anti-regime activities.  She said that the appellant 'had  simply  made
    assumptions and has speculated'.  Mr Kotas accepts, however, that  this
    finding was reached  without  reference  to  material  matters,  namely
    certain answers given by the appellant in his interview.  In answer  to
    questions 74 and 76 of the interview in particular, the  appellant  had
    told the respondent that he had overheard his father  speaking  on  the
    telephone, saying that he 'worked against  the  government'.  Mr  Kotas
    notes that the appellant had not mentioned any such conversation in his
    witness statement and that the judge may, for that reason, have validly
    held that there was an inconsistency between the  two  accounts.   That
    was not the judge's conclusion, however, and  the  conclusion  she  did
    reach was clearly reached without  taking  into  account  the  relevant
    evidence which the appellant had given in  his  asylum  interview.   Mr
    Kotas accepts that this was an error of law and that it  justifies  the
    setting aside of the judge's decision.

 9. I consider that concession to be properly made.   Possibly  because  of
    the fact that the appellant gave a slightly different  account  in  his
    witness statement, the judge does appear to have overlooked the account
    the appellant gave in response to questions 74 and  76  of  the  asylum
    interview.  Given that this  was  a  central  reason  for  the  judge's
    rejection  of  the  appellant's  account,  I  am  satisfied  that   her
    assessment of his credibility cannot stand.

10. Both parties have urged the Upper Tribunal to remit  the  case  to  the
    FtT, in light of the scope of the next hearing.  I also  consider  that
    to be the appropriate course.  I should add that I do  not  accept  the
    submission made by Mr Kotas at [10]  of  his  written  submissions,  by
    which he invited the Upper Tribunal to preserve the  judge's  dismissal
    of the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.   The  appellant  is  a  young
    Kurdish man who maintains that he has no family in Iran.  In the  event
    that he is found to be partly truthful by the next judge,  there  might
    be a suggestion of a claim under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), even if he is
    found not to be positively at risk in Iran.  Given the  common  factual
    consideration which underpin both questions (protection  and  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi)), I consider that it would be wholly artificial to  remit
    only the protection aspect of the enquiry to  the  FtT.   The  remittal
    will therefore be de novo.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT was erroneous in law and is hereby set  aside.   The
appeal is remitted to the FtT to be heard de novo  by  a  judge  other  than
Judge Andrew.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                               6 August 2020
