
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07371/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23rd March 2018                     |On 02nd May 2018                  |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                 B S (NEPAL)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah, Counsel instructed by Imperium Group
     Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 - Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or  any
    member of their family.  This direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal whose date of birth is recorded  as
    [ ] 1989.  She sought  international  protection  as  a  refugee.   She
    appealed the decision of the Secretary  of  State  of  12th  July  2017
    refusing her application both on international protection  grounds  and
    human rights grounds.  In every material particular the judge found the
    Appellant lacking in credibility.  I say that because at  paragraph  24
    of the Decision and Reasons, the judge stated, "I  find  the  Appellant
    has failed to demonstrate to the low standard of proof that any  aspect
    of her claim is capable of belief".  The  judge  went  on  to  consider
    Article  8  but  did  not  specifically  make  reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

 3. Not content with the decision, by Notice dated  5th  January  2018  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 7th February 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-
    Hutchison granted permission thus the matter comes before me.

 4. I have to say that when I  read  the  decision  I  was  at  a  loss  to
    understand the basis upon which it would be contended that any  failure
    on the part of the judge to consider paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  could  be
    material; the Appellant would have to establish that  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to her integration into the country to which  she
    would have to go.  Since each of the  aspects  of  her  case  had  been
    rejected it was difficult to see the premise upon  which  it  could  be
    said that there were going to be any obstacles, indeed it  occurred  to
    me that had the judge gone on to find obstacles in  the  light  of  the
    findings the decision would have been capable  of  being  attacked  for
    perversity.

 5. In VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA Civ 522 McCombe LJ at paragraph  12  said
    as follows:

         "Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration  cases
         when a First-tier Tribunal Judge has given  a  judgment  explaining
         why he has reached a particular decision, of seeking to burrow  out
         industriously areas of evidence that had been less fully dealt with
         than others and then to use this as a basis for saying the  judge's
         decision  is  legally  flawed  because  it  did  not  deal  with  a
         particular matter more fully.  In my judgment, with  respect,  that
         is no basis on which to sustain a proper  challenge  to  a  judge's
         finding of fact ...".

 6. I entirely endorse his observations in this case.

 7. This is an appeal that was, in my view, entirely without  merit.  I  am
    surprised that permission was granted.  It was only because  permission
    was granted that I do not go on to  consider  whether  a  wasted  costs
    order should not have been made.

DECISION

 8. The appeal is dismissed.





ADDENDUM

 9.  I  was  specifically  asked  by  Mr  Miah  to  deal   with   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) and whether the judge should have dealt with it  if  only
    to dismiss it.  If my reference to VW is not sufficient to  explain  my
    view on the point, it seems to me that once such  clear  findings  have
    been made, as were in this case, there was really no reason at all  for
    the judge to explore legal avenues which inevitably would fail.



Signed                              Date: 1 May 2018




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker



