
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/07963/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30th April 2019                       |On 8th May 2019                   |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                  MR. M a i
                       (anonymity NOT direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. F Aziz;  Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. C Bates;     Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He claims to have  arrived  in
       the UK on 1st December 2017 and claimed asylum on the same day.  The
       claim was refused by the respondent for the reasons  set  out  in  a
       decision dated 11th June 2018.  The appellant's appeal against  that
       decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Holt for
       the reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 17th  August  2018.
       It is that decision that is the subject of the appeal before me.


    2. There are two limbs  to  the  appellant's  claim  for  international
       protection.  First, he is at risk upon return to Iraq because he  is
       an atheist.  Second, he is at risk upon  return  because  he  is  of
       Kurdish ethnicity, from Kirkuk, and he  cannot  return  to  the  IKR
       because he could not safely get from Erbil or Baghdad, to Kirkuk.


    3. The FtT  Judge's  findings  and  conclusions  are  to  be  found  at
       paragraphs [15] to [25] of the decision.  The Judge found  that  the
       claim made by the appellant is not remotely credible.   Although  no
       clear finding is set out, one could infer from what is  set  out  at
       paragraphs [16] to [20] of the decision, that the FtT Judge rejected
       the appellant's  claim  that  he  is  an  atheist.   The  FtT  Judge
       rejected, for the reasons set out at paragraphs [21] to [23] of  the
       decision, the appellant's account that he is from Kirkuk,  and  that
       he would be unable to return to the IKR.


    4. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Mr  Justice  Swift  on  29th
       November 2018.  The matter comes before me to consider  whether  the
       decision of the FtT Judge involved the making of a material error of
       law, and if the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


    5. Before me, Mr  Bates  accepts  that  the  Judge's  approach  to  the
       assessment of the appellant's claim that he is an atheist,  and  the
       risk upon return, is irrational.  He concedes that  the  Judge  does
       not come to a clear finding  as  to  whether  the  appellant  is  an
       atheist that is adequately reasoned, and the Judge  therefore  erred
       in his analysis of the claim advanced by the appellant.  He  accepts
       that the Judge failed to properly consider the issues in  accordance
       with the decision of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) -v- SSHD  [2010]
       UKSC 31, and RT (Zimbabwe) [2013] 1 AC 152.


    6. The first stage is to consider whether the applicant  is  indeed  an
       atheist.  Although the Judge expresses concerns  about  the  way  in
       which the appellant and his representative expressed his 'belief' at
       the hearing, it is not clear, absent  a  clear  finding,  adequately
       reasoned, that it was open to the Judge to find that  the  appellant
       is not an atheist, if indeed one  is  to  infer  that  that  is  the
       finding that was made.  If in  fact  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
       appellant was an atheist, the  next  stage  was  for  the  Judge  to
       examine a  group  of  questions  which  are  directed  to  what  his
       situation will be on return, an inquiry directed to what will happen
       in the future.  At paragraph [19] of the decision, the  Judge  notes
       that "..there is no obligation to tell  the  world  and  spread  the
       "good news" about being an atheist.  A free thinker or  atheist  can
       quite happily keep his thoughts to himself."  The Judge appears  not
       to have considered whether the applicant will in  fact  conceal  the
       fact that he is an atheist, and if so, why he will do so.  Mr  Bates
       concedes that in failing to  make  clear  findings  in  relation  to
       material aspects of the claim, the decision  of  the  FtT  Judge  is
       infected by a material error of law, and the decision should be  set
       aside.


    7. The decision of the FtT Judge is infected by a material error of law
       and must be set aside.  As to the disposal of the  appeal,  both  Mr
       Aziz and Mr Bates submit that the  appropriate  course  is  for  the
       matter to be remitted to the FtT for hearing afresh. I have  decided
       that it is appropriate to remit this appeal back to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, having taken into account  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior
       President's Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.  In my  view,
       in determining the appeal, the nature and  extent  of  any  judicial
       fact-finding necessary, will  be  extensive.  The  parties  will  be
       advised of the date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  in  due
       course.


 Notice of Decision


    8. The appeal is allowed the decision of FtT Judge Holt promulgated  on
       17th August 2018 is set aside.


    9. The appeal is remitted the FtT for a fresh  hearing  of  the  appeal
       with no findings preserved.

Signed                                  Date          30th April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

FEE AWARD


No fee is payable and there can be no fee award

Signed                                  Date          30th April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
