
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07569/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House London                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 March 2018                              | On 22 March 2018             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                     RM
                       (anonymity direction CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Razzaq-Siddiq, instructed by Universal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was  born  on  2  February  1983  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh.

Immigration and appeal history

 2. The First-tier  Tribunal  directed  that  the  appeal  proceedings  and
    decision should be anonymised.  Given the nature of the appeal,  it  is
    appropriate to continue that direction and I make  the  relevant  Upper
    Tribunal order at the end of this decision and reasons statement.

 3. The appellant arrived in the UK as a working holidaymaker valid between
    29 July 2009 and 29 July 2011.  He did not leave the UK at the  end  of
    his working  holiday.   In  fact,  he  did  not  seek  to  contact  the
    respondent until 30 January 2017, when  he  made  a  protection  claim.
    That claim was refused on 31 July 2017.

 4. The appellant appealed against that refusal.  His appeal was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk on 7 September 2017, and in her decision
    and reasons statement issued on 27 September 2017, she gave her reasons
    for dismissing the appeal.  The appellant  was  not  content  with  the
    outcome and through different  solicitors  applied  for  permission  to
    appeal.  His application to the First-tier Tribunal was refused but was
    granted on renewal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Plimmer on 17 January 2018.

 5.  When  granting  permission  to  appeal,  Judge  Plimmer  identified  a
    preliminary issue.

         "1.   Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  is   carefully
         drafted, there has been an arguable failure to  take  into  account
         relevant country background material  in  the  Home  Office's  fact
         finding  report  published  in  September  2017  (attached  to  the
         grounds).  The grounds do not make it clear  that  this  report  or
         evidence similar to it was available to the First-tier Tribunal and
         the appellant shall need to address this issue."

    It was obvious that I  should  start  the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing  by
    considering this issue.

Preliminary issue: request to  admit  evidence  not  before  the  First-tier
Tribual

 6. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq admitted that the relevant report (the full  title  of
    which is: Report of a Home  Office  Fact-Finding  Mission:  Bangladesh,
    conducted 14-26 May 2017, published September 2017) was not before  the
    First-tier Tribunal when it heard the appeal on 7 September 2017.  This
    is uncontroversial given that the .GOV website reveals the  report  was
    only publicly available from  19  September  2017.   I  confirmed  this
    during the hearing with both representatives, after examining the  .GOV
    website with them.

 7. Because the appellant wished the Upper Tribunal  to  consider  evidence
    that was not before the First-tier Tribunal, Mr  Razzaq-Siddiq  applied
    for the September 2017  report  to  be  admitted.   Such  requests  are
    subject to rule 15(2A) of the 2008 Procedure Rules.

 8. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq reminded me that the relevant report had  only  become
    publicly available on 19 September 2017.  The appellant instructed  his
    current solicitors on 6 October 2017. The relevance of the  report  was
    not identified until after Judge Birks's decision and reasons statement
    had been received and  analysed,  which  was  done  within  the  period
    available for applying for permission to  appeal.   The  report  raised
    serious concerns about the negative inferences drawn by Judge  Birk  in
    relation to the reliability of the  legal  documents  provided  by  the
    appellant. The report was provided with the application for  permission
    to appeal made on 10 October 2017.

 9. Mr Kotas reminded me that an application to admit evidence that was not
    before the First-tier Tribunal should be made by sending notice to  the
    Tribunal and the other party.  The appellant has not complied with this
    requirement.  Mr Kotas submitted that there was no explanation why  the
    appellant's previous solicitors had not sent a copy of  the  report  to
    the Tribunal between 19 and 26 September 2017, which  could  have  been
    done if the  report  was  as  significant  as  claimed.   There  is  no
    allegation or indication the previous solicitors acted negligently.  Mr
    Kotas also argued that there was no duty on the respondent  to  produce
    the report to the Tribunal because it was not a policy document.

10. I decided I would admit the September 2017  report  for  the  following
    reasons.  The chronology provides a reasonable explanation why  it  was
    not provided to the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   It  contains  evidence
    relevant to the case which was in the public domain prior to  the  date
    of  promulgation.   If  the  report  had   been   provided   prior   to
    promulgation, Judge Birk was  bound  to  consider  it,  given  she  was
    hearing a protection claim.  The content of the report may have changed
    her analysis.  Bearing in mind the need for "anxious scrutiny" and  the
    overriding objective, these factors make it appropriate  to  admit  the
    evidence.

11. In reaching this conclusion, I have applied rule 7(2) of the  Procedure
    Rules and waived the requirement for the request to admit late evidence
    to be made on notice.  The reliance on the report  in  the  grounds  of
    application was a strong indication there would be an  application  for
    it to be admitted in the Upper Tribunal proceedings, particularly given
    the observations of Judge Plimmer as to its potential relevance.   Both
    representatives were able to deal constructively and  competently  with
    the issues at the hearing and there was no disadvantage to either party
    by proceeding on that basis.

12. Of course,  no  criticism  can  be  levelled  at  Judge  Birk  for  not
    considering the report. It was not provided to her and she  would  have
    been in error if she had undertaken her own research.  My  decision  is
    made in hindsight, on information available now but was  not  available
    to Judge Birk when she was determining the issues.

13. I move on to consider the competing cases.

The appellant's case

14. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq relied on the grounds of application made to both  the
    First-tier and Upper Tribunals.

15. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq reminded me of the positive factual findings  made  by
    Judge Birk at paragraph 24  of  her  decision  and  reasons  statement.
    Judge Birk accepted the appellant had been a member of BNP and that  he
    had the role of Joint Secretary.  Judge  Birk  came  to  this  decision
    based on the newspaper report at pages 14 and  15  of  the  appellant's
    original bundle of documents.  The appellant is named in the  newspaper
    report in the second line from the  bottom.    Judge  Birk  found  that
    newspaper  report  was  sufficiently  strong  evidence  to  dispel  the
    concerns that arose from  the  appellant's  own  evidence  recorded  at
    paragraph 23.

16. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq took me to paragraph 34 of Judge Birk's  decision  and
    reasons statement,  where  she  accepted  the  reliability  of  another
    newspaper article that the appellant had been  involved  in  a  violent
    incident on 15 August 2009.  He took me to  the  newspaper  article  at
    page 34 of the appellant's original  bundle,  published  on  17  August
    2009, which describes the appellant as  a  leader.   The  same  article
    refers to a case being filed  against  the  appellant  under  reference
    "65".   Mr  Razzaq-Siddiq  argues  that  this  corroborates  the  First
    Information Report, which is under reference "65/280".  He also  argues
    that the First  Information  Report  is  corroborated  insofar  as  the
    newspaper report confirms the name and address of the informer.

17. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq submitted that it was unclear why Judge Birk  accepted
    some parts of the newspaper articles as being reliable but did not rely
    on other parts of the same articles.  This undermined the soundness  of
    her findings because there was a lack of reasoning in that there was no
    explanation why some parts of the evidence were ignored.

18. Turning to the September 2017 Fact Finding Mission report,  Mr  Razzaq-
    Siddiq submitted that Judge Birk's findings  at  paragraph  35  of  her
    decision and reasons statement are not  sustainable  in  light  of  the
    evidence recorded at paragraph 4.6.1 of the report.

19. At paragraph 35, Judge Birk gave the following reason for rejecting the
    reliability of  the  court  and  police  documents  relied  on  by  the
    appellant.

         "The court and police documents which [the appellant] has  produced
         do correspond to his  account  but  due  to  the  general  lack  of
         credibility that the Appellant has demonstrated as set  out  in  my
         findings I take into account that it is possible for such documents
         to be unreliable and  produced  on  demand.  ...  I  find  that  if
         documents  such  as  passports,  marriage  certificates  and   bank
         documents can be reproduced then there is no reason why  court  and
         police documents can also not be so produced.  I  do  not  find  it
         credible that there would be now some 9 years after the  even  such
         warrants only just being issued for his arrest."

20. Paragraph 4.6.1 of the September 2017  report  contains  the  following
    evidence.

         "The  BHC  [British  High  Commission]  noted   that   forged   and
         fraudulently  obtained  documents  were  easily   obtainable.    TI
         [Transparency International]  noted  that  there  were  significant
         incidents of forged documents, particularly  in  relation  to  land
         matters,  but  it  is  not  a  general  problem.   Several  sources
         commented that it was hard to fake news, such as posting and arrest
         warrant in a paper, in the mainstream media.  One source noted that
         forged or fraudulent police  or  court  documents  are  not  easily
         obtainable because of counter-signature processes and the fact that
         all documents can be checked against a database."

21. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq also submitted that it was not open to Judge  Birk  to
    find at paragraph 31 that the ease with which the appellant was able to
    leave Bangladesh on his own passport was evidence that the  authorities
    had no interests in him.  Mr Razzaq-Siddiq took me to  paragraph  3.1.5
    of the September 2017 report, which recorded the following.

         "An official at the BHC noted that  Immigration  Police  deal  with
         immigration issues.  They are not always linked up with  other  law
         enforcement  agencies.   The  Government  can  sometimes  issue   a
         'blacklist' of 'no-fly list' of names to  the  Immigration  Police,
         but these are not comprehensive and can be  politically  selective.
         99 per cent of people attempting to  leave  the  country,  even  if
         charged  with  a  crim,  would  not  normally  face   difficulties.
         However, one source observed that if any person was  wanted  for  a
         crime  the  police  would  alert  immigration  and  other  stations
         nationally."

22. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq's final submissions related to whether  the  appellant
    would be free from the risks of harm by relocation.  If his account  is
    credible, then the  appellant  would  be  a  person  facing  a  pending
    criminal case that is politically motivated.  This fear is  objectively
    supported by the contents of  the  Home  Office's  Country  Policy  and
    Information  Report  February  2015  (actual  and  perceived  political
    activists), and is updated in the Home  Office's  report  published  in
    January 2018.

The respondent's case

23. Mr Kotas reminded me  that  the  appellant's  general  credibility  was
    undermined by the lengthy delay in claiming  international  protection.
    Judge Birk made this finding at  paragraph  22  and  kept  it  in  mind
    throughout the remainder of the decision and reasons  statement.   This
    is the context in which all other findings and conclusions  had  to  be
    examined.

24. Mr Kotas accepted Judge Birk's finding at paragraph 31, relating to the
    ease with which the  appellant  was  able  to  leave  Bangladesh,  were
    questionable given the evidence contained in  paragraph  3.1.5  of  the
    September 2017 report, but argued that this was a discrete finding  and
    did not infect the other negative findings made.

25. Mr Kotas took me to the negative  findings  made  by  Judge  Birk.   At
    paragraph 24 she found the appellant had not been as actively  involved
    in politics as claimed, and  gave  clear  and  cogent  reasons  for  so
    finding  in  the  next  four  paragraphs.   Those  findings   are   not
    challenged.    At paragraph 29, Judge Birk identified  the  seven-month
    delay in action being taken against the  appellant  in  Bangladesh  and
    noted the appellant had not provided a reasonable explanation for  that
    delay.  It was  open  to  Judge  Birk  to  find,  therefore,  that  the
    appellant had not been attacked for political reasons in January 2009.

26. Mr Kotas disputed the weight to be given  to  paragraph  4.6.1  of  the
    September 2017 report because the part on which the appellant sought to
    rely was based on one unnamed source.  It was doubtful the  source  was
    reliable.  Mr Kotas submitted it was open to  Judge  Birk  to  find  at
    paragraph 35 that the appellant had  failed  to  provide  a  reasonable
    explanation why the arrest warrants had only been procured in 2017.

27. Mr Kotas also submitted that Judge Birk  had  given  clear  and  cogent
    reasons for rejecting the evidence of the appellant's witness  and  the
    evidence from the appellant's Bangladeshi lawyer.

28. Looked at overall, therefore, although there was one finding  that  was
    questionable (relating to the appellant's ease of departure),  all  the
    other findings were soundly made for the reasons given by Judge Birk.

29. Although Mr Razzaq-Siddiq responded to a number of  these  points,  the
    only additional argument he presented was in relation to the  delay  in
    action being taken against the appellant  in  2009.   Mr  Razzaq-Siddiq
    remined me that the Home  Office's  Country  Information  and  Guidance
    Bangladesh Opposition to the government report  published  in  February
    2015 was before Judge Birk.  She refers to that report in paragraph  35
    of her decision and reasons statement.   Section  2.6  of  that  report
    contained evidence in relation to politically motivated  cases.   Judge
    Birk should have had regard to the evidence.  If he had, she would have
    realised  that  delay  in  bringing  proceedings  can  be   politically
    motivated.

Discussion and conclusions

30. Because of the detailed arguments presented by  both  parties  and  the
    issues arising,  it  was  not  appropriate  to  determine  this  appeal
    immediately.  I reserved my decision and reasons, which I now give.

31. Having reviewed all the arguments and evidence, I  am  satisfied  there
    are material errors in Judge Birk's decision and reasons statement that
    require it to be set aside.

32. The errors relate to the assessment of the  appellant's  claim  because
    Judge Birk did not have available  to  her  relevant  and  up  to  date
    background country information.

33. The proper approach to the assessment of protection claims is  set  out
    in paragraphs 339HA to 339N of the Immigration Rules,  which  transpose
    article 4 of the Qualification Directive (2004/83/EC).  It is trite law
    that an assessment requires all the evidence to be  considered  in  the
    round (as  recently  confirmed  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  KB  &  AH
    (credibility-structured  approach:  Pakistan)  [2017]  UKUT  491).   At
    paragraphs 339J(i) and 339JA, the requirement  to  make  an  assessment
    considering up to date information is clear.  The preamble to paragraph
    339L also makes clear that the personal  credibility  of  an  appellant
    will not be particularly relevant to the overall assessment where their
    personal statements are supported by documentary or other evidence.

34.  In  this  context,  the  submissions  of  Mr  Razzaq-Siddiq  are  very
    persuasive.  Many of the negative findings made by Judge Birk fall away
    if the police and court documents were found to be reliable and if  the
    ease with which the appellant left Bangladesh  was  not  a  significant
    factor.  The reasons given by Judge Birk for rejecting the  reliability
    of the police and court documents  and  for  relying  on  the  ease  of
    departure as an indicator the appellant was not  of  interests  to  the
    Bangladeshi authorities are undermined by the  September  2017  report.
    Irrespective of their cogency,  the  fact  the  reasons  are  based  on
    questionable premises, undermines the quality of the reasoning.

35. I add that I find Judge Birk was selective in what  she  accepted  from
    the newspaper articles as being reliable and failed to explain why  she
    was selective in the ways claimed.  The newspaper articles would appear
    to give support to the police and other legal documents,  which  needed
    to be addressed by the Judge.  That failure amounts to a further  legal
    error but is in fact rolled up in the principle error identified.  This
    is because the error might not have been material were it not  for  the
    up to date country information contained in the September 2017 report.

36. Having decided that the assessment carried out by Judge  Birk  contains
    legal error and her decision must  be  set  aside,  I  have  considered
    whether I can remake the  decision  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   I  have
    decided, in light  of  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunal's  Practice
    Statements that  the  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a further hearing so  that  a  proper  assessment  can  be
    carried out.  This is necessary not only because of the extent of  what
    needs to be undertaken but also because of the  need  to  consider  the
    Home  Office's  Country  Policy  and  Information   Note,   Bangladesh;
    Opposition to the government, Version 2.0 of January 2018.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision and reasons statement contains  an  error
on a point of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing,  with
the following directions.


Signed                              Date         21 March 2018

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


Directions

 1. The remitted appeal can be heard by any First-tier Tribunal judge other
    than Judge Birk.

 2. It may be appropriate for  the  remitted  appeal  to  be  allocated  to
    Designated Judge McCarthy, which will enable continuity, but this is  a
    matter for the Fist-tier Tribunal.  If either party has concerns  about
    the appeal being allocated to Designated Judge McCarthy, they should as
    soon as possible make representations to the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The scope of the remitted  hearing  is  limited  to  protection  issues
    (including asylum, humanitarian protection and/or article 3 ECHR).

 4. The following findings are preserved when the remitted hearing  begins.


        a. Paragraph 24 (appellant's membership and role as Joint Secretary
           in the BNP),
        b. Paragraph 34 (the appellant was involved in a  violent  incident
           on 15 August 2009).
    The parties should remember that  the  first  does  not  establish  the
    appellant's level of political activity, particularly  in  relation  to
    his claims to be politically active in the UK.  The parties should also
    remember that the second does not establish a nexus between the violent
    incident and the appellant's claim that  the  allegations  against  him
    were politically motivated.


Signed                              Date         21 March 2018

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


Anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the  parties  or  any  other  person
from disclosing or publishing any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.  The  appellant  can  be  referred  to  as
"RM".


Signed                              Date         21 March 2018

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

