
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07626/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 16 August 2019                      |On 11 September 2019                   |
|                                       |                                       |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                 Sonadan [B]
                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M K Noor, (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought  with
         the permission of a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, from  a  decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it made on 27 July
         2018, following a hearing of 19 July 2018, and which  it  sent  to
         the parties on 31 July 2018. The tribunal decided to  dismiss  the
         claimant's appeal from the Secretary of  State's  decision  of  17
         April 2017 refusing to grant her international protection.

      2. By  way  of  background,  the  claimant,  although  she  had  once
         travelled under a passport containing a different  date  of  birth
         and indeed a different name, was  accepted  by  the  Secretary  of
         State as having been born on 1 March 1964. She is, it is also  not
         disputed, a national of Bangladesh. She entered the United Kingdom
         (UK) on 7 August 2011 by official channels, in possession of a  UK
         visit visa, but with a false passport. It  is  recorded  that  she
         made her claim for international protection on 18 October 2017. In
         making that claim she asserted that she had worked  for  voluntary
         organisations in Bangladesh  and  had  occupied  the  position  of
         "Chairman" of the Bangladeshi National Party (BNP) Women's  Group,
         a position which she took up,  albeit  she  says  unwillingly,  in
         2004. She was also a member of  a  village  committee  and,  as  a
         result of that involvement and her duties, she was required to and
         did, declare that an individual  called  Mohammed  Miah  could  no
         longer serve on the committee because he had been convicted  of  a
         crime. She claims that he  was  aggrieved  and  that  two  of  his
         associates assaulted her, were arrested by  the  police  and  were
         subsequently convicted and sentenced to six  months  imprisonment.
         She asserts that, in 2010, she received threats from  those  three
         persons (Mr Miah and the two associates) and that, to  avoid  them
         she would spend time at her  parent's  home  rather  than  at  her
         husband's village.  She  says  that  if  she  were  to  return  to
         Bangladesh she would be targeted by those  three  individuals  and
         that she would also be targeted by the  ruling  Bangladeshi  Awami
         League (BAL) due to her previous involvement  with  the  BNP.  The
         Secretary of State did not accept her claim to be at risk and  the
         claimant maintained her account on appeal.

3.    The  tribunal,  in  its  written  reasons  of  27  July  2018,  whilst
expressing concerns as to the claimant's credibility, did  accept  that  she
had been "President of the Bangladesh Nationalist Women's Party".  It  noted
that there was background country material before it  which  suggested  that
opposition party leaders and activists might face  harassment  or  arbitrary
arrest and detention at the hands of the ruling forces in Bangladesh. As  to
that, at paragraph 28 of its written reasons, it said this:

    "28.   The CPIN Bangladesh: Opposition to the Government  January  2018
    suggests that since 2009 opposition leaders and  activists  have  faced
    harassment   and   intimidation.   Depending   upon   the    particular
    circumstances and profile of the person any  opposition  party  leaders
    and activists may face harassment  or  arbitrary  detention.  I  remind
    myself that it is necessary  for  me  to  consider  whether  there  are
    particular factors specific to the appellant which could place  her  at
    real risk in the light of the background information.  I  further  note
    that this CPIN states that single women with no support network may  be
    vulnerable if forced to internally relocate."

4.    The tribunal then went on to assess the prospect of  risk  based  upon
the circumstances and the claimant's profile. As to that it said this:

    "33.   I have considered the Appellant's position as president  of  the
    BNP Women's Group and find that I am satisfied that  she  was  in  this
    position. The Appellant's own account in her asylum interview  is  that
    she was effectively pushed into this position in 2004. The  Appellant's
    responses to questions in her asylum interview as to whether the was an
    active member of the BNP are to say the least unclear  (questions  149,
    151 and 152) and it is noteworthy that when the  Appellant  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom she contacted the BNP to see  if  she  was  still  a
    member (AIR questions  147/  148  -  153).  In  her  witness  statement
    paragraph 1 (d) the Appellant states that people came to her house  and
    wanted her to be Chair Person of the BNP Women's  Group.  She  did  not
    know what was required of her but was elected anyway. Paragraph 1(f) of
    the Appellant's witness statement states that as  she  found  out  more
    about the BNP and the fact that it would give her access to  resources,
    she believed that it would be good to help the people. There is nothing
    in the Appellant's account to suggest that she was a BNP activist under
    the normally accepted interpretation of what  constitutes  a  political
    activist. The Appellant's own witness statement states that  she  found
    her position in the BNP to be of  assistance  in  accessing  resources,
    Miss Pickering [the  claimant's  representative  before  the  tribunal]
    submitted  that  it  may  be  that  the  Appellant's   charitable   and
    humanitarian activities may be construed as criticism of the government
    and while there is some merit in that  argument,  I  do  not  find  the
    Appellant's activities in Bangladesh would  suggest  that  she  was  an
    opponent of the Government or a political activist  on  behalf  of  the
    BNP. In any event, the Appellant's account has been  that  the  beating
    which she had received and the subsequent threats when the perpetrators
    were released from prison where as  a  result  of  her  declaring  that
    Mohammed Miah had been  convicted  and  sentenced  in  relation  to  an
    offence rather than as a result of her activities on behalf of the BNP.
    The  CPN/  Bangladesh:  Opposition  to  the  Government  January   2018
    indicated opposition party leaders may face  harassment  and  arbitrary
    arrest and detention but having considered the Appellant's role  within
    the BNP and her activities  in  Bangladesh  I  do  not  find  that  the
    Appellant would be  at  risk  upon  her  return  as  a  result  of  her
    activities with the BNP while she was in Bangladesh".

5.    The tribunal then considered the question of risk in relation  to  the
three individuals the claimant had said  that  she  feared.  The  tribunal's
consideration of that aspect runs from paragraph 24 to paragraph 36  of  the
written reasons. I do not propose to set  that  out  in  this  decision  but
salient points noted  by the tribunal included the  fact  that  on  her  own
account two of the claimed assailants had been  imprisoned  in  relation  to
the claimed assault; there had been no  further  assaults  since  2008;  the
claimant had not left Bangladesh until 2011; although  she  had  claimed  to
have relocated for her own safety she had  remained  in  the  same  vicinity
until her departure for Bangladesh (having gone only  some  seven  to  eight
miles from her home village); and that if the  makers  of  the  threats  had
genuinely intended to carry them out they would have had an  opportunity  to
have done so. Putting all of that together the tribunal concluded  that  the
claimant had not demonstrated she would be at risk  from  those  individuals
if she were to return. Finally, the tribunal concluded, on the basis of  the
claimant's own indication that she had a  number  of  family  members  still
living in Bangladesh, that she would not be returning to that country "as  a
lone female". So, on that basis  and  for  those  reasons,  the  appeal  was
dismissed.

6.    An application for permission to appeal then followed. The grounds  of
appeal, as I read them, criticised  the  tribunal  for  making  inconsistent
findings; for failing  to  adequately  reason  out  its  decision;  and  for
wrongly approaching the  question  of  what  weight  it  ought  to  give  to
documentation. But, in truth, a  large  amount  of  what  was  said  in  the
written grounds did not obviously go beyond attempted re-argument  with  the
tribunal's findings and conclusions.  Permission  to  appeal  was  initially
refused but was then granted by a Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  who  said
this:

    "1.    There is no inherent error in  the  judge's  findings  that  the
    appellant could be a President of a BNP Women's  Group  yet  not  be  a
    political activist. However, as the Judge herself records at [33],  the
    background material (CPIN January 2018) refers to  "political  leaders"
    as well as activists facing a risk of harassment and detention.  It  is
    arguable  that  the  judge  has  inadequately  considered  whether  the
    appellant would,  as  a  political  leader,  if  not  an  activist,  be
    perceived as an opponent by the government".

7.    Permission having been granted the matter was listed before the  Upper
Tribunal (before me) for an oral hearing so  that  it  could  be  considered
whether the tribunal had erred in law and, if  so,  what  should  flow  from
that.  Representation  was  as  stated  above.  I  am   grateful   to   each
representative and I have considered what each of them had to say to me.

8.    As I confirmed to the parties at  the  end  of  the  hearing,  I  have
decided that the tribunal did not err in law. I shall now explain why.

9.    Mr Noor, building upon the written grounds, saw  an  inconsistency  in
the tribunal accepting that the claimant held a position within the BNP  but
concluding that she is not a BNP activist.  However,  as  was  said  by  the
Upper Tribunal Judge who granted  permission  to  appeal,  it  is  perfectly
possible to be the former and not the latter.  What  the  tribunal  did  was
recognise, at paragraph 28 of  its  written  reasons  set  out  above,  that
oppositionist political leaders and oppositionist political activists  might
be at risk depending upon the particular circumstances and  the  profile  of
the person in question. Then, at paragraph 33 which again  I  have  set  out
above, the tribunal analysed the circumstances obtaining in this  particular
case and the claimant's actual profile based upon her activities.  It  found
in consequence of that, that she would not be at risk either as a leader  or
as an activist. Given the  limited  information  she  had  given  about  her
activities it was  entitled  to  conclude  that  she  was  not  a  political
activist notwithstanding the position she had held. Given its  findings,  it
was entitled to conclude, as it did, that she  would  not  face  risk  as  a
leader. That deals with Mr  Noor's  point  and  with  the  point  made  when
permission  to  appeal  was  granted.  Essentially  the  tribunal  correctly
understood the position as to possible risk based on the background  country
material and it them made  its  necessary  findings  in  order  to  reach  a
conclusion as to risk. Its findings and conclusions were open to it  on  the
material before it.

10.   Mr Noor sought to argue, before me, though I do not detect this  point
in the written grounds, that the tribunal had erred  through  regarding  the
risk at the hands of the three individuals and the  risk  due  to  political
activities as being  separate  matters.  But,  essentially,  they  had  been
presented as separate matters. Anyway, on the basis  of  its  findings,  the
tribunal was perfectly entitled to regard them as  being  separate.  In  any
event, it does not seem to me that it would have impacted upon  the  outcome
whether the claimed sources of risk were regarded as separate or related.

11.   Mr Noor criticised  the  tribunal,  in  his  submissions  to  me,  for
wrongly concluding that the claimant would have a sufficiency of  protection
in Bangladesh. Its reasoning as to that was that the authorities  had  shown
a keenness to protect the claimant by responding to her report  of  assault,
prosecuting the individuals concerned, and then imprisoning  them.  Mr  Noor
said that there had been further political developments in Bangladesh  since
those actions had been taken. But on the material  before  it  the  tribunal
was entitled to conclude that there would be a  sufficiency  of  protection.
Additionally and in any event, the tribunal also concluded  that  the  three
individuals no longer had any intention to cause the claimant  harm  because
although they had had the opportunity to attack her in 2009,  2010  and  the
portion of 2011 prior to her departure from Bangladesh, they  had  not  done
so. So, even if the tribunal had erred with respect to its consideration  of
sufficiency of protection (and I conclude  that  it  did  not)  the  outcome
would have been unaffected.

12.   Mr Noor argued that the tribunal had erred  in  the  approach  it  had
taken to documentation the claimant had submitted in support of her  appeal.
But I do not think it has been clearly explained what the claimed error  was
and, in any event, documentation did not play a significant part at  all  in
the tribunal's deliberations. Such is apparent from what it had  to  say  at
paragraph 32 of its written  reasons.  Despite  expressing  a  mild  concern
about certain  of  the  documents  offered  in  support  of  the  claimant's
contention that she had been the President  of  the  Bangladesh  Nationalist
Women's Party, it accepted that she had been.

13.   For the avoidance of doubt, I was not able to detect anything else  in
Mr Noor's oral submissions nor in the grounds of appeal  which  went  beyond
attempted re-argument with the tribunal's findings and conclusions.

14.   In the circumstances it has not been demonstrated  that  the  tribunal
erred in law. Accordingly, this appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law. Accordingly, the claimant's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction. The First-tier Tribunal did not do so  and  I
was not invited to consider doing so.


Signed:     Dated: 10 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

