
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07018/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27th February 2018                      |On 1st March 2018              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     PCN
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, of Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda born in 1976.  She  arrived  in
       the UK in 2000 as a Tier 4 student migrant.  Her  leave  expired  in
       2004  and  she  overstayed.  In  2015  she  made   an   unsuccessful
       application to remain on private life grounds. On 10th January  2017
       she claimed asylum on the basis that she was at real risk of serious
       harm if returned to Uganda because of her sexuality. Her application
       was refused on 11th July 2017. Her appeal against the  decision  was
       dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup on all  grounds  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 31st August 2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kebede  on
       2nd January 2018 on the basis that it was arguable that  the  First-
       tier judge had erred in law in the approach adopted to HJ  (Iran)  v
       SSHD (Rev 1) [2010] UKSC 3 with respect to living discreetly.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. After submissions on error of law I found
       that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  and  set  aside  the
       decision dismissing the appeal. We  then  proceeded  to  remake  the
       appeal with further submissions, and I informed the parties  that  I
       would allow that appeal. Mr Briddock requested that  the  matter  be
       expedited, in terms of receiving the decision of the Upper  Tribunal
       and the respondent issuing refugee status papers, as  the  appellant
       was due to become street homeless tomorrow. Mr Lindsay and I  agreed
       to do our best in expediting the paper work.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. In her grounds of appeal the appellant  argues  as  follows.  It  is
       accepted by the First-tier  Tribunal  that  she  is  a  lesbian  and
       Ugandan. She is found to be a  generally  credible  witness.  It  is
       accepted that she has had a same-sex relationship in the UK;  it  is
       also accepted that she has attended LGBT meetings; and chosen not to
       be an out lesbian amongst members of the Ugandan community for  fear
       of losing her accommodation.

    5. The First-tier Tribunal finds that she would be discreet if returned
       to Uganda and as a result would not be subjected to persecution, see
       paragraphs 60 and 63 of the decision.  This  is  the  first  finding
       which is said to be legally flawed. The First-tier  Tribunal  failed
       to consider the totality of the appellant's lesbian behaviour in the
       UK where she has had a  same  sex  relationship  and  attended  LGBT
       meetings;  and  consider  whether  she  could  find   and   have   a
       relationship with a partner, live with that person and  attend  LGBT
       meetings in Uganda; and whether this  was  accurately  described  as
       discreet behaviour in the UK.

    6. Further the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  consider  whether  the
       motivation of the appellant if she would  not  do  these  things  in
       Uganda was in any part due to avoiding persecution rather  than  for
       her own reasons relating to her character. As it  is  accepted  that
       she conceals her sexuality form the Ugandan community out of fear of
       being forced to leave the area, see paragraph 53  of  the  decision,
       this is not evidence of this being solely a personal decision to  be
       discreet.

    7. HJ Iran directs how the First-tier Tribunal should have assessed how
       the appellant would behave on return  to  her  home  country.  There
       should have been an assessment of  how  she  would  want  to  behave
       absent any persecutory factors and then a decision if she would have
       behaved differently if she would not be at risk of being persecuted.
       The First-tier Tribunal  err  by  failing  to  frame  this  question
       correctly. At paragraph 61 this is put as an either or question: the
       applicant would be discreet because she is private and  reserved  or
       because she fears persecution, whereas  HJ  Iran  directs  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal should  have  looked  to  see  if  her  discreet
       behaviour would in any part be due to  persecution.  The  First-tier
       Tribunal ought to have found the appellant to be a  refugee  if  any
       part of the concealment of her sexuality was due to persecution. The
       appellant clearly recorded fear  as  a  factor  in  influencing  her
       lifestyle if returned  to  Uganda,  see  her  evidence  recorded  at
       paragraph 46 of the decision.  This fear also runs  through  answers
       to questions given at  interview,  see  explicitly  her  answers  to
       questions 229 and 233.

    8. The respondent accepts LGBT persons are at risk  of  persecution  in
       Uganda and it is clear someone who behaved as the appellant  has  in
       the UK, except when in the Ugandan community, would  be  persecuted.
       It was not correct to require the appellant to change her behaviour,
       and the appellant has indicated she would behave  in  this  modified
       discreet way at least in part due to  fear  of  persecution  if  she
       returned to Uganda.  The appellant was therefore entitled to refugee
       status.

    9. In a Rule 24  notice  the  respondent  argues  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal directed itself properly  with  respect  to  HJ  (Iran)  at
       paragraphs 40-43, 48 and 61 of the decision. The First-tier Tribunal
       found that the appellant lived discreetly because of her personality
       and reserved nature and not a fear of persecution, with  a  fear  of
       prejudice not being  sufficient  at  paragraphs  49  to  63  of  the
       decision, and that if the appellant had a relationship on return  to
       Uganda she  would  continue  to  be  discreet  due  to  her  private
       character, see paragraph 63 of the decision.  Mr  Lindsay  added  in
       oral submissions that there was no evidence that appellant would not
       have conducted herself discreetly on return in Uganda  for  personal
       reasons, and that the burden was on her so  there  was  no  material
       error of law. It would be possible to go to meetings of LGBT  groups
       discreetly, and also to have a relationship discreetly in Uganda for
       personal reasons even if the appellant had not lived this way in the
       UK.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   10. The respondent and the First-tier  Tribunal  accept  both  that  the
       appellant is a lesbian, and also that  people  who  are  open  about
       their lesbian sexuality are persecuted in Uganda.

   11. The appellant correctly identifies that the First-tier Tribunal  has
       not directed itself lawfully at paragraphs 40 and 61 of the decision
       with respect to the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant  would  live
       discreetly and the motivation  for  living  discreetly.  The  proper
       question is whether a decision to  live  discreetly  would  only  be
       motivated by social pressures or a  reserved  nature  or  whether  a
       material  reason  would  be  fear  of  persecution.  The  First-tier
       Tribunal puts the question as an either or  one,  not  allowing  for
       what the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) recognised as  likely  to  be  a
       more complicated picture of mixed motives, and not recognising  that
       an appellant was  entitled  to  recognition  as  a  refugee  if  the
       decision to be discreet about her sexuality was materially motivated
       by fear even if other factors also played a part.

   12. It is accepted that the appellant has had a lesbian relationship  in
       Uganda and one in the UK between 2003 and 2004;  and  that  she  has
       joined an LGBT group, Rainbows  without  Borders,  in  the  UK,  see
       paragraph 51 and 52 of the decision. Her relationship with her girl-
       friend was conducted openly in the UK, and  involved  holding  hands
       and kissing in public, and going  on  dates.  In  this  context  the
       finding at paragraph 60 that  she  has  lived  a  very  private  and
       discreet life  in  the  UK  is  either  insufficiently  reasoned  or
       irrational.

   13. The First-tier Tribunal recognised that fear did and would impact on
       the appellant's lifestyle with respect to her sexuality when she was
       in Uganda and when she is amongst the Ugandan community in  the  UK,
       see paragraphs 46 -48 and 53 of the decision.

   14. In these circumstances I find that the error of law with respect  to
       the misdirection on living discreetly to be  material.  I  therefore
       set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
       appeal on asylum grounds.

Submissions - Remaking

   15. Mr Lindsay did not concede but did not challenge the credibility  of
       the appellant. He submitted that the test was whether the  appellant
       would modify her behaviour and conceal her lesbian identity  if  she
       returned to Uganda out of fear of persecution. It was  unclear  that
       this had been shown to be the case, and thus the appellant  had  now
       shown that she was entitled to refugee status.

   16. Mr Briddock accepted that Mr  Lindsay  had  formulated  the  correct
       test. He submitted however that it need not be "clearly"  shown  but
       rather the appellant had to show it to  be  reasonably  likely  that
       fear of persecution would be a  material  factor  in  the  appellant
       modifying her behaviour if returned to Uganda.  Mr  Briddock  argued
       that the responses set out in the appellant's asylum interview shows
       that repeatedly she associated her being discreet in Uganda to  fear
       of homophobia and violence in that country. Likewise, in her  appeal
       statement she explains that unlike in the UK she cannot be open with
       her  sexuality  because  she  would  face  persecution.   In   these
       circumstances the appellant was entitled to refugee status.

Conclusions - Remaking

   17. I remake the decision allowing the appeal on asylum grounds for  the
       following reasons.

   18. I find that the appellant has put forward a consistent  position  in
       both her asylum interview and in her appeal statement that  she  was
       and would be afraid to reveal that she was a  lesbian  and  live  an
       openly gay life in Uganda because of fear of physical violence  from
       a homophobic society.

   19. This is stated explicitly by the appellant  at  her  interview,  for
       instance in response to question 233 of her interview where she says
       she fears being "harmed or stoned" because  of  admitting  to  being
       gay; and in response to question 80 where she states that "there  is
       homophobia throughout the country" which would  cause  her  to  hide
       away if she went back there; and in response to question  299  where
       she talks about "the fear" being there if she  returned  to  Uganda.
       In her appeal statement the appellant states that she is open  about
       her sexuality in the UK, bar with those from Ugandan  community  who
       provide her with accommodation  and  food  as  this  would  then  be
       withdrawn if she told them, but that if she were like this in Uganda
       she would "face persecution", see paragraph 36B, and in contrast  to
       the UK she would not be safe and would fear that people  would  come
       after her, see paragraph 40.

   20. Applying HJ (Iran) I find that the appellant has shown to the  lower
       civil standard of proof that she would be discreet with  respect  to
       her lesbian identity if she were  returned  to  Uganda  but  that  a
       material reason in this decision to live discreetly would be a  fear
       of persecution if she were to live openly as a lesbian woman.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by  allowing  it  on  asylum  and
      human rights grounds.

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  her
    protection claim.


Signed:      Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:   27th  February
2018






