
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07709/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 22nd June 2017                   |On 03rd July 2017                       |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                             Mr Jahangir Siddik
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Head, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  16th  October  1985.
    The Appellant had applied for asylum and asked to be  recognised  as  a
    refugee.  His claim for asylum was based upon a purported fear that  if
    returned to Bangladesh he would face mistreatment on the basis  of  his
    political opinion as a supporter of the  Awami  League,  conversion  to
    Christianity and his fear of the Awami League due to  money  he  loaned
    from them.  The latter ground was  acknowledged  by  the  Secretary  of
    State as being a non-Convention reason.  The  Appellant's  claims  were
    refused by Notice of Refusal dated 12th July 2016.

 2. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal and the appeal came before Judge
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  Chana  sitting  at  Harmondsworth  on  1st
    September 2016.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 24th November
    2016 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 8th December 2016 the Appellant lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper  Tribunal.   Permission  to  appeal  was  refused  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on  26th  January  2017.   Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison considered that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  considered
    all the evidence and made appropriate findings which were open  to  her
    to make and that it was open for the judge to consider what weight  she
    felt it appropriate to place on  all  the  evidence  before  her.   She
    considered that the judge had given detailed reasons for coming to  the
    conclusion that (a) no background evidence had been  provided  to  show
    that the prison conditions in Bangladesh were of  such  harshness  that
    the Appellant should be granted humanitarian protection for  having  to
    go to jail in Bangladesh for his theft or that said conditions  reached
    the Article 3 threshold and (b) in any event the judge found  that  the
    Appellant's entire story was a pure fabrication.

 4. On 9th February 2017 renewed Grounds of Appeal  were  lodged  with  the
    Upper Tribunal.  On 4th May 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge  Perkins  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Perkins noted that it was appreciated that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had rejected much of the Appellant's case
    including his claimed conversion to Christianity, for apparently  sound
    reasons that, appropriately, had not been criticised in the application
    for permission to appeal.  He noted that he granted permission  because
    the ground made out a reasonably  arguable  case  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not consider  rationally  (or  at  all)  strands  of
    evidence concerning particularly (but not limited to) prison conditions
    in Bangladesh.

 5. On 30th May 2017 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Secretary of State  contended  therein  that
    the grounds were totally misconceived and that the suggestion that  the
    Appellant faces an Article 3 breach in prison is predicated on the fact
    that he would be prosecuted for stealing/borrowing money  that  he  has
    failed to repay.  However, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  totally
    rejected the Appellant's claim and critically at paragraph 63 the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had stated: "The Appellant's entire story is a pure
    fabrication".  In any event it  was  unclear  that  if  there  was  any
    evidence before the judge as to  the  likely  punishment  for  stealing
    money it may be that the Appellant would simply be asked to  repay  the
    money, fined or given a non-custodial sentence.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel, Ms Head.  Ms Head is familiar with this matter.  She  appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appears by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Jarvis.

 7. Ms Head has indicated to me that she  had  expected  the  Appellant  to
    personally attend.  He has failed to do so.  I do not hold that against
    him.  In any event this matter was an error of law hearing  dealt  with
    by submissions and I proceeded in his absence.

Submissions/Discussions

 8. Ms Head relies on the grounds.  Firstly she takes me to paragraph 6  of
    the judge's decision where she points out the judge  has  set  out  the
    basis of the claim and she refers me to the findings of fact which  are
    set out at paragraph 39 thereafter.  The main thrust  of  her  argument
    and criticism of the First-tier Tribunal is to be found in the findings
    made by the judge at paragraph 51.  She notes that at paragraph 51  the
    judge has stated:

         "The  Appellant  claims  that  he  borrowed  three  lakhs  from  an
         organisation called Bongo Bondhhu Memorial Fund on which he was the
         president.  He said he could do so ... and  had  the  authority  to
         take the money.  ...  This demonstrates to me  that  the  Appellant
         fears persecution and not prosecution.  No background evidence  has
         been provided to me that the prison conditions in Bangladesh are of
         such harshness that he should be  granted  humanitarian  protection
         for having to go to jail for his theft in Bangladesh."

 9. Ms Head submits that in reaching this finding the judge has ignored the
    background evidence and the further representations  submitted  on  the
    Appellant's behalf and that had  the  judge  properly  considered  this
    evidence she  could  not  have  reached  the  findings  that  she  did.
    Therefore she submits  that  the  findings  reached  on  the  risk  the
    Appellant faces on return to Bangladesh were unsustainable and that the
    judge has failed to consider the prison conditions that currently exist
    within Bangladesh as are set out in the objective evidence.

10. She submits that it was not  open  to  the  judge  that  no  background
    evidence was provided to indicate that prison conditions in  Bangladesh
    were of such harshness that  he  should  not  be  granted  humanitarian
    protection for having to go to jail for his theft or that such evidence
    was clearly before her.  Further it was submitted  on  the  Appellant's
    behalf that his failure to repay the funds would lead to the  Appellant
    being punished by a term of imprisonment  under  the  Bangladesh  Penal
    Code of 1860 and it was submitted that the judge had failed  to  engage
    with this reality and as such her findings in relation to the risk  the
    Appellant faces on return to Bangladesh are unsustainable.

11. In response Mr Jarvis takes me as his starting point to paragraph 63 of
    the judge's decision, pointing out that the  findings  therein  by  the
    judge have not been challenged and that  the  judge  has  rejected  the
    Appellant's claim that his version of events is credible.   Further  he
    submits that paragraph 51 has to be read on the basis of the  Appellant
    facing persecution and not prosecution and he refers me to the decision
    in SH (prison conditions) Bangladesh [2008] UKAIT 00076.  He  asked  me
    to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Case Law

14. SH (prison conditions) Bangladesh [2008] UKAIT 00076 is  authority  for
    the following propositions:

 a) Prison conditions in Bangladesh, at least for  ordinary  prisoners,  do
    not violate Article 3.

 b) This conclusion does not mean that an individual who  faces  prison  on
    return to Bangladesh can  never  succeed  in  showing  a  violation  of
    Article 3 in the particular circumstances of his case.  The  individual
    facts of each case should be considered to determine whether  detention
    will cause a particular individual in his particular  circumstances  to
    suffer treatment contrary to Article 3.

Findings on Error of Law

15. The starting point herein  are  the  findings  reached  on  Appellant's
    credibility by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  It is important to  note
    the way those findings are set out  at  paragraph  63  of  the  judge's
    decision:

         "Considering all the evidence in the case as a whole, I  find  that
         no-one in Bangladesh has any interest in the Appellant and that the
         Appellant's entire story is a pure fabrication.  I  find  that  the
         Appellant came to this  country  from  Bangladesh  as  an  economic
         migrant and not because he fears, any persecution or prosecution in
         Bangladesh.  I find that the Appellant is a man of  no  credibility
         whatsoever."

16. It is against such strong findings on credibility which,  I  note,  are
    not challenged in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  nor  by  Ms  Head  in  her
    submissions that this appeal comes before me.  The thrust of the appeal
    is that the Appellant might be subjected  to  prison  conditions  which
    breach his right for humanitarian  protection.   SH  is  clear  in  the
    manner in which it states the law.  Each case must be considered by its
    own facts.  In this case the judge has made it clear firstly  that  she
    does not actually believe any of the Appellant's version of events.  It
    is a most damning attack on credibility which at no point in the appeal
    process his legal  representatives  seek  to  challenge.   The  premise
    therefore is that his version of events is not true.

17. Secondly the judge has given consideration to  the  position  regarding
    his risk in prison.  At paragraph 51 the judge has found that there has
    been no background evidence provided to her that the prison  conditions
    were  of  such  harshness  that  the  Appellant   should   be   granted
    humanitarian protection for having to go to jail for his  theft.   This
    therefore is clearly a judge who is aware of the overall conditions  in
    Bangladeshi prisons and relied on evidence  being  produced  which  was
    supportive to the Appellant's position.  Bearing in mind  her  findings
    on credibility and her findings  with  regard  to  evidence  on  prison
    conditions she has made findings that she is perfectly entitled to  and
    even if Ms Head is correct in stating that there was overall  objective
    evidence with regard to prison conditions generally in Bangladesh it is
    clear that no specific evidence to the fate of  this  Appellant  if  he
    attends prison had been provided as would appear to be  appropriate  if
    following the guidance in SH and in any  event  this  is  an  Appellant
    whose whole story has  been  found  to  lack  credibility  and  is  not
    challenged.

18. Consequently if there is any error of law in the failure to  the  judge
    to specifically make reference to the  objective  evidence  it  is  not
    material and in such circumstances this is a judge who has given  clear
    and due consideration to all factors that were brought to her attention
    and has  given  a  well-reasoned  and  well-considered  judgment.   The
    decision discloses consequently no material error of law and the appeal
    of the Appellant is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed  D N Harris                               Date 22nd June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed  D N Harris                               Date 22nd June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris












