
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07193/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a hearing|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 30th June 2020                      |On 14th July 2020               |
|                                       |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KG
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      Introduction

   1. The claimant is a citizen of Iraq born in 1980. He came to the  UK  in
      January 2019 with his wife and children and made an asylum claim.  The
      application was refused on 25th July 2019.  The  appeal  against  that
      decision was allowed on humanitarian protection grounds by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Davidge in a  determination  promulgated  on  the  27th
      January 2020.

   2. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State  by  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Scott Baker on 3rd March 2020 on the basis that it
      is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  in  failing  to
      provide sufficient reasons on material matters, and in  particular  to
      support the finding that the claimant could  not  internally  relocate
      within the IKR due to his mental health problems  given  the  arguable
      lack of reasoning with respect to  medical  evidence  and  country  of
      origin evidence about the availability of treatment.

   3. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-
      19 and with regard to the overriding  object  set  out  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  to  decide  matters  fairly   and   justly
      directions were sent out to the parties by email  on  7th  April  2020
      seeking written submissions on the assertion of an error of law with a
      view  to  determining  that  issue  on  the  papers,  and  giving   an
      opportunity for any party who felt that a hearing was necessary in the
      interests of justice to make submissions on that issue too.  Responses
      were received from both parties: from Mr T Melvin, Specialist  Appeals
      Team, dated 22nd April 2020 for the Secretary of State  and  from  the
      claimant's solicitors in an undated document.

   4. The matter came before me to determine whether it is in the  interests
      of justice to decide this matter  without  a  hearing  and  if  so  to
      determine whether the First-tier Tribunal has erred  in  law.  I  find
      that it is appropriate to determine whether there is an error  of  law
      on the papers given that neither party identifies any objection to the
      matter being determined on the papers  in  their  submissions  and  it
      being a relatively discrete issue.

      Submissions - Error of Law

   5. In the grounds of appeal and further submissions from Mr Melvin it  is
      argued by the Secretary of State, in short summary, as follows. It  is
      argued that the First-tier Tribunal errs at paragraph 47 to 48 of  the
      decision in finding that the claimant's mental  health  condition  was
      such that it was not reasonable to expect him to  internally  relocate
      in the IKR. It is argued that there are no adequate reasons explaining
      why the claimant's mental  health  was  such  that  it  would  not  be
      reasonable for him to relocate given that at paragraph 46 it had  been
      found that it would be generally safe for him to do so and that he had
      financial means  and  family  support.  It  is  argued  that  this  is
      particularly the case as no medical evidence is referred to supporting
      this conclusion or evidence of the lack of any relevant  treatment  in
      the IKR.

   6. In his submissions the claimant  argues  that  the  appeal  should  be
      dismissed as there are no errors of law in the decision of the  First-
      tier Tribunal. It is argued that the  grounds  essentially  raise  two
      issues: firstly, whether there was insufficient reasoning as to why it
      would be unduly harsh for the claimant  to  relocate  internally;  and
      secondly contending that there was a  failure  to  consider  treatment
      options in Iraq on return for his mental health problems.

   7. With regards to the first issue  it  is  argued  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal carefully considered the medical evidence from  Dr  Munro  at
      paragraphs 22 to 27 of the  decision  highlighting  the  diagnosis  of
      PTSD; the fact that removal would  aggravate  his  mental  stress  and
      would lengthen the period of therapy and rehabilitation needed for him
      to be able to work; and the fact that the claimant's fears  of  return
      were genuine from a psychological perspective. Further there is also a
      proper direction by reference to  the  case  law  in  SMO,  KSP  &  IM
      (Article 15 (c ); identity documents) Iraq CG  [2019]  UKUT  400  with
      respect to factors affecting return to the IKR including  disabilities
      and access to work. It is submitted therefore that  there  is  further
      reasoning supporting the decision that internal relocation  is  unduly
      harsh, and not just  the  concise  summary  at  paragraph  47  of  the
      decision.

   8. In relation to the second issue it is argued that  extensive  evidence
      of the lack of mental health treatment in Iraq was placed  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal in the claimant's bundle, which included  evidence
      of significant gaps in mental health provision and an  acute  shortage
      of psychiatrists and mental health professionals. The grounds set  out
      the key passage which was drawn to the  attention  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal on this matter. In the decision there is clear  reference  to
      all this material having been considered. It is clear  from  paragraph
      47 of the decision that the  First-tier  Tribunal  placed  significant
      weight on the opinion of  Dr  Munro,  the  medical  expert,  that  the
      claimant's: "fear of further  abuse  and  extortion  would  make  such
      therapy unlikely to succeed in Iraq". In this  context  it  is  argued
      that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal accords with the evidence
      that was before it and is sufficiently reasoned.

      Conclusions - Error of Law

   9. The First-tier Tribunal clearly states that it did have regard to  all
      of the evidence before it, as is noted at paragraph 8 of the decision,
      and it is also clearly said that not all evidence is recited in  order
      to provide an accessible reasoned  decision  at  paragraph  9  of  the
      decision. This is, I find, a lawful approach.

  10. The First-tier Tribunal concludes on the basis of all of the  evidence
      that the claimant has shown to the lower civil standard of proof  that
      he is in need of international protection  as  his  at  real  risk  of
      serious harm from an organised criminal gang who  have  kidnapped  and
      tortured him to extort money in Kirkuk in the past, and that there  is
      a real risk that they will do so again in the  future.  In  coming  to
      this conclusion significant weight is placed on the medical report  of
      Dr Munro. This conclusion  is  not  challenged  in  the  Secretary  of
      State's appeal. The challenge is to the decision  that  he  could  not
      find safety within the IKR in Iraq by internally relocating, away from
      his home area of Kirkuk and Erbil, where he is in danger.

  11. It is found by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 46 of the decision
      in favour of internal relocation that the  claimant  has  considerable
      financial resources of his own and within his family, and that he  has
      family nearby, and that it would be possible to find safety within the
      IKR. However, it is found, at paragraph 47 of the decision, not to  be
      reasonable for the claimant to internally relocate  in  this  area  as
      this would be unduly harsh due to his mental health problems  and  the
      fact it would be too frightening for him.

  12. As submitted by the claimant the medical  evidence  is  considered  in
      detail at paragraphs 22 to 27 of the decision, with paragraphs  24  to
      26 of  the  decision  focusing  on  the  psychological  problems,  and
      concluding that removal would negatively impact on  his  mental  state
      given the ill-treatment he was subjected  to,  and  would  this  would
      impact on his ability to engage with therapy and thus slow his ability
      to rehabilitate and be able to return to work.

  13. It is relevant to consider the scarring evidence set out in the report
      and in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal which can be summarised
      as follows. It is found that the  scarring  is  highly  consistent  or
      typical of injuries which the claimant says  he  received  during  his
      kidnap by the criminal gang in November 2017 and includes: a  scar  on
      his eyelid highly consistent with being caused by a blow with the butt
      of a handgun; a scar at the base of the penis highly  consistent  with
      being caused by a blow from a fist or  boot;  entry  and  exit  wounds
      scars typical of being from a handgun at  a  range  of  1  metre;  and
      injuries to a toe typical of being caused by two segments of  the  toe
      being removed with sharp metal pincers.

  14. In light of the  horrific  torture  the  claimant  is  found  to  have
      suffered at the hands of the criminal gang by the First-tier  Tribunal
      in Kirkuk in November 2017, and the diagnosis of PTSD  (which  as  set
      out in the full report includes: flashbacks, nightmares, avoidance  of
      noise,  crowds  and  discussions  of  his  situation  with  strangers,
      hyperarousal  affecting  his  sleep   and   concentration,   lack   of
      concentration, and emotional upset) and the  opinion  of  the  medical
      expert, Dr Munro, that "his fear of further abuse and extortion" would
      make the necessary psychological therapy "unlikely to succeed in Iraq"
      as he found the claimant to be in a state of "dread"  and  to  have  a
      genuine psychological belief that he will be found and attacked  again
      if he returns to that country, I find that the conclusion of the First-
      tier Tribunal that it would be unduly harsh to expect the claimant  to
      relocate internally is entirely  rational  and  properly  reasoned  by
      reference to the medical report.

  15. I find that there was no need for the First-tier Tribunal to refer  to
      the country of origin materials with respect to  the  availability  of
      psychological support in the IKR as the point is  that  even  if  they
      exist in adequate form the state of terror which return  would  induce
      in the claimant due to his genuine subjective belief  that  relocation
      in the IKR away from Kirkuk and Erbil would not  provide  safety  from
      further abduction and torture would make any therapy very unlikely  to
      succeed in healing his significant and  debilitating  PTSD  condition.
      However, as the claimant has point  out,  in  any  case  the  evidence
      available to the First-tier Tribunal with regards  the  situation  for
      health service provision in Iraq is very poor with an  acute  shortage
      of psychiatrists and mental health professionals, see UNCHR report  on
      Iraq dated May 2019 in the claimant's bundle at page  282,  which  was
      before the First-tier Tribunal  and  in  a  passage  identified  in  a
      schedule as particularly relevant to the determination of this appeal.






   Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involved
      the making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  appeal
      on humanitarian protection grounds.


Signed      Fiona Lindsley   30th June 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

