
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07725/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 January 2019                  |On 30 January 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                  ROGER [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss E Mottershaw (counsel) instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Mather promulgated on 7  August  2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of  the  Congo  who
was born on 28 July 1974. The appellant arrived in the  UK  on  15  November
2017 and claimed asylum on arrival. On 7 June 2018 the  Secretary  of  State
refused the Appellant's protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Mather ("the Judge") dismissed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 26  September  2018  Tribunal
Judge Nightingale gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "3.     The  grounds  are  arguable.  The  Judge's  conclusions,   from
    paragraph 23,  arguably  conflate  plausibility  with  credibility  and
    arguably contain insufficient reasons for the  wholesale  rejection  of
    the appellant's account. It is also arguable that the  Judge  erred  by
    failing to make any finding with regard to the appellant's departure on
    a false passport & any possible risk arising from that departure. It is
    also arguable that the Judge erred in his consideration of  the  letter
    from the UDPS/UK containing details  of  the  checks  and  verification
    which have been made of the appellant's claim.


    4.     It is also  arguable  that  the  Judge  erred  in  refusing  the
    adjournment application as the appellant had been awaiting  a  decision
    on the grant of legal aid which has only been confirmed shortly  before
    the hearing. The Judge was aware that the appellant would  be  provided
    with free legal representation, including the translation of a document
    said to come from the DRC authorities, if the appeal was adjourned.  It
    is arguable that the Judge  did  not  properly  address  the  issue  of
    fairness in accordance with Nwaigwe.


    5.     Permission is granted on all grounds pleaded."


The Hearing

5. After Miss Mottershaw moved the grounds of appeal, Mr Bates told me  that
he would have difficulty resisting the appeal. He told  me  that  the  Judge
applied the wrong test  in  considering  the  question  of  adjournment.  He
agreed that the Judge's findings  of  fact  require  greater  reasoning.  He
referred, in particular, to the final sentence of [27] and said  that  there
was an  inadequacy  of  findings  in  relation  to  credibility.  Both  Miss
Mottershaw and Mr Bates asked me  to  remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.

Analysis

6. The appellant was unrepresented before the First-tier Tribunal.  At  [16]
and [17] the Judge records that  the  appellant's  previous  representatives
requested an adjournment in advance of the hearing,  and  that  request  was
refused. At  [18]  the  Judge  records  that  the  appellant  asked  for  an
adjournment before  the  hearing  started  because  he  had  (just)  secured
representation and his new representatives require further time to  prepare.
The Judge says that he refused the adjournment for  the  same  reasons  that
the written adjournment request made by the appellant's  agents  on  6  July
2018 had been refused.

7. In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)  it  was  held
that if a Tribunal  refuses  to  accede  to  an  adjournment  request,  such
decision could, in principle, be  erroneous  in  law  in  several  respects:
these include a failure to take into account  all  material  considerations;
permitting  immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;   denying   the   party
concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question will be  whether  the
refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a fair  hearing.   Where
an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds,  it  is  important
to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether  the
First-tier Tribunal acted reasonably.  Rather, the test  to  be  applied  is
that of fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected  party's  right
to a fair hearing?

8. The Judge makes no  reference  to  either  Nwaigwe  or  to  the  test  of
fairness. The Judge does not say what test he  applied  in  considering  the
appellant's request to adjourn. The  appellant  had  secured  representation
and has documentary evidence to produce. Some of those documents had  to  be
translated. This is a protection claim. The respondent's decision  was  made
on 7 June 2018. The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal was  on  23  July
2018, just seven weeks after the respondent's decision was made.

9. The refusal of the adjournment creates procedural  unfairness  and  is  a
material error of law.

10. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

11. At [22], in 17 subparagraphs, the  Judge  sets  out  a  summary  of  the
appellant's claim. The Judge's findings of fact take up only half a page  of
an 11 page decision. They are concentrated between  [24]  and  [28]  of  the
decision. At [24] the Judge says only

    "I do not accept the appellant to be a credible witness."


12. The Judge then takes that solitary  sentence  as  his  theme,  which  he
repeats at [25], [26], [27] & [28] of  the  decision.  The  Judge  does  not
properly say why he does not accept the appellant to be a credible  witness.
A fair reading of [24] to [28] creates the impression  that  the  Judge  has
conflated plausibility with credibility.

13. The Judge's findings of  fact  are  inadequately  reasoned.  That  is  a
material error of law. I set the decision aside

14. The appellant has now secured  representation.  In  advance  of  today's
hearing his  representatives  candidly  conceded  that  they  have  not  had
sufficient time to prepare for the second stage  of  this  hearing.  I  have
found that the Judge's decision must be set aside because  his  fact-finding
exercise was inadequate. I cannot substitute my own decision. Further  fact-
finding exercise is necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

15. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or




    (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


16. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

17. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Manchester  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Mather.

Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

19. I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on  7  August  2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.




Signed
              Date 15 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

