
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07971/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 JANUARY 2019                             |On 7 March 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 GROW MUJORO
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co.
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a female citizen of Namibia who was  born  on  4  July
    1990. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 6  May  2018.  She
    claimed on entry that she was  coming  for  a  five  day  holiday.  She
    subsequently claimed that she had been ill-treated in Namibia by an ex-
    boyfriends. The claim was rejected by the Secretary of State who, in  a
    decision dated 13 June 2018, refused her application for  international
    protection. The appellant appealed the First-tier tribunal (Judge Bird)
    which, in a decision promulgated on 27  December  2018,  dismissed  the
    appeal. She now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are six grounds of appeal. First, the appellant asserts that  the
    judge failed to make adequate findings regarding her claim to have been
    the victim of modern slavery. The judge had accepted that the appellant
    had been subjected to ill-treatment by two  individuals,  [E]  and  [G]
    [48]. However, as the presenting officer, Mrs Pettersen, submitted, the
    appellant  had  not  claimed  to  have  been  abused  in   the   second
    relationship referred to, namely that with [G]. It is unclear to me why
    the appellant's relationship with [E] should constitute  an  experience
    equivalent to modern slavery. In any event, even  if  the  relationship
    may be categorised as such, for reasons which I give below,  the  judge
    reached unassailable findings as to risk on return which are sufficient
    to defeat the appeal.

 3. Secondly, the appellant asserts that the judge misinterpreted  the  law
    on modern trafficking  and  human  slavery.  Judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant may have been in abusive relationships but she did not accept
    that she was without protection from the police authorities in  Namibia
    to whom she had reported behaviour of [E] nor had she  shown  that  the
    police authorities were unable or unwilling to  offer  her  protection.
    The grounds of appeal offer a different gloss or interpretation of  the
    facts but these do not, in my opinion, undermine the conclusions of the
    judge especially at [50] which were available to her on the evidence.

 4. Thirdly, the appellant asserts that the  judge  based  her  credibility
    assessment on inherent disbelief and upon a series of speculations  and
    irrational expectations. I find ground has no merit.  The  use  by  the
    judge of expressions such as 'it is simply not plausible...' and  'this
    is what [the appellant] will expect me to accept' do not indicate  that
    the judge entered the credibility assessment in anything other than  an
    even-handed way. The judge's  expressions  may  be  trenchant  and,  at
    times, colourful but  do  not  arguably  indicate  bias  or  an  unfair
    approach. The judge did criticise the appellant's inability to  provide
    explanations for apparent discrepancies in her evidence but  I  do  not
    accept the submission made in the grounds that the  judge  unreasonably
    expected the appellant to know more than she had been told.

 5. Fourthly, the appellant asserts that the judge made material errors  of
    fact and ignored parts of  the  appellant's  evidence.  The  judge  had
    queried how the  appellant's  partner  had  been  able  to  obtain  her
    telephone number after she had changed it. At [38], the judge had found
    that it was not 'not plausible that the [partner] should have just come
    upon her and slapped her in front of her friends without  anyone  doing
    anything.' The appellant claimed in her witness statement that  a  'man
    came to my rescue and told [E] that he could not just beat a woman like
    that. I left quickly and took a taxi home.' Having  read  the  decision
    carefully,  I  acknowledge  that  the  judge  may  have   misunderstood
    particular details of the appellant's  evidence.  However,  any  errors
    were not material. This is because the judge has, in the alternative to
    rejecting the credibility of the appellant's account,  considered  risk
    on return on the basis that the appellant had given a truthful  account
    of past events and has still concluded that she would not  be  at  real
    risk. At [48], the judge found that 'the appellant may well  have  been
    in an abusive relationship with their ex-partner that she was  able  to
    leave him trouble to her  aunt  where  she  remained.  The  appellant's
    account of a partner finding here there is credible that the  appellant
    was able to turn to the police for support. Please did take action  and
    a partner was imprisoned for four months.' At [43], the judge  observed
    that the appellant had moved to Windhoek to avoid ill-treatment and had
    been  gainfully  employed  there.  The  judge   also   considered   the
    appellant's account in light of the fact that the she had travelled  to
    the United Kingdom and tried to seek entry by deception. Moreover,  the
    appellant had not claimed asylum upon arrival.  Those  were  legitimate
    factors for the judge to consider in assessing the credibility  of  the
    appellant's account. However, what  is  very  clear  from  the  judge's
    analysis is that, even  assuming  that  the  appellant  had  been  into
    abusive relationships, there was no evidence that either partner  would
    wish her harm now, sometime after the  events  described,  that  either
    partner would be even aware that she had returned to Namibia and  that,
    even if the appellant feared they might know of her return,  that  they
    would be able to locate her in a different part  of  the  country  from
    where the men live and where the events which  she  had  described  had
    taken  place.  Further,  as  the  judge  observed,  significantly   the
    appellant had sought the help of the police in the past which had  been
    forthcoming.  Set  against  the  background  of  that  analysis,  minor
    misunderstandings of the sequence of events in the appellant's  account
    were  rendered  immaterial;  taking  the  appellant's  account  at  its
    highest, judge had found that the appellant could not succeed.

 6. Sixthly, the appellant complains that the  judge  had  failed  to  have
    regards to the best interests of her child in the appeal under  Article
    8 ECHR. The child lives not in the United Kingdom  with  the  appellant
    but in Botswana and, whilst the grounds acknowledge that child  is  not
    in the United Kingdom for the purposes of section 55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009,  her  best  interests  remained
    relevant. It is not clear to me what relevance this ground has  to  the
    judge's findings. In particular, is not clear how the best interests of
    a child living in Botswana and whose welfare is  not  been  a  relevant
    factor in the determination of the appellant's  appeal  could  possibly
    assist the appellant in this litigation. The ground seems to do no more
    than to assert that there is a child and that the judge  has  some  how
    made an error by failing to apply to her  a  statutory  provision,  the
    operation of which the appellant herself accepts  the  child  does  not
    invoke.

 7. In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 2 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

