
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/07300/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |    Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21 November 2018                   |    On 03 January 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                            THE HON LORD MATTHEWS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Eric Fripp, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Nigeria  who  was  born  in
    October 1981.  He appeals against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Griffith promulgated on 16 August 2018  following  a  hearing  at
    Hendon Magistrates' Court on 26 July 2018.  I set out  the  immigration
    history of the appellant essentially from what is contained within that
    judgment.

 2. The appellant arrived in the UK in May 2004 with  leave  as  a  student
    valid until 2007.  While here within that leave in March  2006  he  was
    convicted of driving without insurance for which he received a fine and
    his licence was endorsed.  He was subsequently in July  2007  convicted
    of drink driving again without insurance and on that  occasion  he  was
    disqualified from driving for eighteen months.

 3. On 29 October 2007 he submitted a student application for further leave
    to remain but some seven days later on 5 November he was  convicted  at
    Greenwich Magistrates' Court of driving whilst disqualified again using
    a vehicle while uninsured  and  also  failing  to  give  his  name  and
    address.  He received a  community  order  and  was  disqualified  from
    driving for two years.

 4. Unsurprisingly, three days later on 8 November 2007 his application for
    further leave to remain as a student was refused but he did later apply
    successfully for leave to remain as a student and was  granted  further
    leave until 31 May 2009.  An application submitted two  days  prior  to
    the expiry of that leave was refused in July but allowed on appeal  and
    he was granted further leave until 28 April 2010.

 5. Prior to the expiry of that leave he applied again  to  be  allowed  to
    remain as a student but this application was refused in  June  2010  as
    were two  further  student  applications.   He  appealed  against  this
    decision and that appeal was dismissed in March 2011;  his  application
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was dismissed in August 2011 and he was
    appeal rights exhausted by 15 September 2011.

 6. Thereafter the appellant remained  in  the  UK  without  leave  and  in
    February 2012 he  lodged  a  human  rights  application  based  on  his
    relationship with a British citizen,  a  lady.   That  application  was
    refused  in  November  2013  and  the   refusal   was   maintained   on
    reconsideration.  His appeal was dismissed in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in August 2014 and he was refused permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal becoming appeal rights exhausted in respect of  that  decision
    in November 2014.

 7. Notwithstanding his immigration status the appellant's  driving  habits
    did not improve and in May 2015 he was convicted of  dangerous  driving
    and failing to provide a specimen for analysis for which on  14  August
    2015 he was sentenced to twelve  months'  imprisonment  in  respect  of
    dangerous driving and  three  months  for  the  refusal  to  provide  a
    specimen for analysis to be served concurrently.  The appellant did not
    appeal against either conviction or sentence.

 8. On 3 September 2015 the appellant was served with a stage 1 decision to
    deport and following that decision representations  were  made  on  his
    behalf that he had established a relationship with  a  British  citizen
    and her two children.  Nonetheless on 5  November  2015  a  deportation
    order was signed against him and the following month a stage 2 decision
    to deport was made which was  certified  under  Section  94(3)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   He  was  served  with
    removal directions the removal being scheduled  to  take  place  on  12
    November 2015.

 9. There followed an application for judicial review but  he  was  refused
    permission on the papers to proceed  with  that  application  in  April
    2016.

10. A further application for leave to remain was  submitted  on  25  April
    2015 which was refused on 24 October 2016 as he had  failed  to  submit
    biometric information.

11. Thereafter, following the further  detention  of  the  appellant  under
    immigration powers in January 2017 in order to effect  removal,  on  20
    January 2017 he made an asylum claim.  That claim was  refused  and  it
    was his appeal against the refusal of asylum and the maintenance of the
    deportation decision (which would  be  unlawful  were  he  entitled  to
    asylum) which came before Judge Griffiths and which  as  already  noted
    above Judge Griffiths dismissed.

12. The basis of the appellant's claim as advanced and as maintained during
    his appeal before Judge Griffiths was that he had a  well-founded  fear
    of persecution in Nigeria because he is bisexual.  In  this  regard  he
    claimed that he was entitled to asylum and also that his removal  would
    be in breach of his Article 3 rights.   He  also  claimed  his  removal
    would be unlawful because it would be in contravention of his Article 8
    rights, although for the reasons that follow we do not need to consider
    this aspect of his claim.

13. In  support  of  his  application  the  appellant  adduced  psychiatric
    evidence and evidence relating to scarring which  he  said  established
    that he had received injuries because he had been beaten and mistreated
    in Nigeria due to public awareness of his claimed sexuality.  At  first
    blush it appears surprising that none of the  matters  now  raised  had
    been mentioned earlier when the appellant had been challenging previous
    decisions made against him.

14. In a very well-reasoned, detailed and thorough decision Judge Griffiths
    considered the claim now made but  made  adverse  credibility  findings
    against the appellant.  However, there is one aspect  of  the  decision
    which is sufficiently troubling as to cause this Tribunal  to  question
    whether the decision properly can stand.

15. We have regard to paragraph 96 of  the  decision  in  which  the  judge
    stated as follows:

         "96. Commenting on the appellant's possible  scarring,  the  doctor
             could only find two scars on his scalp but he considered  them
             consistent with the appellant's  account  of  incisions  being
             made there.  He also  found  that  his  remaining  scars  were
             consistent  with  blunt  instrument  injuries.    The   doctor
             considered other possible causes  of  the  injuries,  such  as
             accidental  trauma,  but  the  appellant   could   recall   no
             significant injuries.  The doctor did not rule  out  self-harm
             by proxy but  found  the  pattern  made  that  unlikely.   His
             diagnosis was that the appellant was suffering from  PTSD.   I
             have had regard to JL (medical reports  -  credibility)  China
             [2013] UKUT and, as the medical  report  was  based  on  [the]
             exclusive testimony [of] the appellant whom I have found to be
             unreliable, I do  not  feel  able  to  attach  weight  of  any
             significance to it".

16. It appeared to this Tribunal at the outset that it  was  arguable  that
    the judge in an otherwise very thorough and well-reasoned decision  had
    made his finding as  to  credibility  before  considering  the  medical
    evidence which had been adduced which would fall foul of  the  guidance
    given by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367.  What  the
    Tribunal is required to do in cases such as this is  consider  all  the
    evidence including the medical evidence in the  round  before  reaching
    conclusions as to credibility.  This was particularly important in this
    case, because, as the judge noted and as is common ground  between  the
    parties, the issue of credibility is central to the appellant's claim.

17. On  behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mr  Jarvis,  having  considered  this
    particular issue  very  carefully  indeed,  set  out  the  respondent's
    current position as follows:

         "On reflection, the  respondent  accepts  there  is  merit  to  the
         appellant's first ground of appeal in respect of the misapplication
         in this judgment of the principle described by the Court of  Appeal
         in Mibanga with specific reference to paragraph 96  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal judgment.

         It does appear from the wording of  paragraph  96  that  the  judge
         deferred the consideration of the psychiatric and scarring evidence
         until after the assessment of the  underlying  credibility  of  the
         appellant's core claim.

         The respondent accepts that  the  medical  report  was  capable  of
         informing  the  judge's  assessment   of   both   the   appellant's
         consistency in oral evidence as well as  the  claim  to  have  been
         beaten and mistreated in Nigeria due to  public  awareness  of  his
         claimed sexuality.

         That being the case and without  reference  to  any  of  the  other
         grounds, the respondent would accept that the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge's  otherwise  very  careful  analysis  of  the  evidence   is
         materially flawed and would require a  complete  rehearing  of  the
         refugee asylum/Article 3 claim".

18. With some reluctance, because as Mr Jarvis has stated the  decision  is
    otherwise very well-reasoned and is also thorough and detailed, we feel
    obliged to agree that this error  is  sufficiently  material  that  the
    decision cannot stand but must be remade.  As credibility  is  core  to
    the claim, we agree also with Mr Fripp (and Mr Jarvis on behalf of  the
    respondent did not seek to argue otherwise) that the appropriate course
    now is to remit this hearing back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    decision to be remade by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Griffiths, and we will so order.  None of Judge Griffiths' findings are
    to stand and the appeal will be a fresh rehearing.



Notice of Decision

We set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Griffiths  as
containing a material error of law and direct that the appeal be reheard  at
Taylor  House  before  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than   Judge
Griffiths.  No findings of fact are to be maintained.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
               Date: 27 December 2018





