
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/07266/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |             Decision & Reasons      |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|on 29 November 2017                   |             on 12 December 2017     |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                               ABDOUKARIM BAH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Kotak, Counsel, instructed by Sriharans
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Wylie (FtJ), promulgated on 8 September  2017,  dismissing
        the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision  dated  18
        July 2017 refusing his asylum and human rights claims.



   Factual Background


     2. The Appellant is a national of Gambia, date of  birth  14  November
        1986. He entered the  UK  on  6  October  2007  as  a  student.  An
        application for further leave to remain in the  same  capacity  was
        refused and an appeal dismissed on 25 April  2012.  An  application
        made in June 2013 for a residence card as an extended family member
        of an EEA national was refused on 17 December 2013  and  an  appeal
        against this decision was dismissed on 15 January 2015.  A  further
        application for an EEA residence  card  made  in  August  2015  was
        refused in February 2016 and an appeal against  this  decision  was
        dismissed on 30 June 2016.  On  23  May  2017,  the  Appellant  was
        encountered at a residential  address  and  served  with  a  notice
        informing him of his liability to removal. He was  detained  as  an
        overstayer. Whilst in detention, on 26 May 2017, he made an  asylum
        claim.


     3. The appellant contends that he would face persecution  if  returned
        to Gambia on the basis of an imputed political opinion arising from
        his  family  connections.  He  claims  his  father  was  a  wealthy
        businessman and a member, active supporter and financial  donor  to
        the APRC political party, which was led by the former president  Dr
        Jammeh. The appellant claims  he  joined  the  party  in  2004  and
        organised rallies, meetings and engaged in fundraising.  He  claims
        he was attacked in 2006 by a group of people he believed were  from
        the Mandika tribe, supporters of the United Democratic Party (UDP),
        the current governing political  party  in  Gambia,  which  was  in
        opposition at the time. Despite being stabbed in the arm  and  head
        the appellant did not report this  assault  to  the  police  as  he
        believed the police would do nothing. The appellant claims that the
        new regime started to target those  who  were  connected  with  the
        former president after Dr Jammeh stepped  down  as  president,  and
        that these individuals were  arrested  and  prosecuted  with  false
        charges. The appellant's father was warned by a friend  who  worked
        for the government that he (the father) was going to  be  arrested.
        The  appellant's  father  left  the  country  on  2  May  2017.  He
        telephoned the appellant the next day to inform  him  of  what  had
        happened. The rest of the family including the  Appellant's  mother
        and two brothers remained in their home in Gambia. Two weeks  later
        two of the appellant's brothers  were  arrested  because  of  their
        support for the APRC and because of their father's involvement with
        their party. The appellant's mother,  a  further  brother  and  his
        sister went into hiding. The  appellant  was  then  informed  by  a
        friend who saw a 'wanted 'notice at  the  police  station  that  an
        arrest warrant had been issued for him. Statements from individuals
        said to be neighbours were presented  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        referencing the arrests and claiming that stones had been thrown at
        the  family  home  because  they  were  supporters  of  the  former
        president.


     4. The appellant's article 8 claim revolved  around  his  relationship
        with his Gambian wife, whom he married on 8 September 2016 and  who
        was lawfully present in the UK as a student completing her PhD, and
        their son born on 23 November 2016. She has been studying in the UK
        since September 2008 and anticipates that she  would  complete  her
        studies in September 2018. Her Tier 4 (General) Student LTR s valid
        until 14 January 2019. The appellant additionally believed that his
        wife's family harm him because he married her when she was pregnant
        without the consent of the parents, wanted her to marry a cousin.


     5. The respondent did not accept that the appellant's  father  was  in
        exile or that his brothers had been arrested. Nor was  it  accepted
        that the Appellant was  the  subject  of  an  arrest  warrant.  The
        respondent did not believe the appellant was a credible witness and
        rejected his claim to have a genuine subjective fear his safety  if
        returned to Gambia. Based on the background evidence, even  if  the
        appellant was a supporter of the former  president,  he  would  not
        face any risk of serious ill-treatment. The appellant did not  meet
        the requirements of the immigration rules  leave  to  remain  as  a
        partner, and his removal would not  constitute  a  disproportionate
        breach of article 8.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     6.   The  judge  accurately  summarised  the  appellant's  claims  and
        recorded  the  submissions  made  by  the  representatives.  Having
        correctly set out the  legal  framework,  and  the  relevant  legal
        principles, the  judge  set  out  her  findings  of  fact  and  her
        conclusions. The judge  did  not  find  the  appellant  a  credible
        witness.  The  judge   identified   inconsistencies   between   the
        appellant's evidence and his father's statement in respect  of  the
        basis upon which  his  father  had  been  allegedly  targeted,  and
        inconsistencies in the evidence relating to why  his  brothers  had
        been arrested. The judge noted that the appellant's claim  was  not
        supported by the background evidence provided, which indicated that
        there had been no  intimidation,  harassment  or  witch-hunting  of
        former regime  members  and  supporters,  and  that  there  was  no
        reliable evidence that the new regime had targeted the families  of
        persons who supported the former president. The  appellant  claimed
        that the authorities had been arresting families before his  father
        left Gambia, but this was inconsistent with  his  father's  account
        that he did not expect the authorities  to  go  after  his  family.
        Given that the appellant's father telephoned the appellant the  day
        after he left Gambia to tell him it was not safe  in  Gambia,  this
        was incongruous  with  the  evidence  that  the  appellant's  other
        family, including his brothers, remained living in the family  home
        in Gambia. The judge noted the absence of any  statement  from  the
        individual who obtained the "wanted" notice, and that she  had  not
        apparently  made  any  enquiries  about  the  whereabouts  of   the
        appellant's brothers or the  charges  levelled  against  them.  The
        judge considered the documents  issued  by  'Gambian  Movement  for
        Democracy & Development', but noted the absence of detail  relating
        to the alleged  "harassment"  of  opposition  supporters,  and  the
        absence of any independent evidence of human rights  breaches  from
        well-known  NGOs.  In  drawing  an  adverse  inference,  the  judge
        additionally relied on section 8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
        (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004.


     7. At paragraph 78 the judge stated,


          Whilst the appellant's father may feel that he needs to stay
          outwith the country  because of his relationship with the former
          president, I do not accept that there is any risk to the appellant
          as his son, if he returns to Gambia.


     8. The judge concluded that the appellant was not at risk  of  serious
        harm if returned to Gambia.


     9. The judge then considered the Article 8 claim.  With  reference  to
        paragraph 276ADE the judge noted the assertion by  the  appellant's
        wife that she will not return to Gambia until completion of her PhD
        studies in September 2018. The judge was not  satisfied  that  this
        would amount to a very significant obstacle  as  contact  could  be
        maintained through remote forms of  communication  and  the  couple
        would be reunited  after  12  months.  The  judge  then  considered
        Article 8 outside of the immigration rules,  and  referred  to  his
        duty under s.55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
        2009. The judge properly noted that the best interests of the child
        was a primary consideration, not  a  paramount  consideration.  The
        judge  accepted  that  the  appellant's  return  to  Gambia   would
        interfere with his protected relationships with his wife and child.
        The judge did not  however  consider  that  his  removal  would  be
        disproportionate. In reaching this conclusion the judge noted  that
        the maintenance of effective immigration controls was in the public
        interest, that the appellant had no lawful status in the  UK  since
        2012, his history of unsuccessful applications, and that  his  wife
        only had limited leave to remain as a student. The  judge  accepted
        that the appellant spoke English and that he would be able to  work
        and support himself if granted leave to  remain,  although  he  had
        substantial debts for rent arrears and a bank loan.


    10. At paragraph 92 the judge noted that both the appellant's wife  and
        son were Gambian nationals and that they could  enjoy  family  life
        together in Gambia. The  judge  noted  the  wife's  evidence  that,
        having spent so many years studying, she would  not  leave  the  UK
        until she obtained a doctorate. The judge accepted  that  this  was
        "obviously a very reasonable position to take", but concluded  that
        this was a choice to be taken by the family. The Article  8  appeal
        was therefore dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

    11. The grounds of appeal levelled various criticisms at the  decision,
        many of which were insufficiently particularised, and many of which
        amounted to no more than a disagreement with the judge's  findings.
        The grounds alleged that the judge applied  a  higher  standard  of
        proof than appropriate when rejecting the  Appellant's  account  of
        his brothers' arrest,  that  she  failed  to  lawfully  assess  the
        documentary evidence criticising the new government, and she failed
        to give adequate reasons for her findings. It  was  submitted  that
        the judge failed to take into account the length of time  that  the
        appellant's wife had resided in the UK, that she was embarking on a
        "very useful PhD programme", and that she would be entitled to  ILR
        in 2018 having completed 10 years lawful residents UK.


    12. The grant of permission by judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Keane
        bore little resemblance to the grounds.


             In large part the grounds amount to no more than a
             disagreement with the findings of the judge and an attempt to
             re-argue the appeal. At paragraph 35 of the judge's decision
             the judge (drawing on the contents of a skeleton argument
             which the appellant's representative relied) characterised as
             a core component of the appellant's claim for asylum the risk
             to which he would be exposed upon a return to Gambia by reason
             of the antipathy towards the appellant's father of the current
             Gambian authorities. It was intrinsic to the appellant's claim
             for asylum (as confirmed at paragraph 36 of the judge's
             decision) that the appellant's father had hurriedly left
             Gambia for Guinea on 2 May 2017. The judge appeared to reject
             such a complaint if paragraph 57 of the judge's decision was
             read with care. However, at paragraph 78 of the judge's
             decision the judge appeared to approbate the appellant's claim
             that the appellant's father might sincerely feel the need to
             stay outside Gambia "... because of his relationship with the
             former president." The judge's findings were arguably
             contradictory. The finding to which the judge arrived at
             paragraph 78 might arguably have established the factual
             foundation whereby the appellant might objectively fear
             persecutory act upon his return to Guinea [this should be
             Gambia]. The judge's decision disclosed an arguable error of
             law but for which the outcome of the appeal might have been
             different.

    13. At the 'error of law' hearing Ms  Kotak  relied  on  judge  Keane's
        grant of  permission.  She  submitted  that  paragraph  57  of  the
        determination was ambiguous and that it was possible that the judge
        had rejected the father's evidence. But at paragraph 78  the  judge
        appears to accept that the father had left the country  because  of
        concerns based on his relationship with the  former  president.  It
        was submitted that the judge's conclusions were  contradictory.  Ms
        Kotak additionally submitted that the judge failed  to  consider  a
        material fact, namely that the appellant was the main carer for his
        child and that his wife would be unable to continue her studies  as
        there would be no one else to  take  care  of  the  child.  It  was
        submitted that the only issue was whether it  was  disproportionate
        to remove the appellant by separating him from his wife  and  child
        given that he was the main carer, given that the couple  had  never
        drawn on public funds, and in light of the best  interests  of  the
        child.

Discussion

  14. I have no hesitation in concluding that the judge did not materially
      err in law in her assessment of the protection claim. The essence of
      the appellants claim was that he would be the subject of an imputed
      political opinion because of his father's close association with the
      former president and the APRC party, and because of the Appellant's
      own involvement in the APRC. The father's evidence was to the effect
      that he felt he had to leave Gambia because he believed he was going
      to be arrested. Paragraph 78 of the determination must be read with
      care. The judge noted that the appellant's father "may feel that" he
      needed to remain outside Gambia because of his relationship with the
      former president. The judge finds that while the appellant's father
      "may" hold a subjective fear for his own safety because of his close
      association with the former president, the father's evidence in
      respect of the Appellant's claim was not believable. There is no
      inconsistency in the father giving truthful evidence in respect of the
      motivation for own departure from Gambia, but giving untruthful
      evidence in respect of any adverse interest in the rest of his family.
      Such a fear, if genuinely held, is not inconsistent with the numerous
      detailed adverse credibility findings made by the judge in respect of
      the appellants claim. I can detect no consistency between paragraphs
      57 and 78. It was open to the judge to conclude, on the one hand, that
      the appellant's father may have felt the need to leave Gambia because
      of his relationship with the former president, but, on the other hand,
      to conclude that the appellant fabricated his claim to fear
      persecution based on his association father. For the reasons given by
      the judge for rejecting the Appellant's account, summarised in
      paragraph 6 of this judgement, I am satisfied that the judge was
      rationally entitled to conclude that the appellant did not hold any
      genuine subjective fear for his safety if returned to Gambia, and that
      any fear was not, in any event, objectively based. In particular, the
      judge was rationally entitled to note the absence of any independent
      and respected human rights reports supporting the appellant's claim
      that family members of individuals prominently and closely involved
      with the former regime had been targeted.


  15. Ms Kotak additionally submitted that the judge's article 8 assessment
      was vitiated by a material error of law by the failure to take into
      account the evidence that the Appellant was the one responsible for
      bringing up their child while his wife was studying. If there was no-
      one who could look after the child then the wife would have to give up
      her studies when she was very close to completing her PhD and this
      would constitute a disproportionate interference with her Article 8
      rights.


  16. There doesn't appear to be any dispute that the Appellant's wife has
      been studying in the UK since 2008 and that she is completing a PhD in
      Business Administration at the University of the West of Scotland. The
      evidence before the judge was that the PhD would be completed by
      September 2018. The judge did not specifically refer to the evidence,
      contained in the statements of the Appellant and his wife, that he
      takes care of their son while she studies, undertakes her research and
      attends university. The judge did however conclude, at paragraph 92,
      that the family could enjoy family life together in Gambia, and that,
      while the wife's assertion that she would not leave the UK until she
      obtained her doctorate was 'very reasonable', this was her choice.
      From this I infer that the judge was satisfied that it was open to the
      Appellant's wife to return with their child to Gambia, and thereby
      maintain the family unit, even if this would result in her ability to
      complete her PhD.


  17. Article 8, in the context of studies, has recently been considered by
      the Court of Appeal in Ahsan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009.  Having
      considered several decisions on the subject, including Patel v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72, [2014] AC
      651, Nasim v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] UKUT 25
      (IAC), MM v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] UKUT 305
      (IAC), and CDS (Brazil) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
      [2010] UKUT 305 (IAC),  Lord Justice Underhill confirmed (at [86])
      that the right to complete a course of education is not, as such, a
      right protected by Article 8. CDS (Brazil) was not to be read as
      meaning that the mere fact that the student is part-way through a
      course leading to a professional qualification by itself engages
      Article 8, but that properly considered, a student's involvement with
      their course and their college can itself be an important aspect of
      their private life, and whether those and other factors are sufficient
      to engage article 8 in any particular case will depend on the
      particular facts. His Lordship noted that the longer a student has
      been here the more likely he or she is to have generated relationships
      of the necessary quality and depth.


  18. There has been no assessment by the judge in respect of the nature of
      the wife's involvement with her college and course, or the
      relationships she has established as a consequence of her studies. If
      required to leave her studies and return to Gambia in order to
      maintain the family unit, or because there is no-one else to look
      after her child, it is possible that there may be a breach of her
      Article 8 rights as described in Ahsan. In these circumstances, the
      absence of any indication that the judge considered the evidence that
      the Appellant took primary care of their child, and the absence of any
      consideration of the possible interference with the wife's article 8
      rights established through her studies, amounts to a material legal
      error.


  19. The matter will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to consider
      only the article 8 aspects of the claim as described in this decision.
      The First-tier Tribunal will consider in particular whether the wife
      could continue her PhD from Gambia, whether there is anyone who could
      provide adequate child care, whether the child could be cared for in
      Gambia without his mother until she completes her PhD, and the nature
      of the wife's involvement with her college and course.

Notice of Decision

The appeal in respect of the protection claim is dismissed.

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a material error of  law  in
respect of the human rights claim only. The case is remitted to  the  First-
tier Tribunal for further consideration in respect of  Article  8  before  a
judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wylie.

Signed

[pic]

Upper                  Tribunal                  Judge                  Blum
      Date12 December 2017
