
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07738/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     DK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the appellant:     Ms Wilson-Brown, Bradford Law Centre
For the respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      1. The appellant is a national of Albania, who has applied for asylum.
          This is based upon her claim that she suffered seriously harm from
         family members and was also subjected to enforced  prostitution  in
         Albania.

      2. The asylum claim was refused by the respondent, and  the  appellant
         appealed against this decision to the First-tier Tribunal  ('FTT').
         In a decision promulgated on 22 March 2018 the FTT  comprehensively
         disbelieved the entirety of the appellant's account, apart from her
         nationality.  The appellant has appealed against this  decision  to
         the Upper Tribunal ('UT').

      3. I make it clear at the beginning of this decision that  the  report
         of Professor Katona dated 13 November 2018  entirely  supports  the
         appellant being treated as a vulnerable witness and  I  do  so.   I
         invited Mrs Pettersen to set out any objections to this course  but
         she confirmed that she was  content  with  this.  For  this  reason
         together with the references  made  to  medical  evidence  in  this
         decision, I maintain the FTT's anonymity order.

      4. Mrs Pettersen conceded that the FTT's decision contains an error of
         law and must be set aside.  This  is  because  the  FTT  failed  to
         properly direct itself to relevant matters  in  Professor  Katona's
         report.  Professor Katona is  a  Professor  in  Psychiatry  at  the
         University of Kent and works part-time as a Medical Director at the
         Helen Bamber Foundation.  I am satisfied that this  concession  was
         properly made, and that the FTT's approach  to  Professor  Katona's
         report contains errors of law.

      5. First, the FTT erred in finding at [41]  and  [50]  that  Professor
         Katona accepted the appellant's account at "face value".   The  FTT
         has completely failed  to  take  into  account  Professor  Katona's
         consideration of  the  clinical  plausibility  of  the  appellant's
         presentation, including the reasons provided  for  concluding  that
         the appellant was not feigning  or  exaggerating  her  symptoms  at
         [12.1-12.5].   These  matters  indicate   that   Professor   Katona
         reflected upon the possibility that the account was provided in bad
         faith.   In  addition,  Professor   Katona   has   provided   clear
         indications throughout the report that the account was not accepted
         at "face value".

      6. Second, the FTT has speculated in finding at [41] and [51] that  it
         is likely that the appellant presented as depressed and anxious for
         other reasons over and above her claim to  have  been  forced  into
         prostitution over an extended period, which could not be  dismissed
         after one meeting.  The  alternative  causes  for  the  appellant's
         presentation before Professor Katona postulated by the FTT include:
         "she was in the presence of medical practitioners" / and  or  being
         assessed by a psychiatrist; "she wishes to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom and may not be permitted to do so"; she has had a difficult
         childhood  including  the  death  of  her   brother.    The   first
         possibility  is  unsupported  by  any   evidence   whatsoever   and
         constitutes mere speculation on the part of  the  FTT.   The  third
         possibility has been taken into account - at 11.5 Professor  Katona
         sets out his view that the appellant's PTSD and depressive symptoms
         have  resulted  from  the  cumulative  effects  of  her   traumatic
         experiences  of  childhood  abuse  and  her   subsequent   enforced
         prostitution and repeated rape.  The FTT has failed  to  take  into
         account that the second possibility has been addressed by Professor
         Katona at [11.6]:

             "other factors such as her separation  and  estrangement  from
             her family, her separation from her country  and  her  ongoing
             immigration  uncertainty...do  not  in  my  view   provide   a
             clinically adequate explanation  for  [the  appellant's]  core
             PTSD symptoms..."

      7. Third, the  FTT  concluded  that  the  weight  to  be  attached  to
         Professor Katona's conclusions was significantly undermined by  the
         fact that they are based upon one  consultation  at  [50],  without
         addressing the fact that Professor Katona also relied upon entirely
         consistent other detailed medical and therapeutic evidence covering
         an extended period of time from May 2015 to  November  2018  -  see
         [8.1-8.6] and [9.1-9.18] of the report.

      8. Fourth, the weight the FTT attached to Professor Katona's report is
         entirely unclear.  There is an assertion  that  this  evidence  has
         been given "weight" at [51] but there has been a failure to explain
         which aspects of the medical evidence  were  given  weight  or  the
         degree of weight attached.  When the decision is read as  a  whole,
         the FTT appears to have  given  Professor  Katona's  findings  very
         little weight for unsustainable reasons, as set out above.

      9. Professor  Katona's  report  is  carefully  drafted.   It  provides
         comprehensive and clear reasons  in  support  of  his  prima  facie
         cogent conclusions.  Although the FTT was entitled to attach little
         weight to the report, the reasoning for this must be  adequate  and
         sustainable.  For the reasons I have provided, the FTT  has  failed
         to provide either adequate or  sustainable  reasons  for  seemingly
         attaching little weight to the report.

     10. It follows that I find that there has been an error of law  on  the
         part of the FTT in its approach to Professor Katona's report.   Mrs
         Pettersen accepted that this has infected the FTT's  other  adverse
         credibility findings and the decision will have to be made on a  de
         novo basis.  This is an  appropriate  case  to  remit  to  the  FTT
         because completely fresh findings of fact are necessary.

     11. I do not make any directions because that will be a matter for  the
         FTT to address.  However, I observe that the  appellant  should  be
         treated as a vulnerable witness, and this  is  a  case  that  might
         benefit from a  Case  Management  Review  hearing,  at  which  time
         careful consideration can be given at an early stage to that  issue
         and steps that should be taken to ensure  fairness  and  compliance
         with the Practice Direction on vulnerable appellants and  witnesses
         - see AM Afghanistan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123.

Decision

     12. The decision of the FTT contains material errors of law, such  that
         it is set aside and will be remade by a FTT Judge, other than Judge
         Moxon.

Signed:     UTJ Plimmer
Ms Melanie Plimmer                                       Dated: 6 June 2019
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
