
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07018/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 May 2019                       |On 30th May 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                           mr rasoul mohammed zada
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors,
     London
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Iran,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Beg of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision made by  the  respondent  on  17  May  2018
    refusing his claim for international protection.

2.   The appellant's grounds of appeal aver that the judge erred in:

    (1)  wrongly identifying a discrepancy in the  appellant's  account  of
         his history of leafleting for the PJAK;


    (2)  failing to provide adequate reasoning  for  counting  against  the
         appellant his claim that he kept his Iranian identity card with him
         when he went to distribute leaflets on the last occasion;


    (3)  unjustifiably finding it implausible that the appellant would have
         been able to outrun a Pasdaran soldier; and


    (4)  wrongly rejected as implausible that the appellant would have been
         hidden by a family of strangers when he had told them he was  being
         chased by the Pasdaran.

3.   I heard submissions from both representatives for which  I  express  my
    gratitude.

4.   I consider that the grounds are made out.  Dealing  first  with  ground
    (1), the only internal inconsistency identified by  the  judge  in  the
    appellant's account concerned his history of leafleting.  At  paragraph
    39 the judge stated:

         "39. I find that the appellant was  unable  to  give  any  detailed
             evidence about where Sorani obtained the  leaflets  from.   He
             was unable to read  the  leaflets.   In  cross-examination  he
             admitted that the only person who knew about  his  involvement
             with PJAK was Sorani.  I find that there were discrepancies in
             the evidence with regard to  when  the  appellant  distributed
             leaflets.  In his first witness statement at paragraph  6,  he
             stated that he started distributing leaflets from August 2015.
              At paragraph 8 he stated that he  left  Iran  on  5  November
             2015.  At question 65 of the substantive asylum interview,  he
             stated that he  distributed  leaflets  three  times.   Between
             questions 66 and 71 the appellant stated that  he  distributed
             leaflets over a three month period.  I find  that  that  would
             mean that if he started in August 2015 he distributed leaflets
             on  the  final  occasion  in  December  2015.   However,   the
             appellant had already left Iran by November 2015.  I find that
             the discrepancies cast doubt upon his overall credibility."

5.   However, as the grounds make  clear,  this  represented  (at  least  as
    analysed by the judge) a simple mistake of arithmetic on  the  part  of
    the judge.  If the appellant  began  distributing  leaflets  in  August
    2015, then three months from that date  would  have  been  the  end  of
    October.  That was consistent, not inconsistent, with  the  appellant's
    account that he left Iran on 5 November 2015.  Mr Kotas submitted  that
    the judge's assessment must have been based  on  paragraph  65  of  the
    respondent's refusal letter where the point  relied  on  was  that  the
    appellant had said he had distributed leaflets on three occasions, with
    a one month then a three month period in between the first  and  second
    occasions.  However, this is nowhere made clear by the judge and in any
    event, as Mr Hodson pointed out, the respondent expressly concluded  in
    paragraph 65 that "this inconsistency will not be held against you"  as
    he was a minor at  the  time  of  the  interview.   Hence  the  judge's
    statement  at  paragraph  10  that  the  respondent   considered   this
    inconsistency to cast doubt on his claim was incorrect.

6.   As regards ground (2), it does not entirely capture the  ambit  of  the
    judge's reasons for finding it not plausible that the  appellant  would
    have kept his ID card with him.  At paragraphs  41  and  42  the  judge
    said:

         "41. In evidence  the  appellant  said  that  he  always  kept  his
             identity card with him.  I do not find it  credible  that  the
             appellant would put himself at risk by  keeping  his  identity
             card with  him.   I  find  that  even  given  the  appellant's
             inexperience and illiteracy, he  would  have  known  that  his
             identity card would identify him if he  was  ever  stopped  or
             questioned by the authorities.  I find  that  the  appellant's
             evidence cast considerable doubt upon his claim.


         42.  In his new witness statement at paragraph 22 he states that he
             was carrying his identity card because  everyone  in  Iran  is
             required to carry their identity card.  He goes  on  to  state
             that he now knows that this is a very significant part of  his
             account and that he should have told the interviewing  officer
             in the asylum interview about  it  as  well  as  his  previous
             solicitor.  I find that the appellant's failure to do so casts
             doubt upon his credibility.  I find  that  the  appellant  has
             fabricated his claim that he was carrying his identity card at
             night with illegal leaflets in a bag; he has attempted to find
             an explanation to explain how the authorities know  about  his
             links to PJAK."

7.   It is clear that in paragraph 42 the judge considered  the  appellant's
    explanation for why he had carried the card.  It remains, however, that
    the judge's assessment does not engage  anywhere  with  the  likelihood
    that the Pasdaran would be able to ascertain the identity of persons in
    the area  whether  or  not  they  carried  an  ID  card  or  gave  true
    particulars.  In that context, the judge should  have  recognised  that
    there were at the very least factors pointing to plausibility  as  much
    as to plausibility.

8.   In relation to ground (3), the judge's reasoning appears to me to be  a
    classic example  of  an  implausibility  finding  not  founded  on  any
    identifiable objective fact.  Its premise appears to be  that  a  young
    man running away to escape being  shot  could  not  outrun  a  soldier,
    carrying a rifle. I take judicial notice  of  the  fact  that  not  all
    soldiers run fast and not all young men run slow.

9.   Ground (4) accurately identifies a further difficulty with  a  decision
    which places undue relevance on plausibility  issues.   It  focuses  on
    what the judge said at paragraph 44:

         "44. I find that the appellant's claim  of  how  the  family  whose
             house  he  went  into  hid  him  in  their  garage  is  wholly
             implausible.  I do not find that a family of  strangers  would
             help the appellant when he told them that he was being  chased
             by the Pasdaran.  The family would  have  known  that  if  the
             appellant was seen coming into  their  home,  they  themselves
             would be of adverse interest to the authorities.  I find  that
             the appellant has fabricated his claim that he  is  wanted  by
             the authorities.  I do not find that the appellant distributed
             leaflets for PJAK."

10.  Here too it is hard to see that, in finding  that  it  was  implausible
    that the appellant would have been hidden by a family in the area where
    he was chased, the judge took into account that the area was a  Kurdish
    village.  The appellant's evidence did not suggest  that  the  soldiers
    saw which house he had gone into. Again I  take  judicial  notice  that
    Kurdish villagers have been known to harbour their own.

11.  Viewed in the round, the judge's assessment is not  one  that  measures
    up to the respondent's own guidance on credibility assessment utilising
    well-established indicators.  The only internal inconsistency relied on
    by the judge was not even relied upon by the respondent.  The judge did
    not in terms rely on any insufficiency of detail.  The preponderance of
    the judge's reasons for finding the appellant not credible  related  to
    lack of plausibility and, read as a whole, they relied unduly  on  this
    indicator.  As analysed above there  was  a  lack  of  any  established
    objective comparison by reference to which the appellant's action could
    be said to lack plausibility.

12.  For the above reasons I set aside the decision of  the  FtT  judge  for
    material error of law.  Save  for  one  matter,  none  of  the  judge's
    findings of fact can be preserved.  The exception concerns nationality.
     The judge gave careful consideration to the evidence relating  to  the
    appellant's nationality, including the Sprakab report.  The  respondent
    in the first place did not adopt  an  express  view  on  nationality  -
    simply saying it was "unknown".  Upon receipt of the  judge's  decision
    the respondent did not submit a Rule 24 response taking issue with  the
    judge's finding that the appellant was a national of  Iran.   Mr  Kotas
    conceded that in light of that failure the  respondent  could  not  now
    raise nationality as an issue.  Accordingly the next FtT  judge  should
    proceed to determine the appeal on the basis that the  appellant  is  a
    national of Iran.

13.  To conclude:

    -    The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material  error  of
         law.


    -    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Beg).


    -    The hearing will be a de novo consideration save that the  judge's
         finding that  the  appellant  is  a  national  of  Iran  is  to  be
         preserved.



Signed                                  Date: 25 May 2019
              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
