
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07526/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2018                           |On 18 January 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     OS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M. C. Benitez of counsel, instructed by Fadiga &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent, who was born on [ ] 2001, is  a  national  of  Albania.
    He left Albania on 1 April 2016 and applied for asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 13 May 2016.

2.   He was interviewed about his application on 7 September  2016  but  his
    application was refused on 25 July 2017.

3.   The Respondent appealed  against  this  decision  and  his  appeal  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman in a decision promulgated on
    19 September 2017 on the basis that he was entitled to protection under
    the Refugee Convention. The Appellant appealed on 22 September 2017 and
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler granted her permission to appeal on 14
    November 2017.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   Both the Home Office Presenting Officer and counsel for the  Respondent
    made oral submissions and I have  referred  to  the  content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   The Respondent is an Albanian national, who was  born  on  22  November
    2001. On 25 July 2017 he was granted limited leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom until 22 May 2019, as  an  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking
    child under  paragraphs  352ZC  to  352ZF  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Therefore, for the purposes of sub-paragraph  352ZC(c),  the  Appellant
    accepted that there would be no adequate reception arrangements for him
    in Albania if such leave was not granted.

6.   The basis of the Respondent's  application  for  asylum  was  that  his
    father, [HS], had been arrested for drug offences in  Albania  on  [  ]
    2015 and that other criminals, who had not been arrested, believed that
    he had given the police information about him and claimed that he  owed
    them money. As a consequence, they had abducted the Respondent in March
    2016 and had told him to inform his father that, unless he repaid  what
    was owed, the Respondent would be killed.

7.   It was the Respondent's case that he went to visit his  father  at  the
    313 Prison in Tirana and told him what had happened and his father then
    instructed him to flee from Albania, which he did on 1 April 2016.

8.   The Appellant did not initially accept that the Respondent was  related
    to  [HS]  as  claimed.  However,  prior  to  the  appeal  hearing,  the
    Respondent's solicitors had  submitted  a  supplementary  bundle.  This
    included a notarial declaration, dated 21  January  2016,  by  [HS],  a
    divorce document, which confirmed his full  name,  date  of  birth  and
    address and a further document from  the  criminal  proceedings,  which
    gave the same details. As  a  consequence,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wyman found  that  [HS]  was  the  Respondent's  father  and  that  the
    documents and press articles submitted by the Respondent confirmed  his
    arrest and role as a prominent criminal. These findings have  not  been
    challenged by the Appellant.

9.   Instead, the sole ground of appeal  is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's findings in relation to whether there would be a sufficiency of
    protection for the Respondent in Albania were inadequately reasoned and
    should be set aside.

10.  In paragraph 75  of  her  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wyman
    accepted that in general there was  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for
    those fearing persecution by non-state agents  in  Albania.  She  noted
    that  there  was  a  functioning  police  service  in  Albania  as  the
    Respondent's  father  and  over  twenty  other  individuals  had   been
    convicted of drug dealing and other offences. But in paragraph  77  she
    went on to find that it was "certainly questionable as to  whether  the
    authorities would have helped the [Respondent] given his links with his
    father, a known drug dealer".

11.  It was the case that the Respondent had not sought any protection  from
    the police before fleeing from Albania. But he was only fourteen  years
    old at the time and,  as  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wyman  noted  in
    paragraph  78  of  her  decision,  it  was  "understandable  that   the
    [Respondent] on receiving information from his father that  his  mother
    should contact an agent (instead of reporting the matter to the police)
    undertook the steps his father told him to do...".

12.  Counsel for  the  Respondent  relied  upon  the  fact  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wyman had referred to the Home Office Country Policy and
    Information Note on Albania in paragraphs  36,  54-59  and  73  of  her
    decision.  She relied upon the fact that paragraphs 9.2.5,  11.1.7  and
    11.1.11 of the Note indicated that  there  was  corruption  within  the
    police force in Albania. She also referred to pages 13, 56  and  59  of
    the Country Evidence Bundle submitted by the Respondent at  the  appeal
    hearing.

13.  In addition, she relied on the fact that the police had not  been  able
    to prevent the Respondent being kidnapped  by  members  of  a  criminal
    gang. However, the test of whether there  would  be  a  sufficiency  of
    protection for the Respondent in Albania is a prospective one  and  the
    issue was whether if the Respondent were to be returned to  Albania  in
    the near future the State  would  be  able  to  protect  him  from  the
    criminals who had abducted and threatened him.

14.  In paragraph 79 of her decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman  found
    that "given the [Respondent's] age and  the  circumstances  around  his
    family, [she] did not find that there is a  sufficiency  of  protection
    for the [Respondent]". However, she did not explain how his  particular
    circumstances related to the country evidence on which she relied  and,
    in paragraph 55, she went no  further  than  stating  that  there  were
    "instances of corruption and of the police having committed abuses".

15.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman  did  err
    in law by failing to give sufficient reasons  for  finding  that  there
    would not be a sufficiency of protection for the Respondent in Albania.
    However, the rest of her reasoning was cogent and detailed  and  |I  do
    not remit the appeal to another  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  for  this
    reason and because it would not be reasonable for the Respondent to  be
    subjected to further cross-examination given his age.

16.  It will be open to both parties to submit further evidence relating  to
    sufficiency of protection at the  remitted  hearing  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wyman.

DECISION

    (1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed on the one issue of  sufficiency
         of protection.

    (2)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal Wyman for her to
         provide reasons relating to this one issue.

    (3)  The  findings  reached  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wyman  in
         relation to the Respondent's identity  and  his  father's  criminal
         history do stand as do her findings that there was  no  possibility
         of the  Respondent,  as  an  unaccompanied  child,  being  able  to
         relocate within Albania to avoid persecution by non-state agents.


Nadine Finch
Signed   Date 12 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

