
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07261/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 April 2019                     |On 31 May 2019                       |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  mrs b j k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Anzani, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss S Kiss, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (by whom I refer to the Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department) appeals against the decision of Judge Mitchell to allow the
    appellant's appeal under Article 8 and  grounds  that  the  Immigration
    Rules ought to be met.  Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Saffer  gave
    the respondent permission on 18 February 2019, even though the decision
    had been promulgated the previous October, because he was of  the  view
    that it was arguable that the judge had made a material error of law in
    making conflicting findings of fact as alleged in the application.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 23 March 1956.

3.   The asylum application was made on 20 January 2017 and was  refused  on
    20 July 2017. In  the  decision  letter  the  respondent  set  out  the
    background to the appeal. It seems the appellant originally came to the
    UK having made an online application in  February  2015.  However,  she
    returned to Bangladesh but re-entered the UK on 22 May 2016. Again, she
    returns to Bangladesh from the UK on 13 November 2016 to  find  another
    woman in her house with whom her husband claimed to have married.   The
    appellant's  husband  locked  the  appellant  in  a  room,   physically
    assaulted her and tortured her  before  forcing  her  to  sign  certain
    papers.  An alternative  claim  was  put  forward  that  she  lived  in
    Bangladesh alone with financial support from her  daughter  for  twenty
    years after divorcing her husband ten years  previously.   She  claimed
    that she had a son  in  Bangladesh  who  was  mentally  underdeveloped,
    however, there was no indication of his whereabouts, and  alternatively
    she had a son who lived with her sister whilst she was in the UK.   She
    claimed to have diabetes and she claimed to have high  blood  pressure.
    She also claimed that her husband would kill her  if  she  returned  to
    Bangladesh.

4.   She had applied for a visit visa on 8 April 2016 which was  granted  on
    19 April 2016.  As has been explained, she left Bangladesh  on  22  May
    2016 and arrived in the UK the same day,  returning  to  Bangladesh  in
    November 2016.  Again, she left Bangladesh  and  came  back  to  London
    Heathrow on 3 December 2016.  She was refused leave  to  enter  the  UK
    with a right of appeal on 3 December 2016  but  was  allowed  temporary
    admission on 4  December  2016  with  removal  directions  set  for  18
    December 2016. It was shortly after that period that she submitted  her
    asylum claim.

The hearing

5.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal the respondent,  through  Miss
    Kiss, explained that the judge had  dismissed  the  asylum  application
    finding it not to be credible.  He had had regard to an  expert  report
    from Dr Halari  but  had  engaged  minimally  with  that  report.   The
    appellant clearly suffered from a language difficulty and did not speak
    English well. The judge nevertheless went on to decides  appeal  should
    be allowed "under paragraph 27 ADEA (1  (VI)  of  the  immigration  and
    under article 8  ECHR".  It  was  submitted  that  Judge  Mitchell  had
    appeared to reach contradictory findings in relation to the  extent  of
    the appellant's cognitive impairment, saying at one point that she  had
    deliberately "embellished and exaggerated" her evidence (see  paragraph
    52) but at paragraph 51 had accepted a degree of cognitive  disability.
    Furthermore,  the  judge  found  that  her  cognitive  impairment   had
    deteriorated since her arrival into the UK.  One  finding  that  stands
    out, Miss Kiss pointed out, is that she  had  lived  alone  for  twenty
    years, but that was a clear finding.  In essence she submitted that the
    decision of Judge Mitchell did not make any sense, the reasons did  not
    support the conclusions.

6.   Miss Anzani for the appellant, on the other  hand,  said  that  it  had
    been accepted by the judge that the appellant  had  been  a  victim  of
    domestic violence and although there had been an asylum claim which had
    been rejected against which there had been no  appeal,  Judge  Mitchell
    had clearly reached  a  view  as  to  the  degree  of  the  appellant's
    cognitive impairment, and explained the societal difficulties which the
    appellant  would  encounter  in  returning  to  Bangladesh,  given  the
    background and the finding in this  case  of  domestic  violence.   The
    judge had given comprehensive reasons and  the  respondent  had  simply
    "cherry-picked" passages from the decision which appeared to contradict
    one another, and this had not been fair. It was acknowledged  that  the
    judge had been critical of the psychologist's report but,  overall,  he
    had he had overall accepted its conclusions.

Conclusions

7.   Following the hearing of all submissions I  considered  a  copy  of  Dr
    Halari's report. It contains a number  of  surprising  conclusions.  Of
    greater surprise is the fact that the judge appears to go each  way  in
    his decision reaching findings that are contradictory.   The  appellant
    has a family support network including a  sister  in  Bangladesh.   The
    judge found that she had a cognitive deterioration but overall  he  did
    not seem to regard this as significant because he rejected much of  the
    psychologist's assessment saying  he  had  reservations  about  it  and
    saying that his assessment had not been to the gold standard that would
    be  expected.   He  described  the  appellant's  evidence  in  material
    respects as being embellished and exaggerated and he said the appellant
    had not been honest in the past about her reasons for coming to the UK.
     He considered her credibility to be adversely affected,  and  although
    he seems to have accepted there was some cognitive  impairment  to  the
    appellant and therefore  some  negative  impact  in  returning  her  to
    Bangladesh, he did  not  consider  the  evidence  showed  any  negative
    psychological impact on the family as a whole.

8.   He considered Miss Anzani's submissions but looked at the case  through
    the prism of Article  8  having  considered  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and anyway would have no right of appeal against  the
    decision under the Immigration Rules.  He took into account the case of
    Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.  He clearly recognised that the  appellant  did
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules because she had  not
    lived in the UK for twenty years, having lived here for only two years.
     He  then  went  on  to  make  a  finding  that  the  appellant  had  a
    deteriorating degree of  cognitive  ability  needing  help  with  daily
    things such as dressing, feeding, washing and help  with  her  balance,
    but he said that the circumstances were such  that  the  obstacles  she
    would face  in  Bangladesh  were  very  significant  and  would  engage
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.  He claimed  to  have
    taken into account the strength of public policy in immigration control
    in the case and considered whether it outweighed the  strength  of  the
    Article 8 claim.  He decided that the asylum claim  was  not  credible.
    There was, the judge found, was no credible  evidence  that  she  would
    face a real risk of return as a failed asylum seeker. Nevertheless, the
    judge went on to conclude that the decision  was  disproportionate  and
    allowed it under Article 8 and under 276ADE(1)(vi).

9.   However,  I  agree  with  Judge  Saffer's  observation,  when  granting
    permission, that the findings appear to conflict with  each  other  and
    with the conclusions and there is no proper Article 8 analysis as there
    should be prior to reaching the conclusion that he reached.  The  judge
    seems to have reached a negative view of  the  appellant's  credibility
    and to have rejected some of her  evidence,  for  example,  the  expert
    report of  Dr  Halari,  yet  went  on  to  allow  the  appeal.  In  the
    circumstances, I agree with Miss Kiss that the judge's decision did not
    make sufficient sense for it to be allowed to stand.  Whether this  was
    simply because of a lack of careful attention to the decision  writing,
    or whether there are more fundamental errors, does not seem  important.
    What matters is  that  both  sides  can  understand  from  reading  the
    decision how this the judge has reached his conclusion.

10.  Both parties agree that, on finding a material error of  law  in  these
    circumstances, the decision of the FTT needs to be set-aside and  a  de
    novo hearing ordered. The appeal needs to be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for the further hearing to take place.

Notice of Decision

11.  The appeal by the respondent against the  decision  of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal is allowed.

12.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

13.  I direct, as I have been invited to  by  both  the  parties,  that  the
    matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  to
    take place before a different judge other than Judge Mitchell.

Directions

1.   The matter is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  (not  before  Judge
    Mitchell) for a de novo hearing

2.   No findings will be preserved.

3.   A Bengali interpreter will be required.

4.   All further directions to be issued by the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   I direct that the anonymity direction below is continued



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  respondent
(appellant) is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her or  any  member  of  her  family.   This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 9 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

