
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07439/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18th August 2017                      |On 19th September 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                        mr Mohammed Ibrahimian Nejad


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Gaisford of Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on 1st June 1981.  He  claimed
    asylum on 13th January 2016 but that was refused in a decision by  the
    respondent of 6th July 2016.  The appellant sought  to  appeal  against
    that decision, which  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gurung-Thapa on 1st December 2016.  By a determination  promulgated  on
    3rd January 2017 the Judge dismissed the claim in all respects.

2.   Challenge was made to that decision and permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was  granted.   Thus  the  matter  comes  before  me  to
    determine the issues under challenge.

3.   It is the case of the appellant that he is Kurdish and  when  he  lived
    in Iran he worked for and/or supported the Red Cross/Red Crescent.

4.   It is acknowledged by both parties before  me  that  those  factors  by
    themselves do not create a profile such as to place  the  appellant  at
    risk.

5.   Central to his case, and that which  is  said  to  create  the  profile
    adverse to him, is his activities and support for the PJAK.

6.   It is the case that the appellant in summary that  he  had  worked  for
    the Red Cross for about thirteen years as a first aider.   He  had  not
    been particularly interested in politics prior to his involvement  with
    the PJAK but was introduced to that party by a colleague and friend  Dr
    Molani.

7.   He said at interview that he was  not  a  member  of  the  organisation
    itself but more of a supporter, more of a helper from outside channels.
     That help he said was to distribute  items,  such  as  leaflets,  CDs,
    food, medication, money and clothing.  He would receive the items  from
    a man called Kardo and he would give the  parcels  to  Dr  Molani.   He
    would receive the parcels, take them home for a day or two and at times
    he would receive them at his workplace.

8.    Given  the  long  involvement  which  the  appellant  had   with   the
    government, the fact that the PJAK was actively  involved  against  the
    government, the judge  did  not  accept  as  being  credible  that  the
    appellant would receive or take the risk of receiving such  parcels  in
    his workplace.    It  was  the  argument  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that his Red Cross activities provided a good cover for  what
    he was doing.

9.   The appellant then indicated that Dr  Molani  had  moved  elsewhere  in
    Iran and essentially for two years the appellant was by himself.

10.  As the Judge indicated, in  paragraph  30  of  the  determination,  the
    appellant failed to explain to whom he delivered the parcels for  those
    two years when he was by himself.  This  was  of  particular  relevance
    because it was the case of the appellant that he had involved a further
    colleague, a person called Roaf in the enterprise, although  what  part
    Roaf played in the matter was not clearly stated.  The  appellant  said
    that Roaf was identified by the authorities and that it was he who then
    told the authorities about the appellant,  such  that  the  authorities
    came to his home looking for him some four to five  times.   The  Judge
    found that to be a fabrication in the absence of any  clear  indication
    as to what the appellant or indeed Roaf were doing  in  that  two  year
    period.

11.  The Judge also looked at the wider aspect of the  claimed  involvement.
    The appellant in the interview had indicated that  as  a  Kurd  he  was
    happy or willing to fight for the Kurds but not fighting, as in killing
    others with  guns,  but  through  politics.   As  the  Judge  noted  in
    paragraph 14 of the determination, there were a number of organisations
    struggling for Kurdish  rights,  not  all  of  them  being  willing  to
    exercise and use violence.  The PJAK was one  such  body  that  was  in
    conflict with the government and with others.  Seemingly  there  was  a
    time when there was a ceasefire but that has  stopped  because  of  the
    support that the PJAK is giving to Syrians.  The Judge  concluded  that
    somebody who wanted to achieve political ends  through  peaceful  means
    would not have chosen that particular party.

12.  Furthermore in the interview the appellant seemed to know  very  little
    about the party itself, giving an incorrect date  as  to  when  it  was
    founded. Although he gave the correct name of the founder, seemingly he
    was not accurate in the answer that he gave as to who was  the  current
    leader.  At question 72 of the interview he had said that Abdul  Rahman
    Haji Ahmadi and Avebndar Nosro were in partnership as the  leaders.  It
    seemed that, although Abdul Rahman Haji Ahmadi was the leader,  Evindar
    Renas was just a coordination member.  When asked about the  emblem  of
    the party, that question was evaded and instead  there  was  an  answer
    given about the aims of the party. It is said that he did not correctly
    identify what PJAK actually stood for.  The point, made in the decision
    letter of the respondent, was that  since  leaving  Iran  he  has  made
    little attempt to involve himself politically  with  the  PJAK  or  any
    other Kurdish party.

13.  All in all the Judge concluded that  the  appellant  knew  very  little
    about the party and had failed to  give  very  much  detail  about  his
    involvement and why indeed he had become involved in the first place.

14.  Mr Gaisford, who represents the appellant, submits that  if  the  Judge
    wanted clarification as to what the appellant  was  doing  in  the  two
    years by himself,  she ought to have asked the appellant  or  at  least
    given the appellant the opportunity of dealing with that matter.

15.  The fact remains, however, that the appellant was  legally  represented
    at the hearing and the respondent's decision, against which the  appeal
    was made, was very specific in its challenges  to  the  motivation  and
    involvement of the appellant.  The respondent  challenged  the  reasons
    for  his  joining  and  challenged  the  receipt  of  the  parcels  and
    highlighted that the appellant had indicated that PJAK stood for "party
    soul of Kurdistan Group" when it stood in fact for "party for free life
    in Kurdistan".  Indeed paragraph 24 of the decision was as follows:-

         "In view of the above considerations, it is noted that you have not
         demonstrated your motivation  behind  your  involvement  or  indeed
         demonstrated that you actually were  involved  with  the  PJAK  and
         therefore this aspect of your claim is not accepted".

16.  It  was  therefore  clearly  upon  the  appellant  to  show  that  that
    criticism was not appropriate.

17.  Taking such matters in isolation, it is clear  that  the  reasoning  of
    the Judge was properly open to be made in all the circumstances.

18.  However challenge is made to the overall fairness  of  the  procedures.
    First of all  the Judge is disinclined to accept that the appellant  is
    Kurdish because the interview was conducted in Farsi.  In  fairness  to
    the appellant it was indicated at the screening interview that he spoke
    both Kurdish Sorani and Farsi.  The explanation generally  was  offered
    that he spoke Farsi as  that  was  his  nationality,  rather  than  his
    cultural identity.  It was said, with some merit,  that  there  was  no
    apparent reason why the Judge should be disinclined to accept  that  he
    was Kurdish and that that was a matter that was largely unreasoned.

19.  Equally, so far as the membership of  the  Red  Cross  is  concerned  a
    number of photographs were presented. I have those in colour, they show
    the appellant dressed in the distinctive red and white jackets with the
    red crescent of the Red Cross.  It is said on his behalf there  was  no
    real reason why the Judge should not accept those photographs upon  the
    face.  That having been said ,however,  the Judge did look in a  little
    bit more detail at that membership.  Certain documents  were  produced,
    one said to be an identity card for relief and rescue  workers  of  the
    province of west Azerbaijan.  This was apparently issued on 15th  March
    2012 and describes the appellant as  a  relief  worker  and  bears  the
    photograph.  The other document is of the Red Crescent Society of Iran,
    valid as of the 216/12/15 and seems to have a slightly  different  name
    to the appellant's name.  The appellant said that  that  was  a  typing
    error.  Seemingly these documents were retrieved from his family  by  a
    friend, the details had been  kept  on  a  memory  stick  held  by  the
    appellant's wife.  In that context the Judge  considered  that  it  was
    unlikely, if the authorities had indeed been to the house on  a  number
    of occasions, that they would not have seized the  memory  stick.   The
    point is made against that in that there is no reason  why  they  would
    have discovered such a small item upon a search.  Mr Gaisford seeks  to
    argue, as do the grounds of appeal, that the approach of the  Judge  as
    to the membership of the Red Cross was largely unreasoned.  It is  said
    that the Judge's uncritical and unreasoned  rejection  of  the  Kurdish
    ethnicity  and  of  the  Red  Crescent  documentation  and   membership
    indicates an attitude that was generally set to  reject  all  that  was
    said  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  rather  than   demonstrating   a
    willingness to look at the evidence in the round.  In the circumstances
    Mr Gaisford submits that the whole approach to credibility  is  flawed.
    The fact that the Judge actually in the determination  is  prepared  in
    the alternative to accept Kurdish ethnicity and/or  membership  of  the
    Red Crescent does not absolve the Judge of that criticism.

20.  It seems to me that the essential weakness in the appellant's  case  is
    a lack of clarification as to what he actually did for the  party.   He
    says that he worked for the party  for  three  years,  the  first  year
    delivering parcels to Dr Molani.  There was no indication as to what he
    did or with whom he worked in the following two years.  He purports  to
    have recruited a colleague, but there is no indication as to what  that
    colleague did or how they worked together or any detail to explain  the
    role and function that he had.   My attention has not been drawn to any
    statement which the  appellant  is  said  to  have  made,  nor  is  any
    criticism made of the Judge that such a statement was  not  considered.
    The appellant's lack of knowledge  of  basic  matters  surrounding  the
    party merely add to the vagueness and lack of definition as to what  he
    was doing.  The burden  is  upon  the  appellant,  albeit  to  a  lower
    standard, to adduce evidence such as to show that he would be at  risk.
    I find it entirely open to the Judge to conclude for the reasons as set
    out that that burden has not been discharged.

21.  Even were the appellant to be  accepted  as  having  been  a  Kurd  and
    accepted as having been working for the Red  Cross,  neither  of  those
    matters, as was conceded, create any additional risk  profile  and  are
    merely contextual in their nature.  The very heart of the claim was  an
    absence of any explanation as to what precisely he was doing and why.

22.  In those circumstances I find, notwithstanding the criticisms that  may
    be made of the Judge on the  wider  context,  that  the  findings  were
    sustainable as made.  In those circumstances I do not find there to  be
    a material error of law.

23.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.   The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal shall stand, namely that  the  appeal  for  asylum,
    international protect and human rights is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.










Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

