
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07803/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th January 2020                  |On 14th January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, Counsel instructed by Fisher Jones
                    Greenwood Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT"),
       and as this a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is
       made. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise,  MS  is
       granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This  direction
       applies amongst others to all parties. Failure to  comply  with  this
       direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


    2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  He arrived in the UK  on
       29th November 2013 and claimed asylum. His claim was refused  by  the
       respondent for the reasons set out in  a  decision  dated  27th  June
       2016.  The decision of 27th June 2016 gave rise to an appeal that was
       most recently heard by FtT Judge Malcolm ("the judge") on 20th August
       2019. The appeal against the decision to refuse the claim for  asylum
       and humanitarian protection was dismissed for the reasons set out  in
       a decision promulgated on 16th October 2019.  The appeal was  however
       allowed on Article 8 grounds.


The decision of FtT Judge Malcolm


    3. It is uncontroversial that the appellant is  a  Afghan  National  who
       lived with his mother and two brothers  in  the  Kapisa  Province  in
       Afghanistan.   The  background  to  the   claim   for   international
       protection and the appellant's evidence is set out at paragraphs [15]
       to [46] of the decision.


    4. The First-tier Tribunal judge found the appellant to  be  a  credible
       witness, and found the appellant has given a  consistent  account  of
       why  his  mother  decided  that  he  should  leave  Afghanistan.   At
       paragraph [124], the judge stated:


           "In summary I accordingly  accept  the  evidence  given  by  the
           appellant of his brother's involvement with the Taliban and  his
           brother's death and the events thereafter of visits made to  the
           appellant's home by members of the  Taliban  seeking  return  of
           weaponry  and  suggestions  that  the  appellant  should  become
           involved with the Taliban."

    5. In the submissions made on behalf of the parties, the judge had  been
       referred to the Country Guidance  decisions  and  in  particular  the
       decision in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118  in
       which the Upper Tribunal held that a person who  was  of  lower-level
       interest for the Taliban (i.e. not a senior  government  or  security
       services official, or a spy) is not at real risk of persecution  from
       the Taliban in Kabul.  The appellant had also referred  the  Tribunal
       to the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for assessing  the  international
       protection needs of  asylum  seekers  from  Afghanistan,  dated  30th
       August 2018.


    6. The judge accepted the appellant's home area is in an area  which  is
       controlled by the Taliban and noted the respondent's claim  that  the
       appellant could return to  Kabul.   At  paragraph  [129],  the  judge
       stated:


           "I consider however that if  the  appellant  was  to  return  to
           Afghanistan and in particular if he was to return to Kaul (sic),
           it is unlikely that he would have any family  support  in  Kabul
           and  consequently  would  not  have  assistance   in   obtaining
           employment, housing,  education  or  integration  and  note  the
           conclusion of the UNHCR is  that  given  the  current  security,
           human rights  and  humanitarian  situation  in  Kabul,  internal
           relocation is generally not available in the city, however I  do
           require to observe the country guidance cases."

    7. The judge noted the submission made on behalf of the  appellant  that
       the  background  evidence  demonstrates   that   the   situation   in
       Afghanistan, and in Kabul has deteriorated, but concluded, at  [132],
       that having taken into account the Country  Guidance,  the  appellant
       could  not  succeed  on  either  asylum  or  humanitarian  protection
       grounds.


    8. The judge went on to consider the appellant's Article  8  claim,  and
       concluded that the difficulties that the  appellant  would  face,  if
       required to return to Afghanistan, are relevant to the  consideration
       of the Article 8 claim. The judge  stated  at  paragraphs  [133]  and
       [134] as follows:


           "133.  I do however consider that given the appellant's lack  of
           contact with his family and lack of familial support if  he  was
           to return to Kabul  that  there  would  be  difficulty  for  him
           reintegrating into life in Afghanistan.

           134.   The report provided by Mr Jawad Hussan Zadeh sets out the
           difficulty for the appellant in finding a safe place  to  reside
           given his lack of family members or relations who would be  able
           to support him  further setting out that for  the  appellant  it
           would be near impossible for him to find a  job  that  pays  for
           subsistence, costs of  accommodation  and  transportation  again
           given the  lack  of  relatives,  close  family  members  or  co-
           tribesman who would be willing or capable of supporting him. For
           these  reasons  I  consider  that  the  difficulties  which  the
           appellant would have in reintegrating into life  in  Afghanistan
           meets the test of very significant obstacles and  consider  that
           the  appellant  does  meet   the   requirements   of   paragraph
           276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules."

    9. The Judge found that there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to
       integration into Afghanistan and the  appellant's  removal  would  be
       disproportionate.  The appeal was  therefore  allowed  on  article  8
       grounds.


The appeal before me


   10. The appellant claims the judge misdirected herself as to the  Country
       Guidance insofar as it  is  relevant  to  the  question  of  internal
       relocation in Kabul. Insofar as the judge relied upon the decision in
       AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG, the appellant claims  the  judge
       erred because the Court of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) -v- SSHD [2019]
       EWCA  Civ  873  acknowledged  the  existence  of  the  updated  UNHCR
       Guidelines on returns to Afghanistan, that had been  relied  upon  by
       the appellant,  and invited the Upper Tribunal  to  consider  whether
       its Afghanistan Country Guidance required revision.


   11. It is said that the judge accepted the expert evidence  of  Mr  Jawad
       Hussan Zadeh as the basis for her conclusion that there would be very
       significant obstacles to the appellant's  integration  into  life  in
       Afghanistan such that the appeal was allowed on  Article  8  grounds.
       The appellant submits similar  considerations  are  relevant  to  the
       question whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant  to
       internally relocate.


   12. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith  on
       27th November 2019 and  the  matter  comes  before  me  to  determine
       whether the decision of the FtT judge is tainted by a material  error
       of law, and if so to remake the decision.


   13. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Eaton submits the judge had  found  at
       paragraph [129], that upon return to Kabul, the appellant is unlikely
       to have any family support and would not have assistance in obtaining
       employment, housing, education or integration.  He submits  they  are
       matters equally relevant to a  proper  consideration  of  whether  it
       would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant to internally relocate.
       In the same paragraph, the judge refers  to  the  conclusion  of  the
       UNHCR that  the  current  security,  human  rights  and  humanitarian
       situation in Kabul, is such that internal relocation is generally not
       available in the City.  However,  the  judge  erroneously  considered
       herself bound by the country guidance set out in AS (Safety of Kabul)
       Afghanistan CG.  The judge  said  at  paragraph  [126]  that  she  is
       required to observe the country guidance cases, and  in  the  closing
       sentence in paragraph [129] the judge again said  that  that  she  is
       required to observe the country guidance cases. He submits the  judge
       failed to have any proper regard to the updated information  set  out
       in the UNHCR guidelines that were relied upon by  the  appellant  and
       extensively referred to in the appellant's skeleton argument.  It was
       those  guidelines  that  were  before  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AS
       (Afghanistan).  The guidelines unequivocally recommend that  internal
       relocation should not be made available in Kabul, and  the  Court  of
       Appeal invited the Upper Tribunal to consider whether its Afghanistan
       Country Guidance required revision.


   14. In reply, Ms Isherwood submits the country guidance set  out  by  the
       Upper Tribunal in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan  CG,  remains  the
       relevant country guidance and the judge was right to consider whether
       it is open to the appellant to internally  relocate  to  Kabul  based
       upon that country guidance.  The Upper Tribunal held  that  it  would
       not generally be unreasonable or unduly harsh to order the  "internal
       relocation" of a single adult male in good health to Kabul,  even  if
       he had no specific connections or support network there.


   15. Ms Isherwood submits the Court of Appeal had done nothing  more  than
       to say the Tribunal would need to  consider  whether  to  revise  its
       Afghanistan country guidance following  the  more  recent  guidelines
       issued by the UNHCR.  That is not to say that  the  Country  Guidance
       was wrong or should not be  followed.   She  submits  the  judge  was
       plainly aware of the UNHCR guidelines that were relied  upon  by  the
       appellant. The judge had referred to  the  guidelines  at  paragraphs
       [91] and [103] of her decision.  The judge was plainly aware that the
       UNHCR considers that given the current  security,  human  rights  and
       humanitarian situation in Kabul, internal  flight  is  not  generally
       available in the city.


Discussion


   16. I record from the outset that the judge  found  the  appellant  would
       face very significant obstacles to integration into  Afghanistan  and
       concluded that the  removal  of  the  appellant  to  Kabul  would  be
       disproportionate and in breach of Article 8.  The decision  to  allow
       the appeal on Article 8 grounds is not challenged.


   17. It is readily apparent from the decision that the First-tier Tribunal
       Judge had reservations as to the position that  the  appellant  would
       find himself in, upon return to Kabul.  At paragraph [129], the Judge
       found that it is unlikely he would have any family support in  Kabul,
       would not have assistance in obtaining employment, housing, education
       or integration.  The judge noted the conclusion  of  the  UNHCR  that
       internal relocation is generally not available in the city.


   18. The internal relocation alternative is an assertion that although the
       appellant may risk persecution or breach of fundamental rights in his
       home area, he could find safety somewhere else in Afghanistan.  Here,
       the question of internal relocation  remained  a  two-part  question.
       First, are  there  risks  of  serious  harm  or  persecution  in  the
       appellant's home area.   The judge found the appellant's home area is
       controlled by the Taliban and on the  findings  made,  the  appellant
       would be at risk upon return to his home area.  Second, is it  unduly
       harsh expect the appellant to relocate to Kabul.


   19. I accept the  submission  made  by  Ms  Isherwood  that  the  country
       guidance set out by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)
       Afghanistan CG, remains the relevant  country  guidance.   A  Country
       Guidance case stands until it is replaced or found to be wrong in law
       and a failure to follow the Country  Guidance  without  good  reason,
       will ordinarily disclose  a  material  error  law.   Insofar  as  the
       guidance is undermined by the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  AS
       (Afghanistan), the Court of Appeal has remitted  the  matter  to  the
       Upper Tribunal on a limited basis  only.   The  UNAMA  statistic  for
       death and injury resulting from armed conflict and security incidents
       in Kabul was 0.1%, which represented one in 1,000 people.  The  Upper
       Tribunal had erroneously expressed the risk of harm as  being  0.01%,
       which represented one in 10,000 people. That,  the  Court  of  Appeal
       held,  was  an  error  of  law  and  the  case   was   remitted   for
       reconsideration on the basis of the correct figure.  The  matter  was
       remitted to the Upper Tribunal only on the question of the extent  of
       the risk to returned asylum-seekers from security  incidents  of  the
       kind considered at paras. 190-9 of its reasons.


   20. Equally however, where a reason for not following a country  guidance
       case is put forward, a decision maker is bound to consider it, and  a
       failure to do so can also amount to an error of law.  Here, after the
       Upper Tribunal's decision in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG, the
       UNHCR produced further guidelines on returns  to  Afghanistan  which,
       unlike its 2003  and  2016  versions,  unequivocally  recommend  that
       internal relocation should  not  be  made  available  in  Kabul.   At
       paragraph [82], Underhill LJ stated:


           "Those limits on the scope of the remittal are  subject  to  one
           important qualification. We were told that last year, after  the
           decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,   UNHCR   produced   further
           Guidelines on returns to Afghanistan,  which,  unlike  the  2016
           version,  unequivocally  recommend  that  "given   the   current
           security, human rights and humanitarian situation in  Kabul,  an
           IFA/IRA is generally not available in the city". It will be  for
           the Tribunal, no doubt after hearing  submissions,  to  consider
           whether  that  assessment  requires  a  reconsideration  of  its
           country guidance on a more extensive basis than is  required  by
           the remittal of this appeal. If it decides that it does,  it  is
           likely to make sense either for  the  scope  of  hearing  to  be
           increased or (which may be procedurally more  correct)  for  the
           remittal in this case to be heard along with whatever appeal  is
           the vehicle for that wider consideration."




   21. In my judgement, although the judge obliquely refers to  the  updated
       UNHCR guidelines, upon a careful reading of the decision of  the  FtT
       judge, it is clear that notwithstanding the concerns the judge had as
       to the difficulties the appellant  would  experience  in  Kabul,  the
       judge reached her decision to dismiss the asylum claim,  because  she
       considered herself bound by the Country Guidance.  In  my  judgement,
       the judge failed to engage with the submissions made on behalf of the
       appellant that the Country Guidance decision could  be  distinguished
       following the publication of the latest  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidance
       relating to Afghanistan  in  August  2018.  The  judge  found  it  is
       unlikely the appellant would have any family support  in  Kabul.  The
       Judge found the appellant would  not  have  assistance  in  obtaining
       employment, housing, education or integration in  Kabul.   The  judge
       also accepted the report provided by  Mr  Zadeh,  that  set  out  the
       difficulty for the appellant in finding a safe place to  reside,  and
       setting out that for the appellant, it would be near  impossible  for
       him to find a job that pays for subsistence, costs  of  accommodation
       and transportation.


   22. In my judgement, the decision of the FtT judge to dismiss the  appeal
       on asylum grounds discloses a material error of law and is set aside.




   23. The parties agree that I should remake  the  decision  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal, and I do so upon the basis of the unchallenged findings set
       out at paragraphs [129] and [134] of the decision.  I note the  Upper
       Tribunal held in AS (Safety of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  [2018]  UKUT
       00118 that it would not generally be unreasonable or unduly harsh  to
       order the "internal relocation" of a single adult male in good health
       to Kabul, even if he had no specific connections or  support  network
       there.  That must  however  be  considered  in  light  of  the  UNHCR
       Eligibility Guidance relating to Afghanistan, issued in  August  2018
       which states that  given  the  current  security,  human  rights  and
       humanitarian  situation  in  Kabul,  an  IFA/IRA  is  generally   not
       available in the city.


   24. The issue is whether taking account of all relevant circumstances, it
       is reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate or whether it would
       be unduly harsh to expect him to do so. The appellant arrived in  the
       United Kingdom in November 2013 when he was 13 years old.   Upon  the
       facts as found by the FtT Judge, and for the  reasons  given  by  the
       judge for  her  conclusion  that  there  would  be  very  significant
       obstacles to the appellant's integration in Afghanistan, I find  that
       it would be unduly harsh for the appellant to internally relocate  to
       Kabul.


   25. I allow the appeal on Asylum grounds.


Notice of Decision


   26. The appeal against the decision of FtT Judge Malcolm to  dismiss  the
       appeal under the Refugee Convention is set aside.


   27. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds

Signed                                  Date          7th January 2020


       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD


No fee is payable and there can be no fee award


Signed                                  Date          7th January 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
