
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07448/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Remotely by Skype for Business       |On 09 February 2021                  |
|On 14 January 2021                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    G M K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Smyth of Kesar & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended) I make an anonymity order.   Unless  the
    Upper  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  no  report  of   these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. This is the determination of the Upper Tribunal re-making the  decision
    following the Upper Tribunal's decision promulgated on 2  October  2020
    setting aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as involving  the
    making of a material error of law.

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 1 November 1991.  He
    comes from the Rahim Awa area of Kirkuk City in Kirkuk Governorate.  He
    is Kurdish.

 4. He arrived in the United Kingdom  on  23  September  2008  and  claimed
    asylum.  He claimed that his father had  been  killed  by  a  terrorist
    group (Jund al Islam).  The appellant claimed  that  he  had  been  was
    threatened and tortured by the group when he refused to plant a bomb in
    a government official's car.  His application for asylum was refused on
    26 January 2009.  However, as an unaccompanied minor,  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain until 1 May  2009.   He  made  a  further
    application for leave which was refused on 9 July 2014.

 5. Between November 2010 and February 2013, the appellant was convicted of
    a number of criminal offences both in the Magistrates' Court and  Crown
    Court.  Most recently, on 7 December 2010 at the Ipswich Crown Court he
    was convicted of burglary of a non-dwelling and sentenced to 12 months'
    imprisonment which was suspended.  Then, on 22 February 2013, again  at
    the Ipswich Crown Court, he was convicted of the offence  of  blackmail
    and sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment.

 6. As a result of his convictions, the appellant was served with notice of
    liability to be deported on 28 March 2014.  The appellant responded  on
    6 May 2014 making an international protection claim and  also  a  human
    rights claim.  On 9 July 2014, he was served with a decision to  deport
    him and his claims refused.  The appellant appealed against the refusal
    of his international protection and human  rights  claims  on  14  July
    2014.  His appeal was dismissed on 7 June 2016.   Judge Peart  did  not
    accept that the appellant's father had been  killed  as  the  appellant
    claimed or that the appellant was threatened by the terrorist group  as
    he claimed.  The  appellant  was  subsequently  refused  permission  to
    appeal by the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal.  As a result,  he
    became appeal rights exhausted on 22 August 2016.

 7. On 27 March 2017, the appellant was detained under  immigration  powers
    in order to be interviewed  by  Iraqi  officials  which  the  appellant
    declined to attend.  On 21 September 2017,  the  appellant  was  again
    detained with a  view  to  taking  part  in  an  interview  with  Iraqi
    officials.  That interview took  place  on  26  September  2017  and  a
    laissez-passer was issued.

 8. The appellant then made further submissions on 21 December 2017  and  2
    January 2018.  On 5 January 2018, the Secretary of State rejected those
    submissions and concluded that they did not amount to a  'fresh  claim'
    under para 353 of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).  Following
    the lodging of a judicial review claim on 5 January 2018, pursuant to a
    consent order signed  on  6  September  2018  the  Secretary  of  State
    withdrew the decision of 5 January 2018.

 9. In reconsidering the appellant's  submissions,  on  18  July  2019  the
    Secretary of State made a decision to  refuse  the  appellant's  asylum
    claim, humanitarian protection claim and claims under Arts 3 and  2,  3
    and 8 of the ECHR.  The appellant appealed against that decision to the
    First-tier Tribunal.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

10. In a decision sent  on  3  January  2018,  Judge  Hosie  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.  The judge rejected the  appellant's
    claim under the  Refugee  Convention  and  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds on the basis that he was excluded from protection under s.72(6)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended)  and
    under para 339D of the Immigration Rules respectively.  In relation  to
    his claim under Art 3 of the ECHR, the judge found that  the  appellant
    would be able to obtain a Civil Status Identity Document  ("CSID")  and
    so he would not be at real risk of serious harm or  of  destitution  on
    return to Iraq.  The judge also found that the  appellant's  return  to
    Iraq would not breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  solely
    on the ground that the judge had erred in law in her  approach  to  the
    issue of whether the appellant would be at real risk of serious harm in
    concluding that he would be able to obtain a CSID within  a  reasonable
    period of his return.  The basis of that  ground  was  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal had, between the hearing of the appeal and the date  that  the
    judge's determination was  promulgated,  reported  a  country  guidance
    decision in SMO and Others (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq  CG
    [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC) which was inconsistent with the  judge's  finding
    that the appellant would be able to obtain a replacement  CSID  before,
    or within a reasonable time of, returning to Iraq.

12. On 22 May 2020, I granted the appellant permission to  appeal  on  that
    ground.  Following an error of law hearing on 24 September 2020,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 2 October  2020,  as  the  Secretary  of  State
    conceded, I concluded that the judge had materially  erred  in  law  by
    failing to apply SMO and Others which was the relevant CG  decision  as
    it had been  reported  before  her  decision  was  promulgated.   As  a
    consequence, I set aside the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision  in
    order that the decision could be remade solely on the issue of risk  to
    the appellant (whether under Art 3 of the ECHR or on the basis  of  Art
    15(b) of the Qualification Directive)  because  he  would  not  have  a
    relevant document such as a CSID or  Iraqi  Nationality  Identification
    Document ("INID") on return.

The Resumed Hearing

13. The substantive appeal was listed at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre on 14
    January 2021.  I was based  at  the  Cardiff  CJC  and  Mr  Smyth,  who
    represented  the  appellant,  and  Mr  Howells,  who  represented   the
    Secretary of State, joined the hearing remotely by Skype for  Business.
    In addition, the appellant joined the hearing  remotely  by  Skype  for
    Business and gave evidence via the video link  through  the  Tribunal's
    interpreter who also joined the hearing remotely by Skype for Business.



14.  In  addition  to  the  appellant's  oral  evidence,  pursuant  to   an
    application  under  rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended), and  without  objection
    from Mr Howells, the appellant also put into evidence a 27 page  bundle
    of additional documents.  This bundle included an additional  statement
    by the appellant dated  11  January  2021  and  a  statement  from  his
    partner, "S" dated 11 January 2021.  Mr Smyth also helpfully prepared a
    short skeleton argument.

The Issues

15. At the outset of the hearing, the representatives narrowed the relevant
    issues for decision.

16. It  was  common  ground  that  the  judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and under Art 8 of  the  ECHR  had
    not been challenged and stood.

17. It was common ground that the sole issue for determination was  whether
    the appellant could establish that he was at real risk of serious  harm
    on return to Iraq because he would not  have  the  necessary  document,
    namely, a CSID or INID.  It was common ground between the parties  that
    if he were to return without such a document then he would be  at  risk
    of serious harm contrary to Art 3 of the  ECHR  or  Art  15(b)  of  the
    Qualification Directive, not least at the hands  of  Shi'a  militia  in
    seeking to travel from Baghdad (to which he would be returned)  to  his
    home area of Kirkuk.  The risk to the appellant in  such  circumstances
    is recognised in SMO and Others at para (11) of the judicial  headnote.



18. On behalf of the Secretary of  State,  Mr  Howells  accepted  that  the
    appellant, if he did not have, or could not access, a CSID would not be
    able to obtain a replacement in the UK from the Iraqi Embassy.  In that
    regard, he adopted the position set out in the  CPIN,  "Iraq:  Internal
    Relocation, Civil Documentation and Returns" (June 2020) at para 2.6.16
    that: "it is highly unlikely that an individual would be able to obtain
    a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy while in the UK."

19. Second, Mr Howells accepted that the appellant would  not  be  able  to
    obtain a replacement CSID through a proxy from the relevant CSA  office
    in Kirkuk.  Mr Howells accepted, on the  basis  of  [431]  of  SMO  and
    Others, that the CSA office in Kirkuk had an INID terminal and  was  no
    longer issuing CSIDs.  An INID could not be obtained by proxy; it could
    only be obtained in person, as it required  biometric  data,  including
    fingerprints and iris scans to be provided set out in SMO and Others at
    [388] and [431].

20. Third, Mr Howells accepted  that  the  appellant  could  not  obtain  a
    replacement CSID from Baghdad as set out in SMO and  Others  at  [393].



21. In short, therefore, the representatives accepted that  the  issues  in
    remaking the decision in this appeal were as follows:

      1) Did the appellant still have the original CSID which he accepted he
         had in Iraq?

      2) (a) If not, was it left with his  family  in  Iraq  whom  he  could
         contact and obtain access to it by them sending it to him in the UK
         or, perhaps, bringing it to him on arrival at Baghdad Airport?

         (b) In relation to this issue, an additional factual  issue  arose,
         namely whether the appellant could contact his family in Iraq.

      3) If neither of these was established,  could  the  appellant  safely
         travel from Baghdad Airport to Kirkuk (where  he  could  obtain  an
         INID) by obtaining from the Iraqi Embassy in the UK a  Registration
         Document (1957)?

The Evidence

22. The principal factual issue concerned whether the appellant had, or has
    access via his family in Iraq, his original CSID.  That issue, in turn,
    incorporated the issue of whether the appellant could make contact with
    his family if his CSID was still in Iraq.

23. On these issues, the appellant's evidence is contained within  his  two
    witness statements dated 19 November 2019 and 11 January  2020.   Also,
    the appellant gave oral evidence in which he adopted his statements and
    was cross-examined by Mr Howells.  There was no re-examination  of  the
    appellant in his oral evidence.

24. In his statement of 19 November 2019, the appellant says this about his
    CSID at para 50:

         "When I was in Iraq, I did have a CSID but that got taken  from  me
         when I left the country.  The agent asked for it and I gave  it  to
         him.  We were not asked why he wanted it.  I was scared at the time
         and did not want to question him  about  it.   I  do  not  remember
         anything about the document and cannot remember what it said  as  I
         cannot really read and write.  I also didn't have  a  passport  as
         there was no need for me to get one as a child as I didn't leave my
         home town of Rahim Awa."

25. In his more recent statement dated 11 January 2021 the  appellant  says
    much the same at paras 5-6 as follows:

         "5.  I confirm again that  I  once  had  a  Civil  Status  Identity
             Document (CSID) when I was in Iraq.  This  was  taken  off  me
             when I left Iraq.  The agent asked me to give it to him and  I
             handed it  over.   I  was  intimidated  by  them  and  by  the
             situation at the time and I didn't question him.  I can't read
             or write well and I can't remember anything about the  details
             on that document.

         6.   I confirm that I cannot remember any details  about  the  CSID
             that I had and I do not know how I would be able to  get  one.
             I have called the Iraqi Embassy to try to assist me  on  their
             number [...] numerous times and have not had any response from
             them yet.  They do not answer their phone."

26. In relation to his family in Iraq, in his first statement the appellant
    said this at paras 46-49 as follows:

         "46. After leaving my family and coming to the UK, I have wanted to
             see my family again.  I have made attempts to find my  mother,
             brother and sister but have not been able  to  find  out  what
             happened to them or where they are.  My social worker tried to
             find them when I was younger but was  unsuccessful.   The  Red
             Cross also tried but could not locate them.

         47.  I have asked people in the Kurdish  community  who  have  gone
             back to Iraq to help me look for my family, but they have told
             me they cannot find any information about  them.   One  person
             went to my house and told me that  he  found  an  Arab  family
             living there.  Another time, I asked a friend of mine,  ["U"],
             who was travelling back to Iraq to go and look for my  family.
             He was also unable to find them.

         48.  I have made numerous attempts to try and find my  family  over
             the years but I have not been able to  find  them.   The  most
             recent was when I was  interviewed  by  the  Iraqi  government
             officials in September of 2017.  I gave them the names  of  my
             family and the names in my house.  I asked  them  to  try  and
             find my family so that I could contact them.   I  received  no
             response from them.

         49.  I have spoken before about my friends [U] and [A] who returned
             to Iraq a long time ago.  They are back in the UK now.   I  do
             not keep in contact with any people in Iraq.  I have a life in
             the UK now, [S] is like my wife.  I have no life in  Iraq  and
             cannot obtain help from anyone."

27. At para 54, the appellant adds this:

         "I have tried to contact my family since I first arrived in the  UK
         over eleven years ago but have never been able to contact them.   I
         have no friends or relatives in Iraq, no one would help me.  I have
         no documentation from Iraq and I am not able to obtain one  because
         I do not have any connections to that country.  ... if I  was  able
         to find my family, it would be okay for me to  return  as  I  would
         have people there  who  could  care  for  me  and  help  me  obtain
         documentation."

28. In para 39 of that statement the  appellant  talks  about  telling  his
    partner, S about his family:

         "I also told her about my family, that my father had died and  that
         I have not been able to contact them for a long time.  It was  very
         hard for me to tell her about it, but I want her to know more about
         me."

29. In his more recent statement dated 11 January 2021, the appellant  says
    this about contact with his family at paras 3-4:

         "3.  I confirm that I have had no contact with anyone in Iraq since
             coming to the UK.  I do not know what happened to my remaining
             family there.

         4.   I confirm that I have approached British Red  Cross's  tracing
             service twice, once a long time ago with my social workers and
             once more  recently,  in  January  2020  during  the  COVID-19
             lockdown.   The  British  Red  Cross  worker  there   actually
             recognised me from the first time  I  attended  and  confirmed
             that they had not been able to find my relatives."

30. In his oral evidence during cross-examination, the appellant was  asked
    questions across a number of areas and issues.

31. First, the appellant was asked about the decisions in his  two  earlier
    appeals.  He was asked, given that the two judges had not found he  was
    telling the truth about  what  happened  in  Iraq,  why  he  should  be
    believed that he had lost contact with his family and did  not  have  a
    CSID.  His evidence was that what he had said about his  life  was  the
    truth.  He had been here for a long time and he did not have anyone  in
    Iraq and that was why he was in the UK.   He  maintained  that  if,  in
    fact, his father was alive and had not been killed by  terrorists,  how
    could he not have spoken to him since 2008.

32. Second, the appellant was  asked  about  his  evidence  concerning  his
    address in Kirkuk.  He said that he lived in  the  Rahim  Awa  area  of
    Kirkuk but that he could not recall the number as he had not been there
    for a long time.  It was pointed out to him that in  his  interview  in
    2008 (at question 10) he had given the address as "20, Rahim  Awa"  and
    that in the appeal before Judge Hosie in 2020  he  had  said  that  the
    number was  "22"  (see  para  60).   He  was  asked  why  was  there  a
    discrepancy.  The appellant responded by apologising and saying that he
    could not now remember.  It had been many years that he had been living
    in the UK.  He was asked how it was that he had remembered  the  number
    last year but not today.  He replied that he forgot things and that  he
    had a problem with his memory.

33. Third, the appellant was asked about his family in Iraq.   He  accepted
    that after his father had died he had a  mother,  brother,  sister  and
    maternal uncle in Kirkuk but no other relatives.  He said that  he  did
    not know what had happened to his relatives.  He was asked whether that
    was what he had told his partner, S.  He said  that  he  had  told  his
    partner that he had lost contact with his family members.  She liked to
    make him happy and she had told him that he might see them again.   The
    appellant was asked about S's statement at para 13 where she  had  said
    that she understood they were all dead and if his evidence was that she
    had said he might see them again, how did that explain what she said in
    her statement that she thought  they  were  all  dead.   The  appellant
    replied that he had been with his partner for a number of years and had
    had no contact with his family.  She had said this to comfort him.  She
    told him not to lose hope and that maybe some are  alive.   He  had  no
    knowledge of them, however, from 2008.

34. Fourth, the appellant was asked a number of  questions  concerning  his
    evidence of attempts to contact his family in Iraq since he has been in
    the UK.  He was asked whether he had  any  documents  to  show,  as  he
    claimed, that local Social Services had tried  to  contact  his  family
    sometime ago.  He said that his social worker had tried very hard  but,
    although he had told his social worker, he did not have any  documents.
    He said that he did have contact with his social worker.

35. He was asked whether he had any documentary evidence  relating  to  his
    friend (U) whom he said had visited Kirkuk to look for his family.   He
    said that he did not have anything.   He lived in a "very bad life".

36. The appellant was asked about what he had said in his recent  statement
    about approaches by the Red Cross and the submitted  evidence  (in  the
    form of text messages) and  whether  there  was  any  evidence  of  his
    claimed first approach to them.  He said he did not know why the  first
    approach was not there.

37. It was put to the appellant that he had come to  the  UK  about  twelve
    years ago as a 16 year old and that the only  documentary  evidence  of
    attempts to contact his family was very recent and that the  truth  was
    that he was in contact  with  his  family  in  Kirkuk.   The  appellant
    replied "no".

38. Fifth, the appellant was asked about his evidence concerning his  CSID.
    He agreed that in his statements he had said that  his  CSID  had  been
    taken by the agent when he left Iraq.   When  asked  what  age  he  had
    obtained the document, he said he could not remember  how  old  he  was
    because his parents had obtained it for him.  He was asked  whether  it
    had an expiry date or did it last permanently.   He  said  he  did  not
    know.  It could be forever but he had left Iraq a decade  ago  and  did
    not know the system there.

39. The appellant agreed that he did not have a National Identity Document.
     He only had a CSID which he called a 'Taskera' and the agent took that
    from him.  Apart from that he had nothing.   He  was  asked  where  the
    agent took it from him and he said whilst he was on route  to  the  UK.
    He did not really know where.  He did not know the  route.   The  agent
    took the ID from him but he did not know exactly where.

40. The appellant was asked about his interview with the Iraqi officials in
    2017 when the Home Office was trying to remove  him  to  Iraq  and  the
    Iraqi officials issued him with a document to enable him to fly to Iraq
    (that is a reference to the laissez-passer) and that the officials must
    have been satisfied that he  was  an  Iraqi  national.   He  was  asked
    whether he produced any identity  documents  when  interviewed  by  the
    Iraqi officials.  He said "no".  He did not give them anything and they
    did not give me anything apart from tickets.

41. It was put to the appellant that the truth was that his CSID  was  with
    his family in Iraq or he had it in the UK.  The appellant replied  that
    it was not with him nor was it with his family.  It was with the person
    who arranged his exit.

42. Finally, the appellant  was  asked  about  what  he  had  said  in  his
    statement about not knowing the details of his family book.  It was put
    to him that the evidence, in SMO and Others, was that these  were  very
    important details and people normally knew them, such as the volume and
    page number in the family book in the Civil Registry.  He replied  that
    it was not something that every individual knew.  His evidence was that
    you brought the file and details and that the person  in  the  registry
    knew about it.

43. In addition to this evidence, the appellant's bundle  also  contains  a
    statement from the appellant's partner,  S.   Much  of  this  statement
    concerns her relationship with the appellant which, in effect,  relates
    to the appellant's Art 8 claim which it is accepted stands as dismissed
    as a result of Judge Hosie's decision.

44. However, there is one matter in that statement to which I  should  make
    reference although Mr Smyth,  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  made  no
    reference to it.  It was, in effect, raised in cross-examination of the
    appellant and concerns what S says the appellant has told her about his
    family.   The  relevant  evidence  is  at  paras  13-14   as   follows:



         "13. [The appellant] has not really spoken to me about  his  family
             as it is very tough for him.  He told  me  that  he  lost  his
             family very early on in our relationship.   He  was  very  sad
             when I asked about his mum  and  dad,  he  burst  into  tears.
             Whenever he has a few drinks,  he  talks  about  how  much  he
             misses his family.  Though I have not  spoken  to  him  a  lot
             about his family, I understand that all of them are dead.   He
             told me that he was on his own before he left Iraq and that he
             left because he did not want to die.

         14.  For the four years I have been with [the  appellant],  he  has
             never spoken with  his  family  and  has  never  talked  about
             looking for them as far as I know.   I  don't  understand  why
             people would think that [the appellant] would be  lying  about
             his family.  For as long as I've  known  him,  he  has  always
             found it very difficult to talk about his parents and is  very
             sad when he talks about them.  He tells me that he  wishes  he
             could talk to his family one more time and I do not understand
             how he could be so sad about his family and be lying."

45. That statement is unsigned and S did not  give  oral  evidence  at  the
    hearing.

46. Finally, there is at pages 24-27 of  the  bundle  photocopies  of  text
    messages which is said to relate to his claim to have recently been  in
    contact with the Red Cross to trace his family.  At page 27 is  a  text
    which is signed by an individual followed by  the  words  "Red  Cross".
    That text says as follows:

         "please check with [the appellant] if he  has  used  any  different
         names in the UK or Iraq.  I have done a check on our  database  and
         cannot find a record of  [the  appellant's  name].   How  does  his
         solicitor and Home Office spell his name?"

47. So far as I can tell, that is a text between the Red Cross (said to  be
    in January 2020) and the appellant's partner, S.  Again, Mr  Smyth  did
    not refer to this evidence in his submissions or skeleton argument.

The Submissions

    The Respondent

48. On behalf of the respondent,  Mr  Howells  invited  me  to  reject  the
    appellant's evidence that he had handed over his CSID to the agent when
    coming to the UK and that he had lost contact with his family in  Iraq.
    He invited me to find either that the appellant still had his CSID  or,
    if not, it was in Iraq with his family whom he could contact and obtain
    it from them.

49. Mr Howells relied on Judge Peart's adverse credibility finding  in  the
    2016 appeal and, again in  relation  to  his  international  protection
    claim, by Judge Hosie in this appeal.  Mr Howells drew my attention, in
    relation to the former, to Judge Peart's determination at paras  48-52,
    where he found that the appellant's claim "lacks credibility"  and  the
    judge's  rejection  of  the  appellant's  account,   upon   which   his
    international protection claim was based, namely that  his  father  had
    been killed by terrorists and he had been threatened  and  tortured  by
    terrorists for refusing to plant explosives on government vehicles  and
    was forced to flee Iraq.

50. Mr Howells also relied upon para  72  of  Judge  Peart's  determination
    where he also found the appellant not to be credible

         "with regards to events and his  family  circumstances  in  Kirkuk.
         There is nothing to suggest that  he  cannot  access  support  from
         family or friends in the event of his deportation to Baghdad."

51. Mr Howells pointed out that  Judge  Hosie  did  not  depart  from  that
    adverse credibility finding and her decision stood unchallenged in this
    appeal.

52. Mr Howells submitted, that as a  result,  the  appellant's  claims  now
    should be treated  with  caution.   He  accepted,  however,  that  just
    because the appellant had not been believed by Judge  Peart  and  Judge
    Hosie did not  mean  that  the  appellant  should  necessarily  not  be
    believed on everything.

53. Mr Howells submitted that there were good  reasons  to  disbelieve  the
    appellant's evidence now concerning his claim to have lost contact with
    his family in Iraq and to have handed his CSID to the agent.

54. First, he relied upon the appellant's  consistent  evidence  concerning
    his address in Kirkuk.  In his asylum interview he had said he lived at
    number "20"; in 2016 he had given his address as number "22" and in his
    oral evidence he could not remember.  Mr Howells  submitted  that  cast
    doubts on the reliability of the appellant's evidence.

55.  Second,  Mr  Howells  relied  upon  the  inconsistency   between   the
    appellant's evidence that his father had been killed  but  he  did  not
    know what had happened to his other family whilst his partner,  in  her
    statement, said she understood that  all  the  appellant's  family  had
    died.  Further, in cross-examination, he had said that she had  offered
    him hope that he would be reunited with his family some time.  That was
    inconsistent with his partner's evidence that she understood they  were
    all dead.

56. Third, Mr Howells submitted that the  appellant's  evidence  concerning
    attempts to contact his  family  was  largely  unsupported.   The  only
    documentary evidence concerning attempts to contact his family was very
    recent in the form of the text message with the Red Cross.   There  was
    no supporting evidence that his social worker had previously  attempted
    to make contact and there was no evidence from U, his friend to support
    his claim that he had looked for the appellant's family unsuccessfully.
     There was no  supporting  evidence  of  an  earlier  approach  by  the
    appellant to the Red Cross.

57. Fourth, Mr Howells submitted that the appellant accepted that he had  a
    CSID in Iraq and he invited me to reject his claim that he  had  handed
    it over to the agent.  He relied upon the appellant's evidence in cross-
    examination about how this occurred as being vague.  He submitted  that
    I should find that his CSID is either with his family in Iraq  or  with
    him in the UK.  Although,  as  regards  the  latter,  foreshadowing  Mr
    Smyth's oral submissions based upon his skeleton argument,  Mr  Howells
    did accept that it was likely that if his CSID had  been  with  him  on
    arrival, in the circumstances in which he was dealt with shortly  after
    arrival, it was likely to have been found and that  therefore,  it  was
    more likely that he had left it in Iraq.

58. Mr Howells also  relied  on  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  been
    interviewed by the Iraqi Embassy and had been recognised  as  an  Iraqi
    national even, on the appellant's evidence, when not producing  any  ID
    documents.

59. Fifth, as regards the appellant's evidence that he could  not  remember
    the details of his family book, Mr Howells relied upon [391] of SMO and
    Others which recognised that this information was fundamental to Iraqis
    and only in exceptional circumstances was it likely that an Iraqi could
    not be expected to know this information.  Mr  Howells  submitted  that
    the appellant did not fall within any of the situations contemplated in
    SMO and Others at [392], namely he was not of a particularly young  age
    when he left Iraq (he was 16); and he  was  not  mentally  unwell.   Mr
    Howells relied upon Judge Hosie's caution  concerning  the  psychiatric
    assessment of the appellant  (at  para  95),  finding  that  there  was
    nothing significant about his mental health.  Those findings  were  not
    challenged.  Likewise, Mr Howells submitted that although the appellant
    claims not to be literate, he did attend school as the judge found.  He
    submitted that I should find that the appellant is likely to  know  the
    details of his family book entry.  Although, Mr Howells submitted  this
    would only be relevant if the appellant did not have  a  CSID  and  was
    seeking a Registration Document (1957) via the Iraqi Embassy in the UK.



60. Sixth, Mr Howells invited me to find, bearing in mind what was said  in
    SMO and Others at [392] that Iraq has a family orientated  culture  and
    that mobile phones are part of the social circumstances and  that  only
    in a small number of cases should it be said that an individual was not
    able to trace his family.

    The Appellant

61. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Smyth relied on his  skeleton  argument.
    The majority of his skeleton argument deals with issues  not  (now)  in
    dispute between the parties.

62. In relation to the issue of whether the appellant has established  that
    he has lost his CSID, Mr Smyth placed  reliance  upon  the  appellant's
    evidence at para 50 of his witness statement dated  19 November  2019.
    Mr Smyth contended that it was not advanced with  any  enthusiasm  that
    the appellant had his CSID in the UK.  He was questioned on the day  of
    arrival at a police station before being handed in to the care  of  the
    local authority.  Mr Smyth submitted there was no realistic  basis  for
    claiming that he had retained his CSID and managed to  keep  it  hidden
    from the authorities.  He pointed out that this had never been part  of
    the  respondent's  case.   Further,  Mr  Smyth  submitted  it  was  not
    implausible that, as the appellant claimed, the document was taken from
    him by the agent during the journey to the UK.

63. As regards the appellant's family in Kirkuk, Mr Smyth made no  specific
    submissions in relation to whether the appellant had lost contact  with
    them.  Although, he relied on the fact that  it  was  no  part  of  the
    appellant's evidence that he had left his CSID with his family.

64. In addition, Mr Smyth submitted that there was  no  logical  basis  for
    concluding that a CSID, issued some considerable time  ago,  was  still
    valid.

65. Mr Smyth submitted that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  because  the
    appellant did not have his CSID and could not access it.   Even  if  he
    did, it would not be much use to him as it would not be valid.

Discussion and Findings

66. In reaching my findings, I bear in mind that it is for the appellant to
    establish his claim under Art 3 of the ECHR or under Art 15(b)  of  the
    Qualification Directive.  In order to do so,  he  must  establish  that
    there are substantial grounds for believing that there is a  real  risk
    of serious harm on return.  That burden and standard of  proof  applies
    to the factual matters in issue in this appeal.

67. For the reasons I now give, I accept in substance (though not in  every
    specific detail) Mr Howells' submissions.

68. First, the appellant has on two occasions been found not to be credible
    by Judges of the First-tier Tribunal.  In 2016,  Judge  Peart  rejected
    the appellant's account that his father had been killed  by  terrorists
    and that he had been threatened thereafter and forced to leave Iraq  in
    fear for himself.  Judge Hosie in 2019, accepted that  conclusion  and,
    at this stage  of  the  appeal,  her  findings  in  that  regard  stand
    unchallenged.

69. Judge Hosie also  made  adverse  findings  concerning  the  appellant's
    family in Kirkuk.  She was considering whether the appellant would have
    the assistance of a male family member in Kirkuk in order to  obtain  a
    CSID for the appellant in Kirkuk.  That, of course,  is  no  longer  an
    issue, as the parties agreed before me, in the light of SMO and Others.
     Nevertheless, the finding is, in my judgment,  significant.   At  para
    103 of her determination, Judge Hosie said this:

         "The question remains however whether he would be able to obtain  a
         CSID on arrival within  a  short  period  thereafter.   This  would
         entail the assistance of a male family  member  to  assist  him  in
         obtaining  a  CSID.   No  evidence  has  been  presented  that  the
         appellant's uncle is not still alive and living in Kirkuk."

70. I would  also  observe  that  there  is  still  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant's uncle is still not alive and living in Kirkuk.

71. Judge Hosie then went on to deal with claims by the appellant  that  he
    had sought to trace family members without success  at  paras  103-104:



        "103.     The appellant claims to have made attempts  to  trace  his
             family however no evidence has been presented by him of  this.
             He claims to have sought the assistance of social work who  in
             turn contacted the Red Cross and again no  evidence  has  been
             presented of this.

         104. The appellant claims that he asked his friend [U] to go to his
             family home when he returned to Iraq as they live in the  same
             area previously and [U] makes  regular  trips  to  Iraq.   The
             appellant claimed in  oral  evidence  that  [U]  went  to  the
             appellant's family home and did not find anyone.  The evidence
             was vague and inconclusive and the  appellant  was  unable  to
             answer whether [U]  made  inquiries  of  neighbours  or  other
             associates yet these would have been obvious questions for the
             appellant to have asked him.  The  appellant  claims  to  have
             been in frequent contact with [U]  although  they  spoke  some
             three months previously.  He did not  ask  [U]  to  provide  a
             witness  statement  or  attend  court  on  his  behalf.    The
             appellant could have gone back to the Iraqi Embassy  with  the
             information provided by [U] and asked them to assist him  more
             recently in family  tracing  however,  no  evidence  has  been
             provided that he has done  this.   All  of  this  weakens  the
             appellant's claim to be unable to obtain a CSID within a short
             period of time on arrival in Iraq."

72. Then, at para 111 the judge reached the following finding:

         "I refer to my findings above in relation to whether the  appellant
         would be able to obtain a CSID.   There  is  insufficient  evidence
         before me to displace the  fact  that  his  evidence  is  that  his
         maternal uncle lived in Kirkuk."

73. It is, of course, as Mr Howells  submitted,  not  conclusive  that  the
    appellant was found by Judge Peart or Judge Hosie not  to  be  credible
    and not to have told the truth.

74. I bear in mind the self-direction, known in  the  context  of  criminal
    trials  as  the  "Lucas  direction"  which  applies  in   international
    protection proceedings as the Court of Appeal  recognised  in  Uddin  v
    SSHD [2020]  EWCA  Civ  338  at  [11]  (per  Sir  Ernest  Ryder,  SPT):



         "I note in that regard the conventional warning which  judges  give
         themselves that a person may be untruthful  about  one  matter  (in
         this case his history) without necessarily being  untruthful  about
         another (in this case the existence of family life with the  foster
         mother's family), known as a 'Lucas  direction'  (derived  in  part
         from the judgment of the CACD in R v Lucas [1981] QB 720 per Lord
         Lane CJ at 723C). The classic formulation of the principle is  said
         to be this: if a court concludes that a witness has lied about  one
         matter, it does not follow that he has  lied  about  everything.  A
         witness may lie for  many  reasons,  for  example,  out  of  shame,
         humiliation, misplaced loyalty, panic,  fear,  distress,  confusion
         and emotional pressure. That is because a person's motives  may  be
         different as respects different questions. The warning is not to be
         found in the judgments before this court. This is perhaps a  useful
         opportunity to emphasise that the utility of the self-direction  is
         of general application and  not  limited  to  family  and  criminal
         cases."

75. Of course, the findings of both judges, including Judge Hosie's finding
    that the appellant has not established that he has lost contact with at
    least his uncle in Kirkuk, are only the 'starting point' in my reaching
    findings applying Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.

76. In this appeal, the appellant has provided little supporting  evidence.
    There is still no evidence from U to support the appellant's claim that
    U travelled to Iraq and unsuccessfully sought to trace the  appellant's
    family.  There is still no  supporting  evidence  for  the  appellant's
    contention that, earlier in his time in the UK, he sought  through  his
    social worker and the Red Cross to  trace  his  family.   In  his  oral
    evidence, he said he was still in contact with his social  worker  and,
    in any event, he could, if he  wished,  attempt  to  obtain  supporting
    evidence about that but has not done so.  There is evidence of  contact
    with the Red Cross in, it is said, January 2020 (but it may be  January
    2021 in context), but that evidence does not, as the appellant claimed,
    provide support to his contention that the Red Cross acknowledged  that
    he had earlier used their services to contact his family.  Further, the
    evidence itself goes no further than stating in a text message (at page
    27 of the bundle) that the Red Cross has been unable to find  on  their
    database any record of a person bearing the appellant's name.  It  does
    not support a claim that the Red Cross  has  effectively  attempted  to
    trace the appellant's family but without success.

77. The evidence of the appellant's partner,  S  was  in  the  form  of  an
    unsigned witness statement.  She did not give oral evidence  before  me
    at the hearing  and  so  her  evidence  was  not  subject  to  forensic
    challenge.  That, in my judgment, affects the weight that can be  given
    to it.

78. In any event, her evidence  is,  in  part,  as  Mr  Howells  submitted,
    inconsistent with what the appellant said.  His evidence  is  that  his
    father was killed but he does not  know  what  happened  to  the  other
    family members.  S's evidence is that she believes that all his  family
    has died.  That is a belief that could only  have  been  engendered  by
    what the appellant said to her.   The  inconsistency  was  not,  in  my
    judgment,  adequately  explained  in  the  appellant's  oral  evidence.
    Further, in cross-examination the appellant said that S encourages  him
    and offers hope that he will be reunited some  time  with  his  family.
    Yet that, on its face, is inconsistent with her understanding that they
    are all dead.

79. In my judgment, these matters lead me to conclude that I do not  accept
    the appellant's evidence that his CSID was handed  over  to  the  agent
    when he came to the UK.  Mr Smyth submitted that that was  a  plausible
    circumstance, namely that an agent might well  take  documents  from  a
    person such as the appellant.  That contention was not supported by any
    background evidence.  It cannot be taken as a given,  in  my  judgment,
    that represents the  modus  operandi  of  agents  bringing  individuals
    clandestinely to the UK.  In the absence  of  supporting  evidence,  it
    amounts to mere supposition.

80. I did not understand Mr Howells to pursue, in the light of  Mr  Smyth's
    submission, that it was likely that the appellant had his CSID when  he
    arrived in the UK and had been able to conceal it from the  police  and
    Social Services with whom he came into contact shortly  after  arrival.
    In my judgment, the evidence does  not  establish  that  the  appellant
    brought the CSID with him to the UK.  In my judgment  it  is  far  more
    likely, and I find as a fact in this case, that there is  a  reasonable
    likelihood that the appellant left his CSID in Iraq with his family, in
    particular his uncle with whom his own evidence was he lived.

81. Further, there is nothing in the evidence before me  to  counter  Judge
    Hosie's unchallenged finding that the appellant still has an  uncle  in
    Kirkuk.  As regards contact, I bear in mind what was said in  at  [392]
    of SMO and others, albeit in the context of contact to  obtain  'family
    book' information:

         "It is also a country with a high prevalence  of  mobile  telephone
         usage amongst the adult population.  Even when we bear in mind  the
         years of conflict and displacement in Iraq, we would  expect  there
         to be only a small number of cases in  which  an  individual  could
         plausibly claim to have no means of contacting a family member from
         whom the relevant volume and page reference could  be  obtained  or
         traced back."

82. I am satisfied on the standard applicable in  international  protection
    cases that the appellant's CSID was left in Iraq and  is  available  to
    his family, in  particular  his  uncle.   I  do  not  accept  that  the
    appellant has lost contact with, or at least the  ability  to  contact,
    his family, in particular his uncle in Iraq.   I  do  not  accept  his,
    largely unsupported, evidence that  he  has  unsuccessfully  sought  to
    trace and contact his family through the Red Cross or his friend, U.  I
    am satisfied, therefore, that the appellant could obtain his CSID prior
    to returning to Iraq.

83. Mr Smyth raised the issue of whether that CSID would, if the  appellant
    could obtain it, still be valid.  The appellant's evidence on that  was
    that he did not know whether the CSID had a limited period of  validity
    or was permanently valid.  No background evidence was  referred  to  by
    either representative relevant to this issue.  It was not, so far as  I
    can tell, an issue raised in SMO and Others.  In the light of  that,  I
    see no reason to doubt, despite the fact that the appellant has been in
    the UK for some  twelve  years,  that  his  CSID  would  be  valid  and
    sufficient to allow him to safely travel,  through  any  Shi'a  militia
    checkpoints, from Baghdad Airport to his home area of Kirkuk.

84. In the light of that finding, it is not strictly necessary  to  resolve
    the  other  issue  relied  upon  by  Mr  Howells  in  respect  of   the
    Registration Document (1957).  That submission was that,  even  if  the
    appellant did not have a CSID and it is accepted he could not obtain  a
    new CSID or an INID in the UK, he could obtain a Registration  Document
    (1957) via the Iraqi Embassy in the UK which would allow him to  travel
    safely in the same way as a CSID or INID would when back in Iraq.

85. In that regard, Mr Howells relied upon paras 2.6.15 and 2.6.16  of  the
    CPIN (June 2020) which is in the following terms:

          "2.6.15  Since  SMO  was  promulgated  in  December  2019  further
         information regarding the issuance of CSIDs  in  the  UK  has  been
         obtained by the Home Office in April 2020 [see Annex I]. When asked
         to describe the process of obtaining a CSID from the Iraqi  Embassy
         in London the Returns Logistics department stated:

         'CSID cards are  being  phased  out  and  replaced  by  INID  (Iraq
         National Identification) cards. It is  not  currently  possible  to
         apply for an INID card outside of Iraq.  As  a  result,  the  Iraqi
         embassy in London are advising their nationals in the UK  to  apply
         instead for a 'Registration Document (1957)' which they can use  to
         apply for other documents such as passports or an  INID  card  once
         they have returned to Iraq.

         'The registration document  (1957)  must  be  applied  for  on  the
         applicant's behalf by a nominated representative in Iraq. In  order
         to start the application, the  individual  requiring  documentation
         would normally provide at least one copy  of  a  national  identity
         document [see  paragraph  2.6.24  for  list  of  national  identity
         documents]  and  complete  a  power  of  attorney  (to  nominate  a
         representative in Iraq) at the Iraqi embassy along with the embassy
         issued application forms.  If  they  have  no  copies  of  identity
         documents they also would need  to  complete  a  British  power  of
         attorney validated by the FCO and provide parents names, place  and
         date of birth to their nominated representative in Iraq.'

         'Once  issued  the   nominated   representative   will   send   the
         registration document (1957)  to  the  applicant  in  the  UK.  The
         process takes 1-2 months.'

         'The HO cannot apply for documentation other than  Laissez  Passers
         on someone's behalf but the embassy is willing to check to  see  if
         the individual  already  holds  documents  and  provide  copies  if
         necessary.'

         2.6.16 Based on the above information, it is highly  unlikely  that
         an individual would be able to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy
         while in the UK. Instead  a  person  would  need  to  apply  for  a
         registration document (1957) and would then apply for an INID  upon
         return to their local CSA office in Iraq."

86. Mr Howells submitted that the appellant would need to know the  details
    of the "family book" but, applying SMO and Others, I should  find  that
    he  would  despite  his  evidence  to  the  contrary  and,  with   this
    information, he could obtain a Registration  Document  (1957)  via  the
    Iraqi Embassy.  That, he submitted, would allow the appellant to travel
    safely to Kirkuk in order to obtain an INID on arrival there.

87. Mr Howells accepted that there was  a  "gap"  in  the  evidence  as  to
    whether this document would allow for safe travel.  He  accepted  that,
    although the Upper Tribunal in SMO and  Others  had  referred  to  this
    document, it had not considered whether the document allowed  for  safe
    travel in Iraq as the evidence at the time was that  a  CSID  could  be
    obtained from the Iraqi Embassy.  Nevertheless,  Mr  Howells  submitted
    that if the Iraqi Embassy was recommending an individual  should  apply
    for this document, as it was not able to issue  CSIDs,  it  was  highly
    unlikely that the appellant would not be able to travel in Iraq  safely
    in order to obtain a new CSID or INID in his home area.

88. As I have said, given that I have found that  the  appellant  would  be
    able to obtain from Iraq via his own family  his  existing  CSID  which
    would allow him to safely  travel  within  Iraq,  it  is  not  strictly
    necessary to decide whether he could obtain this  alternative  document
    which would allow for safe travel in Iraq.

89. I accept Mr Howells' submission, on the basis of [391] and [392] of SMO
    and Others, that it is likely that the  appellant  knows  the  relevant
    details of his family  book  which  would  assist  him  to  obtain  the
    Registration Document (1957).  I do not accept the appellant's evidence
    that he does not know the details.  In SMO and others the UT said this:

         "391.  We consider the number of individuals who do  not  know  and
         could not ascertain their volume and page reference would be  quite
         small, however.  It is impossible to overstate the importance of an
         individual's volume and  page  reference  in  the  civil  register.
         These details appear on numerous official documents,  including  an
         Iraqi passport, wedding certificate and birth certificate, as  well
         as the CSID.    It was suggested  in  a  report  from  the  British
         Embassy in Baghdad, quoted at 6.1.9 of the Internal Relocation CPIN
         of February 2019, that "[a]ll Iraqi nationals will know or be  able
         to easily obtain this information".  We find the  former  assertion
         entirely unsurprising.  The volume and page reference in the  civil
         register is a piece of information which is of significance to  the
         individual and their family from the moment of their birth.  It  is
         entered on various documents and is ever present in  that  person's
         life.  We do not lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  there  remain  a
         significant number of people in Iraq who are undocumented.   We  do
         not consider that problem to be attributable to a  difficulty  with
         recalling the relevant information.  It is instead attributable  to
         the closure - until comparatively  recently  -  of  the  local  CSA
         offices  at  which  people  were  required  to  obtain  replacement
         documents and to their reluctance to return to those areas  from  a
         place of relocation.

         392.     There will of course be those who can plausibly claim not
         to know these details.  Those who left Iraq at a particularly young
         age, those who are mentally unwell and those who have  issues  with
         literacy or numeracy may all be able to make such a claim plausibly
         but we consider that it will be very much  the  exception  that  an
         individual would be unaware of a matter so fundamental to their own
         identity and that of their family.  The  letter  from  the  Embassy
         also suggested that most  Iraqis  would  be  able  to  obtain  this
         information easily.  Again, that  assertion  is  unsurprising  when
         viewed in its proper context.  As is clear from AAH(Iraq), Iraq is
         a collectivist society in which the family is all important.  It is
         also a country with a high prevalence  of  mobile  telephone  usage
         amongst the adult population.  Even when we bear in mind the  years
         of conflict and displacement in Iraq, we would expect there  to  be
         only a small number of cases in which an individual could plausibly
         claim to have no means of contacting a family member from whom  the
         relevant volume and page reference  could  be  obtained  or  traced
         back."

90. In my judgment, the appellant does not fall within either of the  three
    categories in [392] where it is  plausible  that  he  would  not  know,
    namely that he left at a particularly young  age  or  that  his  mental
    health affects his knowledge or that he is illiterate or innumerate  to
    a level where he might not  know  this,  remembering  always  that  his
    evidence was that he went to school.  In any event, I see no reason why
    he could not obtain the information from his family in Iraq  with  whom
    he is able to contact.

91. Nevertheless, I do not accept  that  the  evidence  which,  Mr  Howells
    acknowledged contained  a  "gap",  establishes  that  the  Registration
    Document (1957) is a substitute for an CSID or INID allowing  for  safe
    travel in Iraq.  The point has arisen in a number of  cases  where,  on
    the basis of  very  similar  submissions,  Mr  Howells  invited  me  to
    conclude that this document  would  suffice.    In  a  previous  appeal
    (PA/03933/2019), the submissions (made by Mr Howells) mirrored those he
    made in this appeal.  Rather than seek to re-cast  my  earlier  reasons
    for rejecting those submissions  in  different  language  here,  it  is
    appropriate that I reproduce my earlier reasons which were at paras 116-
    119 of that earlier appeal decision (dated 2 November 2020):

         "116. On the face of it, the  purpose  of  issuing  a  Registration
         Document (1957) is in order to permit an individual to apply for an
         INID on return to Iraq.  Of  course,  that  document  can  only  be
         obtained by an individual attending the relevant CSA Office  (which
         issues such documents) as it is a biometric document.  Mr  Howells,
         however, submitted that possessing a Registration  Document  (1957)
         was the equivalent of possessing a CSID for the  purposes  of  safe
         travel from, for example, Baghdad to an individual's home area.

         117. The evidence from the Iraqi Embassy set out in the  CPIN  does
         not, however, contemplate the document's use in this  way.   It  is
         silent on whether the document would  allow  an  individual's  safe
         passage to their home area.  Mr Howells invited me  to  infer  that
         that was the case otherwise why would the Iraqi Embassy issue  such
         a document.  The answer to that may be that the document is  issued
         in order to allow an individual to obtain an  INID  in  their  home
         area.  That may, for example, be Baghdad itself to where there  may
         be no travel difficulties.

         118. More specifically, however,  the  Iraqi  authorities  are  not
         issuing Registration Documents (1957) in order to  facilitate  safe
         passage to an individual's home area.  The evidence from the  Iraqi
         Embassy is not concerned with  that  issue.   In  my  judgment,  it
         cannot be inferred that is the case on the  basis  of  the  limited
         evidence set out in the CPIN from the Iraqi Embassy.

         119. The UT in SMO  did  not  express  any  view  on  whether  that
         document would allow safe passage in  Iraq.   The  UT  in  SMO  was
         concerned with the relevance of a CSID, an INID, a 'laissez passer'
         or a 'certification letter'.  Neither of the latter  two  documents
         was considered by the UT to allow for such safe passage (see  [374]
         and [378]) and, as [counsel or the appellant] submitted, that  view
         was taken in the face of a (potentially) contrary position taken by
         the Iraqi Embassy itself.  Here, of course, there  is  not  even  a
         view expressed by the Iraqi Embassy. In SMO,  the  UT  referred  to
         with approval the expert evidence that Shi'a militia were  unlikely
         to find acceptable alternative forms of identification to a CSID or
         INID (see [378]).   In  the  light  of  this  evidence,  I  am  not
         satisfied that  even  if  the  appellant  obtained  a  Registration
         Document (1957) - and assuming he has not already obtained  a  CSID
         as I have concluded he could - that document would obviate any risk
         to him, for example at Shi'a militia  checkpoints  on  his  journey
         home to Kirkuk Govern[orate].  The evidence in this  appeal  simply
         does not make good Mr Howells' submission as to the  potential  use
         of  the  document  beyond  it  being  a  document  that  allows  an
         individual, once in their home area, to obtain an INID."

92. The evidential position is no different in this appeal and I  adopt  my
    earlier reasons here which are, in my judgment, equally  applicable  to
    this appellant's  claim  and  justify  the  rejection  of  Mr  Howells'
    submissions that a  'Registration  Document  (1957)'  would  allow  the
    appellant to safely travel from Baghdad to Kirkuk where he  would  then
    be able to obtain an INID.

93. However, as I have already found, the appellant can obtain his existing
    CSID in order to travel safely and so his claims under  Art  3  of  the
    ECHR and Art 15(b) of the Qualification Directive do not succeed.

Decision

94. The decision of Judge Hosie to dismiss the appellant's appeal  was  set
    aside for error of law in my decision sent on 2 October 2020.

95. I remake the decision dismissing the appellant's appeal  under  Arts  2
    and 3 of the ECHR and Art 15(b) of the Qualification Directive.

96. Judge Hosie's decision (and findings) dismissing the appellant's appeal
    under the Refugee Convention and Art 8 of the ECHR were not  challenged
    and stand.

97. Consequently, the appellant's appeal is dismissed on all grounds.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             26 January 2021

