
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/07922/2018
     PA/07924/2018
     pa/08430/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st June 2019                             |On 3rd July 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     XS
                                     ES
                                     ES
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms G Loughton
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  three  Appellants,  minors,
    from Albania who had made a protection claim based  on  the  fact  that
    they were at risk because of a blood  feud  between  their  father  and
    another family.  The matter came before Judge Black at Taylor House  on
    25th March 2019 and in  a  Decision  promulgated  on  5th  April.   She
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 2. The very brief chronology is that the Appellants' mother  had  come  to
    the UK previously with the first and oldest of the children and claimed
    asylum.  That asylum claim was rejected on the basis that the judge  at
    the time found that the mother would not be at risk.   The  blood  feud
    had ended because the mother had separated or divorced from her husband
    and also on the basis that women were not at risk in blood feuds.

 3. The Appellant then had the  subsequent  two  children,  the  other  two
    Appellants in this case,  and  they  lived  with  extended  family,  in
    particular the maternal grandmother, for several  years.   However  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that that period was not  a
    calm and settled period  in  that  mother  was  abused  by  her  family
    members, beaten by other persons and the children  themselves  suffered
    abuse from others in school which, their evidence was, was  because  of
    the blood feud.  I am not making any finding in relation to whether  or
    not those things happened but that is the background under  which  they
    claimed.

 4. The claim is that they were  then  forced  to  leave  the  family  home
    because of the difficulties between their mother and the  rest  of  the
    family and lived elsewhere until mother said it was not safe  for  them
    to stay in Albania and took them first to Belgium where they lived in a
    detention camp and then travelled on to France where  while  attempting
    to gain entry into a  lorry  to  come  to  the  UK  the  children  were
    successful but mother was not.

 5. What the judge did in deciding the  appeal  was  adopt  a  lot  of  the
    reasoning from mother's own asylum appeal  and  then  found  there  was
    insufficient evidence that a blood feud existed at all and also  relied
    heavily on her finding that they had lived safely for a number of years
    on the second occasion when mother went back.   However,  the  evidence
    was that they did not live  safely  because  there  were  a  number  of
    attacks and the judge also did not factor into the adverse  credibility
    findings the fact that mother had caused  them  to  flee  on  a  second
    occasion, so it could be argued that having gone back because  she  was
    refused asylum to try and make a life there,  she  could  not  and  was
    forced to flee a second time.  The fact that that aspect was not  taken
    into account by the judge I find is an error of law which could  affect
    the outcome.

 6. The second matter that I am concerned about and which I find to  be  an
    error of law is the judge's conclusion that these  three  unaccompanied
    children will return to Albania to be collected by social services  who
    and with their help will be returned to their maternal  family  members
    who can and will look after them.  That is entirely speculative because
    the evidence that was before the judge was that the  maternal  extended
    family and the mother had had a serious falling out and that there  had
    not been any contact even when they were in Albania  so  to  find  that
    there was ongoing contact continuing now is against the  evidence  that
    was before the judge.  Therefore, the judge did not consider  what  the
    position of the children would be if they did not have family to return
    to and that was not factored into the Article 8 balancing exercise.

 7. Because there are errors both  in  the  findings  in  relation  to  the
    protection claim and the blood feud and risk from  that  and  also  the
    situation on the children's return the Decision will  have  to  be  set
    aside in its entirety and because of the number of findings  that  need
    to be made i.e. all of them,  it  is  appropriate  that  it  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. Given the ages of these Appellants  I  hope  that  the  matter  can  be
    reheard in a very short time.  The appropriate hearing centre is Taylor
    House and an Albanian interpreter will be required.

 9. An anonymity direction was made in the First-tier  Tribunal  and  given
    the ages of the Appellants I continue that.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed [pic]                            Date 30th June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin






