
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/07955/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27 October 2017                         |  On 12 December 2017            |


                                   Before

                               DR H H STOREY,
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                     BS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Emezie, Solicitor, Roli Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant is a national of DRC.  On 10 April 2017 he was  sent  the
    decision of Judge Wylie  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent  made  on  18  July  2016
    refusing him leave to remain following a rejection of his asylum claim.



2.   The appellant's asylum claim was presented before the judge  as  having
    two bases.  First of all  he  maintained,  as  he  had  in  his  asylum
    interview (which took place in January 2016) that after helping start a
    group  in  his  neighbourhood  called  Congo  Pour  le  Changement  and
    participating in an  opposition  rally  in  January  2015,  the  police
    visited him at his home and beat him.   He  was  then  kept  in  Makala
    Prison for 19 days before a business partner arranged his release  with
    one of the guards and he  thereafter  fled  the  country.   Second,  he
    maintained that after his arrival in the UK in June  2015  on  a  visit
    visa he had become a  member  of  APARECO  (Alliance  of  Patriots  for
    Rebuilding of the Congo) in January 2016 and became its treasurer.

3.   I heard submissions from the parties after which I stated  that  whilst
    I would not hand down my decision at the hearing I was  satisfied  that
    the judge materially erred in law.  The judge's error is a  simple  but
    highly material one.  Despite recording the appellant's account of  his
    sur place involvement in APARECO at para  16  and  noting  Mr  Emezie's
    submission that since coming to the UK the appellant had become "active
    in opposition politics" and that "APARECO were outlawed  in  the  Congo
    and those involved in the group were at  risk"  (para  22),  the  judge
    wholly failed to make any assessment of this aspect of the  appellant's
    claim.  The judge simply focused on the credibility of the  appellant's
    account of his adverse experiences in the Congo.

4.   The judge's error was compounded by the fact  that  the  appellant  had
    produced not only a witness statement in which he described himself  as
    "an active member of APARECO"  but  a  letter  from  that  organisation
    vouchsafing the  same.   The  judge  also  heard  evidence  from  a  Mr
    Livingstone whose evidence was to similar effect.  Not to  engage  with
    the evidence relating to sur place activities  in  any  respect  was  a
    plain error.

5.   Given especially that the appellant's evidence was that he  had  become
    a political oppositionist in the Congo, it was incumbent on  the  judge
    to consider whether, pursuant to Articles 4 and 5 of the  Qualification
    Directive, his sur place activities were undertaken simply  to  bolster
    his claim or were a continuation of political activities in his country
    of origin.  It was also  necessary  to  assess  whether,  whatever  the
    appellant's motives for being involved with APARECO (if that claim were
    accepted) his level of involvement was  sufficiently  "significant  and
    visible" to bring him within the risk category  identified  in  BM  and
    Others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] 293  (IAC)
    at para (iii) of the headnote.

6.   For the above reasons I set aside the  judge's  decision  for  material
    error of law in that he has failed to address or make  findings  a  key
    part of the appellant's claim.

7.   The judge's error is such that none of his  findings  of  fact  can  be
    preserved.  I am not persuaded  by  Mr  Melvin's  submission  that  the
    judge's adverse credibility finding on the appellant's  experiences  in
    the DRC can be retained.  Assessment of credibility needed to be  based
    on the appellant's claim considered as a  whole,  taking  into  account
    both his account of his experiences in the DRC and in the UK.  I cannot
    exclude  that  if  a  favourable  assessment  had  been  made  of   the
    appellant's  sur  place  activities,  the  evidence  about   his   past
    opposition  experiences  in  the  DRC  might   have   been   different.
    Accordingly, it is appropriate,  pursuant  to  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement, for the case to be remitted to the FtT to be  heard
    by a judge other than Judge Wylie.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 11 December 2017

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

