
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07364/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th February 2021                 |On 9th March 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     H S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Waterford Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the bundles on the court file, the contents of which I have recorded. The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of India  born  in  May  1979.   He  appeals
    against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  K   Thapar,
    promulgated on 20  April  2020,  dismissing  his  protection  claim  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

2.   The Appellant is 41 years old. He came to the UK in 2005 with leave  to
    enter as a religious worker. His leave was extended until  15  December
    2009. In December 2008 the Appellant visited India for a month  because
    his  mother  was  ill.  He  returned  to  the  UK  and  his  subsequent
    applications for further leave to remain made on 14 December  2009  and
    22 May 2010 were rejected. On  13  December  2016,  the  Appellant  was
    encountered working illegally. His application  for  further  leave  to
    remain made on 7 March 2017 was refused  and  certified  on  22  August
    2018. He claimed asylum on 29 August 2018. His application was  refused
    on 17 July 2019 and is the subject of this appeal.

3.   It is the Appellant's case that he lived in  India  with  his  parents,
    brother and sister. His father was violent  towards  him  and  hit  his
    mother and sister. When he was 14 years old, the Appellant was arrested
    by the police, detained, tortured and sexually  abused.  Following  his
    release he was treated in hospital. The Appellant worked as a priest in
    India and came to the UK as a religious worker. He  became  politically
    active in the UK and supported Shiromani Akali Dal Amritsar [SADA]. The
    Appellant's claim to have been raped by his cousin was not an issue  in
    this appeal. The Appellant feared  return  to  Indian  because  of  his
    involvement with the Khalistan movement supporting a separate state for
    Sikhs.


The judge's findings

4.   The structure  of  the  judge's  decision  is  as  follows:  The  judge
    summarised the Appellant's claim at [11] and went on the  consider  the
    Appellant's account of his arrest and detention at [12] and  supporting
    documentation (the letter from Dr Bhatia) at [13]. The judge considered
    the  Appellant's  account  that  he  did  not  experience  any  further
    difficulties in India after his claimed arrest and detention in  1994/5
    until he came to the UK in 2005 at [14] or when her returned  to  India
    in 2008 at [15]. At [16], the judge found that, whilst  the  background
    evidence demonstrated that individuals of the Sikh faith were  arrested
    in the early to  mid  1990's,  the  Appellant  was  not  one  of  those
    individuals because his account was inconsistent for the reasons  given
    previously  and  the  timing  of  the  Appellant's  claim.  The   judge
    considered the report of Dr Andres Izquierdo-Martin dated  16  December
    2019 [the scarring report] at [17] and  the  Appellant's  contact  with
    family members at  [18].  She  went  on  to  consider  the  Appellant's
    political activities in the UK at [19] to [23] including  reference  to
    the psychiatric report at [20] and the letter from SADA  at  [21].  The
    judge considered the psychiatric reports  and  the  Appellant's  mental
    health at [25] to [27] and section 8 of  the  2004  Act  at  [28].  She
    concluded the Appellant was not credible at [29] and he would not be at
    risk on return at [30].

5.   The judge made the following relevant findings at [13]  onwards:  In  a
    letter dated 15 February 2019,  Dr Bhatia confirmed that according to a
    slip dated 5 January 1995 the Appellant was treated for blunt  injuries
    to the back, buttock, thighs, hands, forehead due to an alleged beating
    by the police. The judge attached little weight to this letter  because
    a copy of the slip referred to in the  letter  was  not  provided.  The
    provenance of the slip was unknown as was its content. The  Appellant's
    age was incorrect and, in his second letter, Dr Bhatia  was  unable  to
    recall the date. There was no reference to the alleged sexual assault.

6.   The judge rejected the Appellant's claim to have moved to  a  different
    city after the alleged ill-treatment by the police  and  his  claim  to
    have stayed in a different village when he returned to India  in  2008.
    The judge found that the Appellant had not experienced any difficulties
    in India prior to his departure in 2005 or on his return in  2008.  The
    judge considered the background material and found that  the  Appellant
    was not detained because he was Sikh.   The  judge  did  not  find  the
    Appellant to be a credible witness.

7.   The judge attached little weight to the scarring report  because  there
    was no reference to the physical abuse by the Appellant's  father.  The
    judge stated there was clearly another possible cause for the marks and
    injuries the Appellant claimed to have suffered which was not disclosed
    or considered within the report. Further the account of the Appellant's
    release from detention was inconsistent with the Appellant's  evidence.
    The judge found that the Appellant could return to India and live  with
    his mother. He had a support network and connections  such  that  there
    would be no significant obstacles to re-integration.

8.   The judge attached little weight to  the  letter  from  SADA  dated  18
    January 2020 because it failed to state when  the  Appellant's  support
    commenced and what support was provided. The letter  lacked  sufficient
    detail to support the Appellant's claim to be  politically  active  and
    the judge concluded it had been produced to embellish  the  Appellant's
    claim. The judge found the Appellant was unable to provide a consistent
    and clear account of his political activity in India or the  UK.  There
    was insufficient evidence to show that that  Indian  authorities  would
    become aware of the Appellant's political activities  in  the  UK.  The
    judge concluded that the Appellant was not politically  active  and  he
    would not come to the adverse attention of  the  authorities  in  India
    based on his political opinion.

9.   The judge considered the psychiatric reports dated 6 October  2018  and
    9 January 2020 and  concluded  the  Appellant's  PTSD,  depression  and
    anxiety were not attributable to the Appellant's claimed  ill-treatment
    in 1994/5 and could stem from other circumstances such as  his  abusive
    father. The Appellant had not accessed any treatment in the UK  and  he
    had failed to show he would not be able to access medical assistance in
    India. The Appellant would not be at risk in India due to his health.

10.  The Appellant's credibility was further undermined by  his  failure  to
    claim asylum before August 2018. The judge concluded at [29]  that  the
    Appellant's account was not credible for the reasons he  identified  in
    the earlier paragraphs. At [30] the judge stated that she had given the
    evidence anxious scrutiny and taken a view  of  the  evidence  'in  the
    round'. She found that the Appellant had not been detained and  he  did
    not have a well-founded fear of persecution.


Permission to appeal

11.  Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen  Smith
    on 24 August 2020 on the following grounds:


         "Arguably, the judge gave insufficient reasons  for  rejecting  the
         scarring report, as arguably the judge  did  not  engage  with  the
         'highly consistent' scarring it recorded, and the judge  sought  to
         attribute any scarring displayed by the appellant  to  mistreatment
         from his father, which was not  the  appellant's  case.  While  the
         appellant contended  his  father  had  been  violent  towards  him,
         arguably it was never  part  of  his  case  that  the  torture  and
         scarring (which arguably resulted  from  violence  of  a  different
         order to that  referred  to  at  [3]  of  the  appellant's  witness
         statement dated 22 January 2020) was  caused  by  his  father,  but
         rather by the police."

12.  The grant of permission was accompanied by directions stating  that  it
    was the Tribunal's provisional view the error of law hearing  could  be
    determined without a hearing. In response, the Appellant filed  further
    submissions on 11 September 2020 and the appeal was listed for a remote
    hearing.


Submissions

13.  In written submissions, the Appellant  argued  that  the  judge  failed
    adopt the correct approach to the medical evidence following Mibanga  v
    SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367 by  considering  the  medical  evidence  after
    having made adverse credibility findings. There was no suggestion  that
    the injuries and scars referred to in the scarring report  were  caused
    by the Appellant's  father  and  this  point  was  not  put  in  cross-
    examination. The authenticity of the letters from  Dr  Bhatia  was  not
    challenged at the hearing. The judge failed to deal  with  the  medical
    evidence as an integral part of his findings on credibility: HE (DRC  -
    Credibility and Psychiatric Reports) [2004] UKIAT 00321  at  [22].  The
    judge reached conclusions  on  credibility  without  reference  to  the
    medical evidence and then concluded the  medical  evidence  was  of  no
    assistance to her.  In  addition,  the  judge  failed  to  clarify  the
    Appellant's involvement with SADA and failed to make adequate  findings
    on the Appellant's Article 8 claim. The judge gave  inadequate  reasons
    for attaching little weight to the psychiatric report.

14.  In oral submissions, Mr Bellara relied on  his  skeleton  argument  and
    submitted the judge had failed to apply Mibanga and had failed to  give
    adequate reasons for attaching little weight to  the  scarring  report.
    Whether the Appellant's father could have caused the scarring  was  not
    explored at the hearing by the judge or  the  presenting  officer.  The
    letter from Dr Bhatia was not considered in the light of  the  scarring
    report. Mr Bellara accepted the judge had  dealt  adequately  with  the
    risk from the Appellant's cousin. The issue in this  case  was  whether
    the Appellant had been persecuted in the past.

15.  Ms Cunha relied on Mibanga at [20] to [22] and submitted there  was  no
    error of law at [17] of the  judge's  decision.  The  judge  took  into
    account  the  scarring  report  in  concluding  that  there  could   be
    alternative causes for the Appellant's scars. It  was  the  Appellant's
    case that he was detained by police in 1994/5 and tortured. It was  not
    inconceivable that the scarring report did not improve the  Appellant's
    credibility. The expert had failed to consider alternative  causes  for
    the scarring because the Appellant had failed to disclose that  he  had
    suffered violent abuse from his father. The scarring report  was  taken
    into account and any mistake was one of form not substance. The medical
    evidence from India showed that the injuries were old and  any  failure
    to refer to the psychiatric report was not material.

16.  In response, Mr Bellara submitted the judge erred in  law  in  treating
    the scarring report as an 'add  on'.  The  report  concluded  that  the
    Appellant's scarring was highly consistent with his account of torture.
    If the judge had any doubt as to the cause of the scarring,  he  should
    have clarified the point with the Appellant. Had the judge  found  that
    the scarring was caused by beatings from the police, the Appellant  had
    shown  past  persecution.  Given  the  Appellant's  current   political
    activity, the Appellant would be at risk on return, applying the  lower
    standard.

17.  The judge also failed to take into account the psychiatric report.  The
    medical expert had the psychiatric report and the Appellant's statement
    and so was aware of alternative causes when assessing the scarring. The
    scarring report had to be assessed in the round and the judge failed to
    do so. If the judge doubted the cause of  the  scarring,  applying  the
    Surendran guidelines, he should have put the matter to  the  Appellant.
    The decision should be set aside. The Appellant was at risk of  Article
    3  treatment  on  return  to  India  and  the  psychiatric  report  was
    sufficient to show that there were significant obstacles to integration
    in view of his current mental health issues.



Conclusion and Reasons


18.  The judge considered all aspects of the Appellant's claim  at  [12]  to
    [27]. At [29] the judge considered  section  8  of  the  2004  Act  and
    concluded the Appellant's credibility was  further  undermined  by  the
    delay in claiming asylum. The judge properly directed herself  at  [30]
    in giving anxious scrutiny to the Appellant's claim and  assessing  all
    the evidence 'in the round'. The judge found  that  the  Appellant  had
    failed to establish his claim to have been  arrested  and  detained  in
    1994/5 or that he would be at risk of arrest on return to India.

19.  It is apparent from the decision that the judge took into  account  all
    relevant matters. The  decision  was  based  on  the  totality  of  the
    evidence viewed holistically. I find that the  judge  properly  applied
    Mibanga in substance if not in form. Although she  expressed  her  view
    that the Appellant was not credible and had fabricated his  account  at
    [16], it is apparent from the remaining paragraphs that she  was  still
    considering other aspects of the Appellant's claim before coming to her
    final conclusions at [29] and [30]. It is not an error of law  to  give
    reasons for rejecting each part of an Appellant's account before coming
    to the overall conclusion that the Appellant was not credible  and  had
    not proved his claim to the lower standard.

20.  I find the judge took into account the scarring report as part  of  her
    primary assessment and it did not matter at which point in the decision
    she referred to it. I am satisfied the judge did not come to a negative
    assessment about credibility and then ask whether that  assessment  was
    displaced by other material. I find, on reading the judge's decision as
    a whole, that the judge treated the scarring report as an integral part
    of her assessment of credibility and not just an 'add on'.

21.  Dr Izquierdo-Martin  found  that  the  Appellant's  scars  were  highly
    consistent with  intentionally  caused  injuries  by  repetitive  blunt
    trauma. The grounds accept that Dr Izquierdo-Martin concluded that  the
    scars were not fully specific and  other  alternate  explanations  were
    also possible, although he was of the view this was less likely because
    the appearance of the scars was not inconsistent with  the  Appellant's
    description of events. The judge  found  that  there  were  alternative
    possible causes for the Appellant's injuries which were not  considered
    in the scarring report, namely  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  been
    violently abused by his father from the age of  five.  At  [6]  of  his
    witness statement, the Appellant stated "It was not only at  the  hands
    of my Father that I suffered abuse. When I was  14  years  old,  I  was
    arrested by police officers..." The judge's finding was open to her  on
    the evidence before her.

22.  Contrary to the Appellant's submissions, the psychiatric  reports  were
    considered at [25] and [26] as part of the judge's  overall  assessment
    of the Appellant's claim and the judge gave adequate  reasons  for  the
    weight she attached to them. In any event, the part which a psychiatric
    report can play in the assessment of credibility was very  limited:  HE
    (DRC).

23.  The judge gave cogent reasons for why she  attached  little  weight  to
    the letter of Dr  Bhatia,  the  scarring  report  and  the  psychiatric
    reports  and  she  highlighted  significant  inconsistencies   in   the
    Appellant's account. The judge did not find the Appellant's account  to
    be politically active in India or in the UK to be credible and she gave
    cogent reasons for attaching little weight to the letter from SADA.

24.  The Appellant was represented by Mr Bellara at the hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. There was  no  obligation  on  the  judge  to  put
    matters to the Appellant. It was the Appellant's own evidence that  his
    father was violent towards him. The  judge's  failure  to  clarify  the
    Appellant's involvement with SADA  did  not  give  rise  to  procedural
    unfairness as alleged in the grounds of appeal.  The  onus  is  on  the
    Appellant to prove his claim.

25.  Even if the Appellant's account of past persecution was  accepted,  the
    Appellant would not be at risk on return because he had failed to  show
    that he was politically active in India or in  the  UK.  The  Appellant
    returned to India to visit his mother in 2008 and was of no interest to
    the authorities on return notwithstanding his  claim  to  have  been  a
    member of the Khalistan movement  since  2007.  Any  error  of  law  in
    relation to the assessment of  credibility  was  not  material  to  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal. The Appellant would not be at  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm on return to India.

26.  The judge found there were no significant obstacles to  re-integration.
    There was no challenge to the judge's finding that the Appellant  could
    access treatment for  his  mental  health  in  India.  The  Appellant's
    removal to India would not breach Article 8.


27.  Accordingly, I find there was no material error of law in the  decision
    promulgated on 20 April 2020 and  I  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal.




Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 8 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 8 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email




