
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/07260/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                       |
|On 24 September 2018                   |on 03 October 2018                |
|                                       |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                  Asif [R]
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, of Counsel, instructed by Goodfellows
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a Pakistani national born  on  4  April  1988.  He
         challenges the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mill,
         promulgated on 11 July 2018,  dismissing  his  asylum/human  rights
         appeal.

      2. The appellant is an illegal entrant who claimed asylum after he was
         arrested and detained. His claim is two fold. He maintains that  he
         has converted from Sunni to Shia Islam and also that he is gay.

      3. The appellant was  released  from  detention  the  day  before  his
         hearing. He notified the court that he would not be  attending  and
         enclosed a medical report on his mental  state  of  mind  with  his
         letter. The judge noted that no adjournment  had  been  sought  and
         proceeded to hear the appeal in the appellant's absence.

      4. Permission to appeal against the determination  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal was granted by Judge Landes on 14 August 2018 on the basis
         that there may have been a procedural  irregularity  in  proceeding
         with the appeal in the appellant's absence and without  considering
         the psychological report. The matter then  came  before  me  on  24
         September 2018.

      5. The Hearing

      6.  I  heard  submissions  from  the  parties.  A  full  note  of  the
         submissions is set out in my Record of Proceedings. Essentially  Mr
         Spurling argued that the judge  had  acted  unfairly.  He  had  not
         considered the issue of fairness  when  deciding  when  or  not  to
         proceed and failed to acknowledge that the appellant had  indicated
         that he wanted to give  evidence  when  he  lodged  his  notice  of
         appeal. The appellant's letter had not  been  drafted  by  a  legal
         professional and it had been written at a time when  the  appellant
         was unwell. It did not establish that he had waived his right to an
         oral hearing. Furthermore, it was extraordinary that the report had
         not been considered at all. The psychologist's views had an  impact
         upon the credibility of the claim. There were matters  which  could
         have been resolved by oral evidence. The appeal  should  have  been
         adjourned. The decision was flawed and should be set aside.

      7. In response Mr Lindsay  submitted  that  the  judge  was  right  to
         dismiss the appeal having found that it was a fabricated claim. The
         appellant could have  submitted  a  witness  statement  to  address
         issues that needed clarification. There was  no  evidence  that  he
         wanted an oral  hearing.  This  was  simply  a  ruse  to  frustrate
         removal. He had previously been disruptive when attempts to  remove
         him were made. He had also withdrawn an earlier  asylum  claim  and
         had delayed in claiming asylum. Even  if  he  had  sought  an  oral
         hearing when he lodged his appeal that did not mean  he  could  not
         change his mind. There was no requirement for a judge to adjourn of
         his own accord. Any error in the failure to consider the report was
         immaterial as it would not have made any difference to the  outcome
         of the appeal.

      8. Mr Spurling replied. He submitted that the Tribunal had a  duty  to
         consider all the relevant material and the judge had failed to take
         the report into account. Whatever the outcome of  the  appeal,  the
         appellant was entitled to a fair hearing.

      9. That completed submissions. At the conclusion  of  the  hearing,  I
         reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.




     10. Discussion and Conclusions

     11. I have considered all the evidence before me and have had regard to
         the submissions made.

     12. Essentially, the issue is whether or not the appellant had  a  fair
         hearing. I accept that the  appellant's  letter  did  not  seek  an
         adjournment and did not indicate in any way that he  wished  to  be
         present at the hearing. However, as Mr Spurling pointed out, it was
         written by the appellant himself and without legal advice and it is
         wholly possible that the appellant, by stating he  was  unwell  and
         could not attend, meant to seek another opportunity to attend. More
         worrying, however, is the fact that the judge made no reference  at
         all to the medical report that the  appellant  submitted  with  his
         letter. The Tribunal file confirms it had been received before  the
         hearing and so would have been before the  judge.  His  failure  to
         take it into account is inexplicable. Whether or not it would  have
         made a difference is hard to say but it was  a  relevant  piece  of
         evidence and should not have been disregarded.

     13. For these reasons, I can only conclude that the appellant  did  not
         have a fair hearing. The determination  is  unsustainable  and  the
         decision is set aside.

     14. Decision

     15. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law.  The  decision  is  set
         aside. It shall be  remade  by  another  judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal at a date to be arranged.

     16. Anonymity

     17. I have not been asked to make an anonymity order and see no  reason
         to do so.




    Signed










    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 28 September 2018
