
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07322/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 February 2018                           |On 8 March 2018               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               SH (BANGLADESH)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Alison Harvey, Counsel instructed by Cranbrook
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Skehan sitting at Hatton Cross on 31 August 2017) dismissing his
    appeal against the Secretary of State to refuse to recognise him  as  a
    refugee on account of his homosexual orientation.



The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 21 November 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge  King  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal for the following reasons: "The findings that  the
    appellant is a gay man who  will  live  discreetly  in  Bangladesh  are
    properly open to be made.  Such does not address the concern which lies
    at the heart of the asylum claim, namely  a  fear  of  his  family  and
    community,  particularly  coupled  with  a  cultural   expectation   of
    marriage.  No findings were made as to that risk or  any  consideration
    as to internal relocation."

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, whose date  of  birth  is  5
    January 1982.  On 10 July 2003 he applied for a  working  holiday-maker
    visa.  The  application  was  refused,  but  allowed  on  appeal.   The
    appellant entered the United Kingdom on a working holiday-maker visa on
    6 June 2004.  He overstayed, and was encountered working illegally at a
    restaurant in  Ongar  on  17  July  2014.   He  was  identified  as  an
    overstayer. He was granted temporary admission and required to  report.
    On 20 February 2015 the appellant applied for further leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules, and his application was refused  on  27  March  2015
    with no right of appeal.

 4. On 21 October 2016 the appellant contacted the Asylum Intake Unit,  and
    on 15 November 2016 the appellant claimed asylum as a homosexual.

 5. He said that at the age of 15 he had had a sexual relationship  with  a
    man, 'AK', who lived in a neighbouring village.  AK introduced him to a
    shop where he was able to purchase gay pornographic  magazines.   About
    two months after his relationship with AK had begun, his father saw him
    with the gay magazines and told him that he was taking the wrong  path.
    He said that it was not acceptable from a cultural and community  point
    of view, and their religion did not accept it.  He understood  that  if
    he did not listen to his father, then his father would disown him  (Q&A
    38).   The  appellant  was  asked  whether   there   were   any   other
    consequences.  He said that his father would disown him, and  he  would
    not let him live, and he would chop  him  into  pieces  (Q&A  52).  The
    appellant said that he conducted his relationship with  AK  in  secret,
    and it had ended after about six months.

 6. In 2016 he had become a member of the East London Lesbian and Gay Club,
    and he had also begun attending Pulse and Heaven gay nightclubs.

 7. On 27 July 2017 the  respondent  gave  her  reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellant's asylum claim.  It was not accepted that he was gay, due  to
    the vague and uncertain nature of his account, and because  there  were
    credibility issues and inconsistencies within  his  evidence.   On  the
    issue of risk on return, it was considered that he  would  be  able  to
    return to his home area of Sylhet in Bangladesh and live as he had done
    in the past, as it was not accepted that he would be at any risk there.
     He  was  a  healthy,  well-educated  male  who  had  demonstrated  his
    resourcefulness  by  leaving  Bangladesh  and  living  in  the  UK  for
    approximately 13 years.  He could return to his previous home area,  or
    he could choose to live elsewhere in Bangladesh.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 8. Both parties were legally represented  before  Judge  Skehan.   In  his
    subsequent decision, the Judge made the following findings:

      a)      It was not reasonably likely that  the  appellant  had  had  a
         sexual relationship with AK, although it was reasonably likely that
         he had had romantic feelings for AK that  did  not  progress  to  a
         sexual relationship;

      b)      The appellant had lived in the UK for approximately 13  years,
         and  he  had  produced  no  evidence  of  any  romantic  or  sexual
         relationship with a man during this time;

      c)      The appellant was not living openly as a gay man in the UK;

      d)      It was entirely possible that the appellant had chosen to hide
         his sexuality  due  to  actual  or  perceived  social  or  cultural
         pressures felt by him;

      e)      The appellant felt unwanted pressure from his family to  marry
         a woman.

 9. At  paragraph  [60]  of  his  decision,  Judge  Skehan  considered  the
    application of the test propounded by Lord Rodger in HJ (Iran) -v- SSHD
    [2010]  UKSC  31.   While  the  appellant  had  not  had   any   sexual
    relationship with any man, the appellant might identify himself as gay.
     People who lived openly as  gay  in  Bangladesh  would  be  liable  to
    persecution.  He had not been provided with  any  evidence  to  suggest
    that the appellant would choose to live any differently  in  Bangladesh
    on return.  He found that it would be most unlikely that the appellant,
    having never lived openly as a gay person at all, would decide upon his
    return to Bangladesh to live openly as a gay man and thereby be exposed
    to a real risk of persecution.  He concluded that the  appellant  would
    in fact live discretely and so avoid any  potential  persecution.   The
    Judge continued:

         "I must go on to ask myself why he would do so.  In considering the
         evidence set out above as whole, I conclude that he has  throughout
         his life and would continue to live discreetly simply because  that
         was how he himself  would  wish  to  live,  or  because  of  social
         pressures, e.g. not wanting to distress his  parents  or  embarrass
         his friends.  For this reason, the  appellant's  appeal  should  be
         rejected.   Social  pressures  of  that  kind  do  not  amount   to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them ...I have considered  whether  the  material  reason  for  the
         applicant living discreetly on  his  return  would  be  a  fear  of
         persecution which would follow if he were to live openly as  a  gay
         man, and I have concluded that due to the fact that  the  appellant
         has lived discretely for 13 years in the UK where there is no  fear
         of persecution, that a fear of persecution is not  the  reason  for
         the appellant choosing to  live  discreetly.   I  accept  that  the
         appellant has faced unwelcome pressure to  marry  from  his  family
         however such social pressure does not amount to persecution."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

10. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Harvey (who did  not  appear  below)  developed  the  arguments
    advanced in the grounds of appeal.  She submitted that it was not  open
    to the the Judge to base his conclusions on the fact that the appellant
    had lived discretely as a gay man in the UK.  The Judge had not engaged
    with the appellant's evidence about the threat made to him in the  past
    by his father, and his expressions of fear as to what would  happen  to
    him if he lived openly as a gay man in  Bangladesh.   Being  forced  to
    marry a woman against his will would be persecutory.

11. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Kotas submitted that the  Judge
    had not found the appellant to be a credible witness, and the  findings
    which he had made when applying the test in HJ (Iran)  were  reasonably
    open to him on the evidence.

Discussion

12. In his  closing  submissions  before  Judge  Skehan,  Counsel  for  the
    appellant drew  the  Judge's  attention  to  the  section  on  internal
    relocation in the Home Office's Country Policy and Information Note  on
    Bangladesh: "Sexual orientation and Gender  Identity",  dated  December
    2016.  The section provides as follows:

         2.5.5 It would not, in general, be unreasonable or unduly harsh for
         a gay man (or a person who is perceived to be such) who is able  to
         demonstrate a real risk in his home area because of his  particular
         circumstances, to relocate internally within Bangladesh.

          2.5.6 Bangladesh is one of  the  world's  most  densely  populated
         countries.  If an LGBT person's family wishes to  pursue  and  harm
         her/him in the place of internal relocation, their ability to do so
         will depend on the reach of the family network, how persistent they
         are, and how influential.

         2.5.7 Decision-makers must also take into account that the  Supreme
         Court in the case  of  HJ  (Iran)  made  the  point  that  internal
         relocation is not the answer if it depends on the person concealing
         their orientation (or gender identity) in the proposed new location
         for fear of persecution.

13. It would have been open to Counsel for the appellant to run a  case  in
    the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  appellant  faced  a  real  risk  of
    persecution in his home area at the hands  of  his  father  and/or  the
    local community, if he came out to them as  gay;  and  to  submit  that
    internal relocation was not the  answer  as  it  would  depend  on  the
    appellant  concealing  his  sexual  orientation  in  the  proposed  new
    location for fear  of  persecution  by  non-state  agents  in  the  new
    location.

14. However, Counsel did not do  so.   It  is  apparent  from  the  Judge's
    manuscript record of proceedings that Counsel did not  advance  a  case
    that the appellant faced a specific or elevated risk of persecution  in
    his home area at the hands  of  his  family  or  the  local  community.
    Counsel simply relied on paragraph 2.57 of the Guidance.

15. At paragraph 20 of his witness statement for the appeal, the  appellant
    said:

         "I cannot tell my family about my homosexuality, I am afraid.  They
         will disown me, and that really scares me.   My  brother  will  not
         support me if he finds out I am homosexual and that  is  why  I  am
         still hiding the fact that I am gay from my family. "

    In his closing submissions, Counsel  for  the  appellant  made  express
    reference to the appellant's fear of being disowned by his family if he
    came out as gay.  Counsel did not submit that, in addition to having  a
    fear of being disowned by his family, the appellant also  had  a  well-
    founded of fear of being murdered by his family.

16. At paragraph [4] of his decision, the Judge summarised the  appellant's
    claim as set out in his written evidence.   The  Judge  said  that  the
    appellant's  explanation  for  not  telling  his   family   about   his
    homosexuality was that he was "afraid that they will disown him."

17. The grounds of appeal do not in terms challenge  the  accuracy  of  the
    Judge's summary of the thrust  of  the  appellant's  evidence.   Having
    checked the record of proceedings, I am satisfied that  the  Judge  has
    adequately addressed the case that was put to  him  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Judge was not asked to decide whether the appellant  had
    an elevated risk of persecution in his home area from his father and/or
    the local community. So it was not  incumbent  on  the  Judge  to  make
    specific findings on aspects of the appellant's  evidence  which  might
    arguably have supported such a case, such as the appellant's claim that
    his father had in the past threatened to chop him  into  pieces  if  he
    continued down the "wrong path" of homosexuality.   Similarly,  as  the
    Judge was not asked to weigh up the potential risk to the appellant  in
    his home area as against the potential risk he would face  on  internal
    relocation, there was no error on the part of the Judge in not  drawing
    such a distinction in his findings.

18. I accept that  forcing  someone  into  marriage  is  capable  of  being
    persecutory. But it was not part of the appellant's  evidence  or  case
    before the First-tier Tribunal that there was a real risk of him  being
    forced into marriage.  The apprehended risk was of the appellant  being
    disowned by his family if he came out as homosexual.  If he came out as
    homosexual by way of an explanation for not entering into  an  arranged
    marriage, the consequences would be no different.  On  the  appellant's
    case, the risk was that he would be disowned by his family, not that he
    would be forced into marriage or chopped into pieces.

19. Ms Harvey also took issue with the following passage in the decision at
    paragraph [16]: "Whether the appellant would be treated as gay  by  any
    potential persecutor is difficult to assess.  Any potential  persecutor
    is on a simple basis likely to consider men who have sex  with  men  as
    gay, and men who do not have sex with  other  men  as  not  being  gay.
    Therefore, there is a real question mark  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant would be perceived by any potential persecutor as  gay.   For
    the purposes of this test I assume that any potential persecutor  would
    consider the appellant to be gay and therefore I continue."

20. Ms Harvey submits  that  the  Judge  was  thereby  conceding  that  the
    appellant would have to  take  positive  steps  to  conceal  his  self-
    identification as a gay person in order to avoid potential persecution.
     In fact that the Judge was saying the opposite.  The Judge's view  was
    that the appellant was unlikely to be perceived as gay by any potential
    persecutor precisely because he was not a practising homosexual and  he
    was very discrete about his self-identification as a gay person.

21. The Judge gave adequate reasons for finding that  the  appellant  would
    live discreetly as a gay person in  Bangladesh,  and  that  a  fear  of
    persecution would not be a material reason for the  appellant  choosing
    to do so.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 17 February 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

