
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/07442/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 June 2019                       |On 18 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   Lea [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah, Counsel, instructed by Immigration Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant a national of Namibia, has permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Mayall of the First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  sent  on  1
    March 2019 dismissing her appeal  against  the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 31 May 2018 refusing her protection claim.  The basis  of
    her claim was that she would be at risk of persecution on return at the
    hands of her abusive ex-husband who would be able  to  track  her  down
    whenever she went in Namibia as  a  result  of  the  tribal  system  in
    Namibia (both were from the Otjherero tribe).  The respondent  accepted
    that she had suffered violence and ill-treatment at the  hands  of  her
    husband but considered she would be able to receive protection from the
    authorities both in her home area or  if  necessary,  upon  relocation.
    The judge agreed, stating at paragraphs 35 to 38:

         "35. Applying the  above  guidance  to  the  materials  before  me,
             including that set out in the Refusal Letter,  I  am  entirely
             satisfied  that  here  is  in  place  a  system  of   domestic
             protection and machinery for the  detection,  persecution  and
             punishment of actions such as those feared by  the  appellant.
             Quite obviously the system is not perfect and does not operate
             effectively in all cases.  However I do not consider that  the
             evidence demonstrates that there is any lack of willingness or
             ability on the part of the state to operate the system.   This
             level of protection reaches,  in  my  judgment,  a  reasonable
             level.


         36.  I note, in reaching this decision, that the appellant  herself
             has not sought to avail herself of state protection either  by
             reporting the matter to the police or by making any  enquiries
             as to the availability of places in the two shelters of  which
             she is aware.


         37.  I recognises, of course, that there are cultural factors which
             make reporting of such  matters  less  prevalent  but  I  must
             consider  the  position  as  it  would  be  if  she  did  seek
             protection.


         38.  I also recognise that as set out above, conviction  rates  for
             offences such as rape may be low.  Again, however, sadly, I am
             aware from  my  own  fairly  extensive  experience  of  trying
             serious sexual offences in the UK that this is not  a  problem
             confined to Namibia."

2.   The grounds contend that  the  judge  fell  into  legal  error  by  (1)
    failing to engage properly and accurately with the expert report of  Dr
    Fumanti;  (2)  giving  inadequate  consideration  to   the   background
    evidence; (3) relying on irrelevant considerations, in  particular  the
    fact that gender-based  violence  and  underreporting  of  rape  was  a
    feature of many societies, including the UK; and (4)  failing  to  take
    into account that the appellant would have to relocate in any event and
    whether this would be unreasonable or unduly harsh.

3.   I am grateful to the submissions of both representatives.

4.   I am persuaded that taken cumulatively the grounds disclose a  material
    error of law.

5.   Dealing with ground (1), the judge's assessment of the expert's  report
    dated 1 March 2019 was set out at paragraph 29:

         "I have the benefit of the expert's report.  The expert is  clearly
         well qualified.  I must say, however, that I did not derive a great
         deal of assistance from the report.  The report, as it seems to me,
         concentrates very largely  upon  the  public  perception  (and  the
         perception of the appellant) of,  for  example,  police  corruption
         rather than upon particular evidence  of  the  same.   Examples  of
         police corruption cited in the report to date back to 2006."

6.    To  reject  the  report  on  the  basis  that  it  "very  largely  ...
    concentrates upon ... public perception" is a misreading.   The  expert
    makes  clear  throughout  that  her  assessment  was  based   on   both
    "perception and experience" as regards the capabilities of the Namibian
    police to protect (see e.g. paragraph 11).   Subsequent  paragraphs  of
    the report do not deal with perception at all but rather the  cultural,
    tribal and institutional factors affecting the  system  of  protection.
    The judge's comment about  the  expert  relying  for  assessing  police
    corruption on an old report dated 2006 overlooks that the  expert  drew
    on a range of reports including ones dated July 2015 and January 2017.

7.   As regards ground (2), the judge's approach to the background  evidence
    was also flawed.  In addition to appearing not to take account  of  the
    reports referred to by the expert, the judge failed to refer to several
    reports  in  the  appellant's  bundle  relating  to  gender  -  related
    violence.  This failure was particularly  salient  in  the  appellant's
    case because it  was  evidence  indicating  that  whilst  the  Namibian
    authorities were able to provide sufficient protection generally, there
    were serious gaps  in  their  protection  of  victims  of  gender-based
    violence.  This was a  central  part  also  in  the  expert  report  at
    paragraph 17.  In failing to address  this  gap  the  judge  failed  to
    follow the legal guidance he himself had highlighted  at  paragraph  34
    citing the Court of Appeal guidance in Bagdanavicius  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    1605:

         "34. ... Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of  state  protection
             in the receiving state, a  claimant  may  still  have  a  well
             founded  fear  of  persecution  if  he  can  show   that   its
             authorities know or ought to know of circumstances  particular
             to his case giving rise  to  his  fear  but  are  unlikely  to
             provide   the   additional    protection     his    particular
             circumstances reasonably require ...  the  threshold  of  risk
             required to engage Article 3 or reach the level of persecution
             depends on the  circumstances  of  each  case,  including  the
             magnitude of the risk, the nature  and  severity  of  the  ill
             treatment risked and whether the risk emanates from the  state
             agency or non state actors).

8.   Whilst ground (3) on its  own  does  not  suffice  to  establish  legal
    error, it adds to the problems with this determination, insofar as,  by
    stating more than once that gender-based violence and underreporting of
    rape was a problem in  many  societies  including  the  UK,  the  judge
    appeared  to  wrongly  assume  that  assessment  of  the  threshold  of
    persecution was an exercise in comparison between the country of origin
    (Namibia) and other countries (the UK included).   That  is  erroneous.
    By Article 9 of the  Qualification  Directive  the  assessment  of  the
    threshold of persecution has to be made by reference to objective human
    rights norms.

9.   Ground 4 is also made out.  Ordinarily the fact that a judge  may  have
    erred in analysing  internal  relocation  would  not  give  rise  to  a
    material error unless the assessment of  risk  in  the  home  area  was
    flawed, but here the  terms  of  the  judge's  assessment  of  internal
    relocation actually called into question his assessment of risk in  the
    home area.  At paragraph 40 he stated:

         "I should, perhaps, add that, had I been satisfied that the was  an
         insufficiency of protection available to her, I would not have been
         satisfied she could  have  safely  relocated  to  another  part  of
         Namibia.  I found the  expert  report  to  be  more  compelling  in
         relation to the likelihood of her being discovered by  her  husband
         wherever she might be in Namibia as a result of the  tribal  system
         outlined.  Thus, whether or not it would have been  reasonable  for
         her to relocate, the relocation would not have been effective."

10.  If there was a likelihood of the  appellant  being  discovered  by  her
    husband "wherever she might be in Namibia", then in logic such  a  risk
    would obtain in her home area.  In any event, the judge's treatment  of
    internal relocation (even if one  could  somehow  unscramble  what  was
    meant at paragraph 40) failed to address the  issue  of  reasonableness
    (as opposed to safety) of relocation.

11.  For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law.  I set aside the decision.

12.  I see no alternative to the case being remitted to the FtT (not  before
    Judge Mayall).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 14 June 2019

              [pic]

