

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/07798/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons          |
|                                         |Promulgated                 |
|On 20 December 2019                      |On 10 January 2020          |
|                                         |                            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                    [O P]
                            (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs K Degirmenci, Counsel instructed by Yemets
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Landes  on  7  November  2019
          against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson,
          promulgated  on  24  September  2019  following   a   hearing   at
          Harmondsworth on 12 September 2019.


       2. The appellant is a Ukrainian national born on 10 December 1983. He
          entered the UK in February 2004 to undertake  seasonal  farm  work
          and then overstayed. He claims to have been scammed by  a  man  he
          believed would make an application for an extension as  a  student
          on his behalf. His asylum claim was made on 5 July 2019 after  his
          arrest on 29 June 2019 and after he was  served  with  enforcement
          papers. He claims to be at risk on return to  Ukraine  for  having
          evaded military service for which he was sentenced in absentia  to
          three years' imprisonment.


       3. His appeal was dismissed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who
          found that he was not a credible witness, that his documents  were
          unreliable and that he would simply be returned to  Ukraine  as  a
          failed asylum seeker who had not done his military service and not
          someone who had been convicted and sentenced to a prison term.


       4. There has been no Rule 24 response from the Secretary of State.


          The Hearing


       5. The appellant was in attendance at the hearing before  me  when  I
          heard submissions from the parties.


       6. Ms Degirmenci relied on the written grounds. She submitted that it
          was clear from the interview record (where the appellant had  been
          interviewed in English) that  there  were  significant  issues  in
          comprehension and that although  the  judge  recognised  this,  he
          nevertheless  placed  reliance  on  discrepancies  and   omissions
          arising from it. It is maintained  that  this  was  perverse.  The
          second ground is that the judge failed to note  that  contrary  to
          his finding in  the  determination,  the  appellant  had  in  fact
          mentioned the sentencing document in his  witness  statement.  Not
          only was the judge mistaken when he stated that the appellant  had
          not mentioned this, but he also failed  to  take  account  of  the
          appellant's explanation for the  late  submission  of  documentary
          evidence. Ms Degirmenci also submitted that the judge had  wrongly
          relied on a "discrepancy" over how the military  summons  and  the
          court papers had  been  received  in  Ukraine.    The  appellant's
          evidence had always been that the military summons had been served
          by hand and  the  court  documents  sent  by  post  and  that  the
          questions put to the appellant at  the  hearing  did  not  clarify
          which of the two he was being asked about. It was  submitted  that
          the judge also misread the CPIN which stated that call  up  papers
          were commonly left with family members who were required  to  sign
          for them. The  judge  misinterpreted  this  as  meaning  that  the
          recipient had to be the subject of the mobilisation call  up.  The
          judge also misunderstood the background  evidence  when  he  found
          that the appellant would not be required to serve as he  was  over
          27 years old. The evidence,  however,  made  it  clear  that  only
          ordinary conscription ended at 27; mobilisation continued  through
          to 65. Ms Degermenci also submitted that  the  appellant  had  not
          been asked to clarify the confusion relied on by the judge  as  to
          whether he had given his passport to the man who he thought  would
          apply for an extension of leave for him or whether he  had  it  at
          home. It was submitted that  had  the  appellant  been  given  the
          opportunity to explain he would have made it  clear  that  he  had
          both an external and an internal  passport  (as  is  the  case  in
          Ukraine) and  that  this  was  the  cause  of  the  "discrepancy".
          Finally, it was submitted that the judge  should  have  considered
          the judgment of the New Zealand Tribunal in  AB  (Ukraine)  [2015]
          that was placed before him. Even though  it  predated  UK  country
          guidance, it made relevant findings on matters not covered by  the
          Upper Tribunal in VB. For all these reasons, I was  asked  to  set
          aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.


       7. In response,  Mr  Tarlow  submitted  that  the  determination  was
          sustainable. He submitted that the interviewing officer had  asked
          the appellant if he was happy with the interview  being  conducted
          in English; what else could he have done. He maintained  that  the
          judge was, therefore, entitled to rely on  the  interview  record.
          The judge had taken account of country guidance and had reached  a
          sustainable conclusion. The challenge should be dismissed.


       8. Ms Degirmenci replied. She pointed out that the problem  was  that
          the appellant was not aware that there had been  problems  in  his
          being understood at the interview until the  transcript  was  read
          back to  him  in  his  own  language.  The  interview  record  was
          unreliable. The matter should be re-heard.


       9. At the conclusion of the hearing, I  indicated  that  I  would  be
          setting aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal. I  now
          give my reasons for so doing.


          Discussion and Conclusions


      10. In reaching my decision, I considered all  the  evidence  and  the
          submissions made.


      11. There are plainly serious issues arising from  the  screening  and
          asylum interview records and indeed the judge  acknowledged  this.
          He observes at paragraph 44 of the determination that "a number of
          the answers given by the appellant in  his  asylum  interview  are
          difficult  to  understand.  Indeed,  at  one  point   during   the
          interview,  the  interviewer  himself   expressed   some   concern
          regarding his level of comprehension of English". At paragraph  45
          he remarks that the content of the AIR "does appear to  reflect  a
          certain lack of understanding..." Notwithstanding  these  concerns
          and the obvious problems with the appellant's understanding of the
          questions asked and the incomprehensible replies given (such as at
          Qs.28-35, 39, 42 and 49),  the  judge  placed  weight  on  alleged
          discrepancies and issues arising from the  interview  records  and
          used them as reasons to dismiss the appeal. He justified  this  on
          the basis that the appellant had confirmed he was happy to proceed
          in English. This did not, however, take account of the  fact  that
          the appellant could not be relied upon  as  being  able  to  judge
          whether there were issues at the interview  as  he  was  not  best
          placed to understand whether his replies were properly  understood
          by the interviewer. Indeed, as the grounds and  submissions  point
          out, the appellant would not have realised the difficulties  until
          the record of the interview was  read  back  to  him  in  his  own
          language. I therefore agree with  Ms  Degirmenci  that  the  judge
          erred in placing reliance on discrepancies and  omissions  arising
          from  the  interview  record  when  there  were  clear  flaws   in
          comprehension both by the appellant and the interviewing  officer.
          On this basis alone, the  determination  is  unsustainable.  There
          are, however, further errors that undermine the sustainability  of
          the determination.


      12. The judge was wrong to find that the appellant did  not  refer  to
          any documents confirming his term of imprisonment when his witness
          statement does make reference to  these  (at  paragraph  43).  The
          judge appears to have overlooked this. The judge  also  criticised
          the late production of the documents from  the  military  and  the
          court but took no account of the appellant's explanation  that  he
          had been in detention and found it difficult to obtain evidence in
          a timely fashion and also that his mother had been afraid to  send
          the papers to the UK. In the end, his sister scanned and sent them
          to him by email.


      13. The appellant maintains that  when  asked  about  the  receipt  of
          documents in Ukraine during cross-examination,  he  was  referring
          only to the sentencing document. His evidence always was that  the
          mobilisation papers had been hand delivered and  signed  for.  The
          judge, however, understood the appellant to be referring  to  both
          documents and hence wrongly found there was a discrepancy over how
          the summons had been received.


      14. The judge also found  that  the  appellant  could  not  have  been
          sentenced in his absence for an offence he did not  commit  as  he
          rejected the  claim  that  the  appellant  had  been  served  with
          mobilisation papers. This was based on  his  erroneous  assumption
          that only the subject of a call up  could  sign  for  its  receipt
          whereas the CPIN and the expert report both confirm  that  is  not
          the case and that call up papers can be left with and  signed  for
          by a family member.


      15. The judge was also wrong about the  age  at  which  the  appellant
          could no longer be mobilised. The cut off age of 27  years  relied
          on  by  the  judge  refers  to   ordinary   conscription   whereas
          mobilisation can continue through to the age of 65.


      16. The judge also noted a discrepancy in whether  the  appellant  had
          given his passport to the man whom he believed was going  to  make
          an application for leave for him or whether he had it at home. Had
          this discrepancy been put to the appellant,  he  would  have  been
          able to explain that he  was  talking  of  his  external  and  his
          internal passports.


      17. Finally, reliance was placed on a decision from  the  New  Zealand
          Tribunal which the judge declined to take into account. As it  was
          a part of the evidence, he should have considered it  even  though
          it predated country guidance. It would have been open  to  him  to
          find that it did not advance the case but as it formed part of the
          evidence, it had to be considered.


      18. For all these reasons, I conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge erred in law in dismissing the appellant's asylum appeal.  I
          set aside the determination in its entirety other than as a record
          of the oral evidence given. The matter shall be remitted  back  to
          the Tribunal for another judge to hear the evidence and to make  a
          fresh decision.


          Decision

      19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and  a  fresh
          decision shall be made by another judge of that Tribunal.


          Anonymity


      20. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.


    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge
       Date: 20 December 2019
