
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07621/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields (Kings Court) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 October 2019                   |On 13 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     WS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr McWatters, instructed by KK & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The appellant  in  this  case  is  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department.  However, for convenience, I shall use the titles by  which  the
parties were known before the First-tier Tribunal,  with  the  Secretary  of
State referred to as "the respondent" and WS as "the appellant".


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


SCOPE OF THIS APPEAL

 1. This appeal has been remitted by the  Court  of  Appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for re-hearing limited to determining whether the  deportation
    of the appellant would be lawful, taking into account the  case  of  KO
    (Nigeria) and Others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan where he was born in  1985.   He
    had arrived in the United Kingdom on a Tier  4  visa  in  2010.   After
    divorcing his wife in Pakistan  in  2011,  he  married  KK,  a  British
    national, on 29 February 2012 and was granted leave to  remain  on  the
    basis of that marriage as her spouse until 24 October 2014.

 3. The appellant has a record of criminal offending.  On 16 April 2014  he
    was convicted of  obstructing  a  police  officer,  driving  without  a
    licence and insurance for which he received a  twelve  months'  driving
    ban.

 4. On 11 June 2015 he was  convicted  of  drunk  driving  and  received  a
    suspended sentence  of  twelve  weeks  and  was  further  convicted  of
    facilitating a breach of immigration law on 19 June 2015 for  which  he
    was sentenced to 45 months' imprisonment.  A  pending  application  for
    further leave to remain as a spouse was received by  the  Secretary  of
    State on 26 August 2015.  The appellant made an asylum claim on 22 June
    2016 and on 12 July that year the Secretary of State refused that claim
    and made a deportation order against which the  appellant  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal did not uphold the certificate by the Secretary
    of State pursuant to section 72 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 on the basis that the appellant was not a danger to the
    community.  Although accepting  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  if
    returned to his home area due  to  his  family's  murderous  intentions
    towards  him,  the  judge  considered  internal  relocation  would   be
    effective and would not be unduly harsh.   Turning  to  Article  8  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the case through the prism of  the
    rules  in  particular  paragraphs  A398  to  399A  and  concluded  that
    paragraph 399(B)(i) was made out (the relationship was formed when  the
    person was in the United Kingdom unlawfully and the immigration  status
    was not precarious) and 399(b)(ii) was  also  made  out  (it  would  be
    unduly harsh for KK to live in Pakistan).   The  judge  also  concluded
    that it would be unduly harsh for KK to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    without the appellant (paragraph 399(b)(iii)) and  allowed  the  appeal
    under Article 8.

 6. Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul found  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision on appeal by the Secretary of State  broadly  due  to
    the failure to mention sections 117B and 117C of the 2002 Act.  He  re-
    made the decision and dismissed the appeal.  By that  stage  the  issue
    was confined to the application of the relevant Immigration  Rules  and
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

 7. By consent on 25 June 2019 the Court of Appeal ordered that the  appeal
    against the Upper Tribunal decision be allowed and  that,  relevant  to
    the scope of the hearing in the Upper Tribunal:

         "The matter be remitted to  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and
         Asylum Chamber) for re-hearing, limited to determining whether  the
         deportation of the appellant would be lawful, taking  into  account
         the case of KO (Nigeria) and Others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53."

THE HEARING

 8. Mr McWatters confirmed that the appeal stood or fell with the answer to
    the question whether it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's  wife
    K to remain in the United Kingdom without him with reference to section
    117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   He  did
    not seek to make a case that if the answer  is  in  the  negative  that
    there are very compelling circumstances over and above those  described
    in section 117C(5) nor did he advance a case as to the  impact  of  the
    appellant's deportation on K's daughter, L,  who  was  born  in  August
    2002.  She is not currently part of the household of the appellant  and
    K.  It is accepted by the Secretary of State that it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for K to go with the appellant to Pakistan.

 9. The appellant and his wife adopted statements and gave  oral  evidence.
    Statements from K's mother and L have also been provided although  they
    did not attend the hearing.  In  addition,  reliance  is  placed  on  a
    psychological report by Dr Christopher Wood dated 10 October 2019 which
    followed an assessment of K on 7 October 2019 at  Yarm  Medical  Centre
    earlier in the month.

10. In my review of matters at the outset  of  the  hearing,  Mr  McWatters
    explained the need to treat K as a vulnerable witness in the  light  of
    the content of Dr Wood's report.  Ms Petterson explained that she  had
    initially indicated to Mr McWatters that the appeal  would  proceed  on
    the basis of submissions on the evidence, however,  she  explained  she
    wished to ask some questions following my observation that Dr Wood  had
    not referred in his report to the medical evidence  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in 2016 of K being on a methadone programme supervised by
    Plummer Court in the context of a visit to the fertility clinic.  On 19
    May 2015 Dr M  saw  the  appellant  and  K  at  the  clinic  and  wrote
    afterwards in terms that the ideal situation  would  be  if  K  is  off
    methadone substitution before any treatment is contemplated.

11. Dr Wood refers to having access to medical records on K from 1995 to 17
    September 2019 and in response to my direction, Mr McWatters  arranged
    for his instructing solicitors to send digital copies  of  the  medical
    notes and the letter of instruction to Dr Wood before the  hearing  got
    underway.  Time was given to Mr McWatters to take instructions on  the
    issue of the medical evidence from 2016 and time also  for  he  and  Ms
    Patterson to examine  the  extensive  medical  notes  that  were  being
    emailed in order to identify any which either party wished to rely on.

12. These preliminary matters were  addressed  whilst  on  my  direction  K
    waited outside the hearing room.  I was mindful throughout of the Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010 giving guidance  on  children,
    vulnerable adults and sensitive appellants and of the decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  1123.   It
    appeared to me appropriate for K to wait outside until  the  time  came
    for her to give evidence and when she did so I sought to place  her  at
    ease and explained in detail the context.  She understood  the  process
    and was attentive during the relatively short period of questioning  by
    Mr McWatters, Ms Petterson and myself.  I also explained  to  her  that
    the hearing was proceeding in camera which  meant  that  she  could  be
    confident in giving her  answers  that  no  one  would  interrupt,  and
    furthermore that because the hearing was recorded, no  names  would  be
    given.

13. The letter of instruction to Dr Wood is dated 4 October 2019 and on the
    letterhead of the appellant's current solicitors.  It does not have  an
    addressee and explains:

         "I write further to the above-named client.

         I can confirm I have requested her medical records and are  waiting
         for them to be provided.  As soon as I receive them we will forward
         a copy to you in due course.

         I require an  expert  psychiatric  report  for  you  to  assess  my
         client's mental health as well as the  potential  impact  upon  her
         mental state should her husband be deported from the UK."

         [The letter continues with procedural matters of no relevance].

14. The medical notes were forwarded  in  numbered  electronic  attachments
    which were not in chronological order.   I was invited by  the  parties
    to have regard to numbers 6 and 10 (as to the current position) in 2018
    and 2019, and numbers 22 and 23 (as to the position in 1998  and  1999)
    when K was admitted to hospital for suicide attempt at the age of 19.

15. It is a matter of regret that this material had not  been  included  in
    the bundle provided.  As a consequence some two hours was taken up with
    the process of ensuring that all relevant evidence was before me.

16. In summary it is the appellant's case that the expert  evidence  of  Dr
    Wood clearly indicates that the threshold of unduly harsh has been  met
    in respect of K given that her  mental  health  would  deteriorate  and
    there is a high risk that she would attempt to  commit  suicide  should
    the appellant be deported.

THE LAW

17. Section 117C of Part 5A of the 2002 Act is in the following terms:

         "117C   Article 8: additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals


         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,


             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.


         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

  18. This provision was analysed by the Supreme  Court  in  KO  (Nigeria  &
      Others) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 and explained by Lord Carnwath  at  [20]
      to [23] as follows:

         "20. Turning to section 117C the structure is not entirely easy  to
             follow.  It starts with the general rules (1) that deportation
             of foreign criminals is in the public interest, and  (2)  that
             the more serious the offence the greater that interest.  There
             is however no express indication as to how or at what stage of
             the process those  general  rules  are  to  be  given  effect.
             Instead, the remainder of the section  enacts  specific  rules
             for two categories of foreign criminals, defined by  reference
             to whether or not their sentences were of four years or  more,
             and two precisely defined exceptions.  For those sentenced  to
             less than four years, the public interest requires deportation
             unless exception 1 or 2 applies.  For those sentenced to  four
             years or more, deportation is required "unless there are  very
             compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2".
         21.  The difficult question is whether the specific rules allow any
             further room for balancing of the relative seriousness of  the
             offence, beyond the difference  between  the  two  categories.
             The general rule stated in subsection (2) might  lead  one  to
             expect some such provision, but it could equally be read as no
             more than a preamble to the more specific rules.  Exception  1
             seems to leave no room for further balancing. It is  precisely
             defined by reference to three factual issues: lawful residence
             in  the  UK  for  most  of  C's  life,  social  and   cultural
             integration into the UK, and "very significant  obstacles"  to
             integration into the country of proposed deportation. None  of
             these turns on the seriousness of  the  offence;  but,  for  a
             sentence of less than four years, they are enough, if they are
             met, to  remove  the  public  interest  in  deportation.   For
             sentences of four years or more, however, it is not enough  to
             fall within the exception, unless there are in addition  "very
             compelling circumstances".
         22.   Given  that  exception  1  is  self-contained,  it  would  be
              surprising to find exception 2 structured in a different way.
               On its face it raises a factual issue seen from the point of
              view of the  partner  or  child:  would  the  effect  of  C's
              deportation be "unduly  harsh"?   Although  the  language  is
              perhaps less precise than  that  of  exception  1,  there  is
              nothing to suggest that the word "unduly" is  intended  as  a
              reference  back  to  the  issue   of   relative   seriousness
              introduced by subsection (2). Like exception 1, and like  the
              test of "reasonableness"  under  section  117B,  exception  2
              appears self-contained.
         23.  On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems  clearly
              intended  to  introduce  a  higher  hurdle   than   that   of
              "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking account of the
              public interest in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
              Further the word "unduly" implies an element  of  comparison.
              It assumes that there is a "due" level of  "harshness",  that
              is a level which may be  acceptable  or  justifiable  in  the
              relevant context.  "Unduly" implies  something  going  beyond
              that level. The relevant  context  is  that  set  by  section
              117C(1), that is the public interest in  the  deportation  of
              foreign criminals.  One is looking for a degree of  harshness
              going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child
              faced with the deportation of a parent.   What  it  does  not
              require in my view (and subject  to  the  discussion  of  the
              cases in the next section) is a balancing of relative  levels
              of severity of the parent's offence, other than  is  inherent
              in the distinction drawn by the section itself  by  reference
              to length of sentence.  Nor (contrary  to  the  view  of  the
              Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for  the
              Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 932, [2017] 1 WLR 240,  paras
              55, 64) can it be equated with a requirement  to  show  "very
              compelling reasons".  That would be in  effect  to  replicate
              the additional test applied by section 117C(6)  with  respect
              to sentences of four years or more. "

19. Reliance was also placed by Mr McWatters on the recent Court of  Appeal
    decision in SSHD v PG (Jamaica) [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1213.   Holroyde  LJ
    explained at [34]:

         "34. It is therefore now clear that a tribunal or court considering
             section 117C(5) of  the  2002  Act  must  focus,  not  on  the
             comparative seriousness of the offence or  offences  committed
             by the foreign criminal who faces deportation, but rather,  on
             whether the effects of his deportation on a child  or  partner
             would  go  beyond  the  degree  of   harshness   which   would
             necessarily be involved for any child or partner of a  foreign
             criminal faced with deportation.  Pursuant to  Rule  399,  the
             tribunal or court must  consider  both  whether  it  would  be
             unduly harsh for the child  and/or  partner  to  live  in  the
             country to which the foreign criminal is to  be  deported  and
             whether it would be unduly harsh for the child and/or  partner
             to remain in the UK without him."

20. In his analysis of the facts of the case Holroyde LJ explained at [39]:

         "39.  ...  I  recognise  of  course  the  human  realities  of  the
             situation, and I do not doubt that SAT and the three  children
             will suffer great distress if PG is deported.  Nor do I  doubt
             that their lives will  in  a  number  of  ways  be  made  more
             difficult than they are at present.  But those, sadly, are the
             likely consequences of the deportation of any foreign criminal
             who has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a  partner
             and/or children in this country.  ..."



THE EVIDENCE

21. The appellant's statement explains the nature of his current life  with
    K and also the affection he has for her daughter and how he and K would
    love her to move back into their home, something they had discussed and
    are making plans to achieve.  He refers to the ill health of his mother-
    in-law and the time he and his wife  takes  in  caring  for  her  which
    involves going over almost every weekend from Friday  to  Sunday.   She
    has numerous health problems due to a previous alcohol problem and also
    suffers from anxiety and stress as a consequence.  She is alone.   They
    take her to hospital on a regular basis for  appointments  and  due  to
    mobility difficulties,  she  uses  an  electric  scooter.   K  and  the
    appellant take her shopping every week and take her out for days to get
    her out of the house.

22. The appellant refers to his wife suffering from asthma and that she  is
    recovering from a blood clot as well as well as suffering from  anxiety
    and depression for which she  has  been  taking  anti-depressants  long
    term.

23. Reference is made to an incident of which I heard  oral  evidence  that
    the appellant was taken into detention in May 2019 for a period of some
    ten days.  He explains that when this happened, his wife had to go back
    onto anti-depressants and has been on them since then.

24. The appellant expresses concern  that  his  wife  would  be  unable  to
    mentally cope without him and would be unable  to  survive  alone.   He
    explains the difficulty she would encounter were she to move to  a  new
    country and refers also to the loss that he would suffer were he to  be
    deported.

25. K explains in her statement how her daughter due to issues in the wider
    family and for her to attend school, lives with  her  sister,  although
    they are still a close family and spend a great deal of time  together.
    She refers to her affection for the appellant and that  she  could  not
    live without him now as they  are  really  a  team  and  do  everything
    together.  The appellant ensures that  she  has  eaten  and  taken  her
    medication every day and were he absent she  would  forget  to  do  so.
    Owing to her anxiety she often has days when she cannot leave the house
    or even get out of bed and  the  appellant  does  everything  for  her,
    including shopping and picking up L  when  needed.   K  refers  to  the
    emotional toll of spending recent time in hospital  owing  to  a  blood
    clot and her extreme fatigue due to an underactive thyroid.  As to  the
    incident when the appellant was taken into detention, she had  to  then
    go back onto anti-depressants and had been unable to wean off them  yet
    due to stress and panic at the thought of her husband being taken away.
     She confirms also the arrangements discussed by the appellant  in  his
    statement as to the care provided for her mother.

26. A statement by L explained that she has been recently living  with  her
    aunt from where it is easier  for  her  to  get  to  school.   She  has
    finished High School and is looking into different college courses  and
    is considering moving back home.  She does not think  that  her  mother
    would be able to cope without the appellant.

27. K's mother speaks in affectionate terms of the appellant and refers  to
    her health issues owing to her age and her previous  alcohol  problems.
    If it were not for the appellant making sure that she  left  the  house
    every week and taking her shopping she apprehends she would  no  longer
    be able to continue living in her current home on her own.  She  refers
    to her concern about K who is inconsolable, and her genuine worry about
    her wellbeing and mental health.  She rules out the  possibility  of  K
    and L going to Pakistan.

28. In his oral evidence, the appellant referred to the  incident  when  he
    was taken into detention and that on his return she stopped taking anti-
    depressants although when they go out owing  to  their  neighbours  she
    still takes them sometimes.  He confirmed that  he  had  seen  Dr  Wood
    himself who asked him a  few  questions  relating  to  their  life  and
    immigration.  He was initially seated in the  waiting  area  and  after
    half an hour because K was crying continuously Dr Wood called him in to
    sit next to her and asked him a few questions.  He was with the two  of
    them for some twenty minutes when Dr Wood continued to question K.  The
    questions Dr Wood had for him was some three or four and were about his
    daily life, to which he had responded that it was okay,  they  go  out,
    but that people sometimes made fun of them relating to his  crime.   He
    had also been questioned about the impact of his immigration status and
    also about his life in Pakistan and why the appellant had come  to  the
    United Kingdom.  There was a concern at one point by Mr McWatters that
    the appellant had not understood all the questions.  On enquiry however
    he confirmed he had but had just been nervous.

29. K was asked whether she had ever seen a psychiatrist and explained this
    had been when she was 19 when she tried to  commit  suicide.   She  had
    been in mental hospital for a week.  As to the  prescription  drug  she
    was currently taking, she confirmed it was 25mg of  methadone  and  had
    been over the past ten years.  She could not remember the name  of  the
    anti-depressant that she received a prescription for  from  her  doctor
    when asked about whether there were any  other  prescriptions.   As  to
    whether she had taken any other drugs in the last  year  she  explained
    how she had taken diazepam when  the  appellant  had  been  taken  into
    detention.  It had not been prescribed but she had obtained them on the
    street in Sunderland.  A friend had acquired  them  from  somebody  who
    sold drugs.  She  had  stopped  taking  them  when  he  came  back.   K
    confirmed however that she had been previously prescribed diazepam.  Mr
    McWatters referred to a reference in the medical notes for October 2018
    to mirtazapine.  K explained that this was for depression, anxiety  and
    panic but she did not take them because  of  side  effects.   She  then
    recalled the drug she was currently taking  for  her  depression  being
    fluoxetine which was provided on  prescription.   She  had  been  given
    numbers for referral to mental health support but  did  not  feel  like
    being in groups where she felt panicky, the walls closed  in,  and  she
    could not breathe.

30. Ms Petterson asked about the use of diazepam following the incident  in
    May 2019.  My question for clarification related to a reference in  the
    medical notes for that time to 60ml in the light of K's  evidence  that
    she was now taking 25mg (of methadone).  K said  that  she  might  have
    been on 60mg in May but was coming down.

31. The report by Dr Wood includes extracts from medical notes  between  22
    December 2015 and 20 May 2019.  He begins  his  report  with  a  mental
    health assessment in these terms:

         "Panic disorder (ICD-10 code F41) is characterised  by  reoccurring
         panic attacks.  These are sudden periods of intense fear  that  may
         include  palpitations,  sweating,  shaking,  shortness  of  breath,
         numbness, or a feeling that something terrible is going to  happen.
         [K] reports that she experiences these symptoms a couple of times a
         day and they tend to be triggered by thoughts associated  with  her
         husband being deported or by thoughts  of  leaving  the  house  and
         potentially being exposed to criticism or humiliation  (she  claims
         that her neighbours call her names and sometimes spit at her).

         Severe depressive episode without psychotic symptoms  (ICD-10  code
         F32.2) is characterised by  feeling  sad,  hopeless,  or  helpless,
         feeing guilty or worthless, anxiety, irritability  or  frustration,
         fatigue or low energy, restlessness, changes in appetite or weight;
         loss of interest in things  once  enjoyed,  including  hobbies  and
         socialising; trouble concentrating or remembering; changes in sleep
         patterns; loss of interest in living, thoughts of death or suicide,
         or attempting suicide; aches or pains that do not have  an  obvious
         physical cause.  These symptoms need to have been present for  over
         two weeks in order for a diagnosis of depression to be  made.   [K]
         reported experiencing these symptoms  in  the  severe  range  since
         around May 2019 when it was  suggested  that  her  husband  may  be
         deported from the UK."

32. Dr Wood continues:

         "[K's] description of the symptoms and the provided medical records
         suggests that the symptoms  were  in  the  severe  range  in  2015.
         Improving when her husband was released from  prison  in  2017  and
         then deteriorating again in the summer of  2019,  following  notice
         that her husband may be deported from the UK.

         [K] struggled with heroin and diazepam addiction in  her  twenties.
         She denies any current misuse of alcohol or illicit drugs."

33. As to the potential impact on K's mental state should  her  husband  be
    deported, Dr Wood notes that her current mental health difficulties are
    currently managed by anti-depressant medication but that she  does  not
    believe this is effective.  He notes also the  offer  of  psychotherapy
    input by the  primary  mental  health  service  but  that  K  had  been
    discharged in March 2016 due to non-attendance.  K explained to Dr Wood
    that she did not believe psychotherapy input would be  helpful  if  she
    believes her symptoms "are related to the fear  of  her  husband  being
    deported".  Dr Wood also notes K's understanding that she would have to
    leave the house to attend such sessions and from  the  medical  records
    she had failed to attend dozens of medical  appointments.   He  had  no
    reason to doubt her concerns that this was due to  the  severe  anxiety
    that she experienced when considering leaving the house.

34. After recording aspects of  K's  current  social  life  (she  has  lost
    contact with friends and the way in which the family  provides  support
    for her mother) Dr Wood concludes:

         "[K's] mental health would deteriorate if her husband were deported
         from the UK.  [K] is unlikely to make use of mental health services
         or social support as she has little faith in them and is  reluctant
         to leave the house or to meet new people.  She could perhaps obtain
         some support from her mother but this would be insufficient to meet
         her mental health needs.  [K] has expressed that she would jump off
         a nearby bridge or take a paracetamol overdose if her husband  were
         deported.  There is a high risk that [K] would act on  these  ideas
         as she is extremely depressed and feels hopeless.  [K] also  has  a
         past history of a suicide attempt (overdoes of  opiates,  mefenamic
         acid and paracetamols age 20), which is a risk  factor  for  future
         attempts.  Her mother and daughter are protective  factors  against
         suicide, but may not be sufficient to prevent an attempt."

SUBMISSIONS

35. Ms Petterson maintained the Secretary  of  State's  decision.   It  was
    clear from the medical notes extracted by Dr Wood that K was distressed
    when the appellant was detained by immigration and  in  her  submission
    that had been a reaction to the unexpected.  Noting Dr Wood's  view  of
    the impact on deportation and K not  engaging  with  psychotherapy,  Ms
    Petterson observed this was a domestic case and that there were systems
    in place to protect K.  She is  known  to  the  community  and  with  a
    history of some mental health difficulties, there was no reason why she
    could not seek support.  She contended that the report by Dr  Wood  was
    not indicative that K would be likely to self-harm should the appellant
    be deported and accordingly the impact on K's  mental  health  was  not
    sufficient for that deportation to be unduly harsh.

36. In the course of his submissions Mr McWatters  urged  the  need  for  a
    holistic assessment.  He accepted that Dr Wood had not referred  to  or
    explained how he had taken account  of  K's  methadone  treatment.   He
    appeared qualified and should not be criticised  for  "cherry  picking"
    having based his assessments of risk according to the  Beck  Depression
    and Beck Anxiety Inventories appended to her statement.

37. I asked him to consider what  the  right  approach  was  under  section
    117C(5) and where someone has a mental health condition and refuses  to
    take treatment for it.  He explained that K was  unlikely  to  use  the
    services because of what she is, and it was not unreasonable of Dr Wood
    to conclude as he has.  In his contention were I to accept the evidence
    by Dr Wood that K is at high risk of suicide the threshold must be  met
    as it goes beyond the common place.  He argued that  all  the  evidence
    suggested that Dr Wood is correct in his conclusion.

ANALYSIS

38. The starting point is  Dr  Wood's  assessment  since  I  consider  this
    critical  to  a  gauging  of  the  impact  on  K  of  the   appellant's
    deportation.   A  section  in  his  report  is  headed  "Mental  health
    description for medical records" which is accompanied by  a  note  that
    "***** equals anonymised  entries".   This  comes  prior  to  the  next
    section which is the "Mental  Health  Assessment"  set  out  in  [33]ff
    above.  Eight extracts from K's medical notes are reproduced covering a
    period 22 December 2015 and 20 May 2019.

39. The chronological context is useful.  The appellant was convicted on  a
    plea of guilty in November 2014.  On 12 July 2016 the deportation order
    was made.  This followed a letter from the Secretary of State dated  27
    July 2015 when the appellant was still in prison  to  indicate  that  a
    deportation order was being considered.  On 15 May  2017  Judge  Ince's
    decision (allowing the appeal) was sent to the parties.  Permission  to
    appeal that decision was refused on  2  June  2017  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but granted on 21 September 2017 by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but granted on 21 September 2017 by the Upper Tribunal.  Thus there was
    a six-month window during which K might have thought the concerns  were
    over although the appellant's advisers might have indicated to him that
    permission to appeal was being sought.

40. The most recent extracts of the eight reproduced are for 8 August  2018
    and 20 May 2019.  The August extract is incomplete stopping at the word
    'benefit'  (marked  with  an   asterisk).    In   full,   the   general
    practitioner's notes for 8 August are as follows (preserving the syntax
    and abbreviations):

         "Cigarette consumption 15 cigarettes/day
         Mixed anxiety and repressive disorder
         Flashbacks
         ***** thoughts


         History
         Things going through the change as  mood  swings.   Tearful,  *****
         thoughts (1BD1) but no plans or intentions.  Flashbacks (X75yW)  of
         childhood memories for which she blames herself.  has a 16  yr  old
         ***** who is protective, ***** attempt at age 19, was  admitted  to
         MH  hospital  then.   No  MH  probs  since  but  has  been   trying
         antidepressant meds every year since 2014 -  tries  for  2-4  weeks
         then stops as doesn't see  any  benefit*.   On  75ml  *****  daily.
         Plummer ***** Takes 5mg diazepam every night - buys off the street.
           Down  from  100mg  daily  a  couple  of  years  ago.    Cigarette
         consumption (Ub1tl) 15 cigarettes/day - very keen to stop  smoking.
         Adv given re stop smoking clinic - will attend.  Lives  with  *****
         periods regular, does not need *****, no hot sweats etc.


         Examination
         Tearful, intermittent eye contact, appears *****




         Diagnosis
         Major, mixed ***** and depressive disorder (New Episode)


         Plan
         All Ads, she  has  tried  so  far  interact  with  *****  including
         mirtazapine putting her ***** ***** of arrythmias - understands and
         accepts risks.  Will stop diazepam as Mirtazapine  likely  to  help
         sleep.   Rv  2w  prn  meantime.   Will   do   self   referral   for
         counselling."

    I pause to note that the detail after "benefit" not included by Dr Wood
    appears to relate to the methadone  treatment  which  as  noted  by  Dr
    Moorby is administered by Plummer Court as well as K's diazepam use and
    its illegal source.  Furthermore there is  refence  to  K's  depressive
    disorder and a  redacted  mixed  condition  both  described  as  a  new
    episode.    This  is  followed  by  a  plan  which  is  medicine  based
    (mirtazapine).

41. The medical notes reveal that between 8 August 2018 and 20 May 2019,  K
    attended the surgery and Accident and Emergency on numerous  occasions.
    On 11 October 2018 the GP noted the following comments in  relation  to
    K's mental health as follows:

         "History
         Mood - fees got worse when tried to come off  diazepam,  nightmares
         about  childhood  *****also  *****  twice,  *****  under  *****  of
         deportation also has  ***** but lives  with  *****  tearful  often,
         self ***** thoughts of ***** but no plan to take at present, didn't
         take mirtazapine regularly, thought  was  just  for  sleep,  thinks
         would benefit from talking to someone  about  experiences  -  can't
         really talk to ***** about events, stable  on  *****  from  Plummer
         ***** no other ***** except diazepam, no alcohol, denies DV.

         Plan
         Explained mirtazapine won't help for mood if not take  regularly  -
         will try, needs to try to  cut  down  diazepam  again,  number  for
         talking helps given review re-mood 1/12.

42. On 6 February 2019 the GP recorded the following notes:

         "History
         Diazepam 20 - 70 mg - buying off street.  Taking  every  day  until
         Oct/Nov/Alcohol intake (136..)  60 Units/Week ***** thoughts (1BD1)
         - Worse since coming  off  diazepam  -  longstanding  -  protective
         factors as prev.  Legs feel like they are burning/things  crawling.
         Feels really  paranoid.   Sometimes  carries  a  knife  to  protect
         herself against perceived threats.  No thoughts of ***** to self or
         specific others re knife.  Still  on  *****  Still  seeing  Plummer
         ***** Note in past has worked w CGL.


         Plan
         Suggest reduce alcohol - she says will not be a problem  -  suggest
         if more difficult than she hoped could approach COL again.   Seeing
         Plummer ***** 12/2 - suggest mention  problems  w  mood  and  etoh.
         Advised against carrying weapons.  R/v mood here as needed  if  not
         improving w reduced etoh."

43. On 17 May 2019 (whilst the appellant was in detention) the GP  recorded
    the following notes:

         "History
         1.***** has been taking away by the ***** for  arranging  marriage,
         she is now being targeted and having bricks thrown at  windows  etc
         but neighbours and randoms.  Suffers  with  *****  and  asking  for
         something to help  her  with  this.   Is  under  Plummer  *****  on
         methadone.  Denies having  any  street  *****  and  states  is  off
         alcohol.  Always has ***** thoughts.  Hasn't made any plans and not
         storing medications.  ***** and family are her  protective  factors
         but ***** back in ***** again.  She  is  well  supported  with  her
         inhaler as using it 5-6 times a day for week.  Still  using  clenil
         bd.  Breathless with light chest and cough all day  every  day  for
         weeks but she isn't sure whether *****  or  infection  causing  the
         symptoms.  Green spulum, no chest pains, no haemoplysis.


         Examination
         Looks under the influence of *****  alcohol.   Carrying  bottle  of
         coke.  Good eye contact, reasonably presented, is  tearful,  asking
         for something to help with ***** Chest - widespread coarse crackles
         with occasional inspiratory wheeze.  Oxygen saturation at periphery
         (X770D) 99% (New Episode).  Peak flow rate  abnormal  (XM1Ub)  300.
         O/E  -  pulse  rate  (242..)  90  bpm  O/E  -  temperature   normal
         (2E31.)36.4


         Diagnosis
         Infection of lower respiratory tract (X1004) Major. ***** state NOS
         (E200z)


         Plan
         Offered GP appointment within 1hr but refused  as  going  to  mams.
         Happy to wait until Monday.  Advise to  ring  crisis  team  if  any
         ***** ideation."



44. The 20 May 2019 notes reproduced by Dr Wood are  also  incomplete;  the
    extract stops at the end of the passage headed 'History'

45. The full notes explain:

         "History
         Low mood ***** Getting *****  of  feeling  panicky,  shakey,  heart
         racing about twice a day.  Says neighbours harassing her,  shouting
         ***** ***** has been taken away by immigration and not been granted
         ***** Lives alone, no kids at home.  Her family all in  Sunderland.
         Is on 60ml ***** a day and on daily pick up.  Denies any alcohol or
         other drug use.  Fleeting thoughts of ending her  life  but  denies
         any firm plans of ***** or self *****

         Examination
         Tearful at  start  but  settled.   Calm  after  that.   Appropriate
         speech.  Good eye contact.

         Plan
         Start fluoxetine for depression/***** Review in  2/52,  or  prn  in
         meantime  if  feeling  worse.   Number  given  for   Crisis   Team.
         Encouraged her to  go  to  the  council/police  about  housing  and
         neighbours."




46. On 19 June 2019 the GP recorded the following notes:

         "History
         Says lost script for fluoxteine so didn't start  -  still  keen  to
         give this a go **** is back at home now, feels  better  like  this,
         denies DV or any other problems with own safety at  home  -  is  in
         process of appealing his status trying to reduce  alcohol  -  today
         has had only 1 can, normally up to 2 cans still on  *****  60mls  -
         wanting to eventually reduce this denies any other *****  drug  use
         says  ***** ideation 'not a problem' now

         Examination
         Casually dressed, normal speech, eye contact

         Diagnosis
         Depression interim review"

47. On 3 July 2019 the GP recorded the following notes:

         "History
         DNA'd today's appt - forgot says hasn't started  taking  medication
         yet - has prescription still, wants to start, not  much  change  in
         mood or situation.

         Plan
         Encourages to start f/u booked with me, if struggling  in  meantime
         can book on that day/appt."

48. Dr Wood does not explain the methodology for  his  selection  from  the
    medical notes regarding K's mental health and if he  did  not  consider
    the above extracts relevant why this was so.  It is unexplained why the
    extract reproduced for 8 August leaves out the reference  to  methadone
    and diazepam.  Whilst it may be that Dr Wood  did  not  consider  these
    aspects significant, the absence of  any  reference  to  methadone  and
    diazepam use in his report which features in the intervening notes that
    have not been reproduced is surprising.  The issue of fact that  arises
    is whether being a long-term methadone user coupled with a  history  of
    the unprescribed taking of diazepam has had any impact on  K's  ability
    to give  a  reliable  account  of  her  mood  and  intentions  and  her
    behavioural presentation which Dr  Wood  considered  met  the  relevant
    criteria.   Whilst  the  methadone   treatment   is   prescribed,   K's
    explanations to her general practitioners clearly  shows  the  diazepam
    she has been taking is not.   Given her pattern of  diazepam  use,  K's
    denial to Dr Wood that she has any current misuse of illicit drugs will
    have required careful consideration and probing.  The account given  by
    K to her GPs of the sourcing of the diazepam is not consistent with the
    evidence she gave at the hearing which was  that  she  had  only  taken
    diazepam on prescription whilst the appellant was  in  detention.   Her
    answer was confusing as she  subsequently  referred  to  obtaining  the
    diazepam on the streets through a friend.  Either way the fact is  that
    her use of this drug was not confined to the period of detention of the
    appellant in May 2019.  There is no evidence before me that assists  in
    the consideration whether the methadone/diazepam  use  was  capable  of
    being an influencing factor in the psychometric scoring  logged  in  Dr
    Wood's report.  And if so whether such use could  have  the  effect  of
    skewing the results.

49. I also have difficulty in reconciling Dr Wood's  statement  that  K  is
    unlikely to make use of mental health services or social support as she
    has little faith in them with the picture painted by the medical  notes
    is of someone who sees her GPs on a very regular basis and also attends
    Accident and Emergency.  Dr Wood's observation that  K  "could  perhaps
    obtain some support from her mother but this would be  insufficient  to
    meet her mental health needs" is  not  well  explained.   The  extracts
    cited above from the notes for 17 May 2019 demonstrate that whilst  the
    appellant was in detention K went to see her GP who was satisfied  that
    she was "well supported" with her mother and was  going  back  to  stay
    with her.  Dr Wood's reference to a past history of a  suicide  attempt
    was one that took place in 1999 and I was taken to no other passage  in
    the medical notes which indicates a recurrence.

50. I also consider it significant that there is no indication in the  GPs'
    notes that K's mental health was an aspect that required a referral  to
    a specialist mental heath team in the period covering  the  notes  have
    been reproduced above.   Instead  it  appears  that  the  doctors  have
    considered that medication would be an  adequate  treatment.   Dr  Wood
    observed that K considers that fluoxetine is not effective.  It will be
    seen from the notes that K reported a loss of the  script  on  19  June
    2019 and on 3 July that she had not started taking the  medication  but
    still wanted to.  A feature of the August 2019 entries is a failure  to
    keep appointments and there is no medical entry indicting  whether  the
    course of fluoxetine has been started  and  continued  or  started  but
    ceased.  Dr Wood  does  not  comment  on  whether  this  medication  is
    suitable for the treatment of the depression he diagnosed but I  accept
    that such an evaluation might be outside his competence and  expertise.
    He appears to have accepted K's assertion as to the  poor  efficacy  of
    fluoxetine.  K's judgement on the effectiveness of the  medication  can
    have a number of explanations ranging from a belief that they  are  not
    needed to an unwillingness to give the medication the  chance  to  take
    effect.  Her evidence at the hearing was that she was taking fluoxetine
    but the evidence does not establish how long she has been  taking  this
    drug.  There is no independent evidence gauging  the  effectiveness  of
    the course of fluoxetine  but  it  is  significant  that  there  is  no
    evidence that  K  has  made  an  complaint  to  her  GP  or  sought  an
    alternative treatment or medication.  There is also no analysis on  how
    the course of methadone and use of diazepam could impact on the  taking
    of the antidepressant medication or whether in combination the combined
    use has an ameliorative impact on K's depression.  It appears from  the
    notes in particular those of 8 August 2018 that in the past K  has  not
    taken the anti-depressant medication for a sufficient period for it  to
    produce results.  The position  regarding  the  current  medication  is
    unclear.  K's observation to Dr Wood that she believes her symptons are
    related to the fear of the appellant being  deported  also  appears  to
    have been accepted by Dr Wood and there is no indication that  he  gave
    consideration to the possibility that K's  mental  health  difficulties
    may exist independent of the  deportation  concerns.   I  also  do  not
    accept K's evidence at the hearing that the diazepam use  was  confined
    to the period of the May detention of the appellant in the light of the
    conflict between her evidence and the medical notes.  I also find  that
    K mislead Dr Wood when denying any current misuse of  drugs  as  it  is
    clear that she has continued to use diazepam well  after  her  twenties
    during which he notes K had struggled with addition to  this  drug  and
    heroin.  All these factors reduce the weight I am able to  give  to  Dr
    Wood's diagnosis of  severe  depression  and  panic  disorder  and  his
    prognosis of a high risk of suicide in the  event  of  the  appellant's
    deportation.  The suicide ideation is not explored in any detail in the
    report.  I am satisfied that K's depression is real but also that it is
    treatable should she permit it.  These factors point  to  a  manageable
    mental health condition with K's cooperation.

51. In gauging the impact the appellant's deportation may have on K, it  is
    also necessary to see the extent to which he  may  been  a  stabilising
    influence in her life  in  the  light  of  her  long  history  of  drug
    dependency  and  her  mental  health  problems.   This  aspect  is  not
    addressed to  any  great  extent  by  Dr  Wood  in  his  mental  health
    assessment.   He  acknowledges  the  practical  assistance   that   the
    appellant provides.   Given the length of time that K acknowledges  she
    has been a methadone user and the length  of  the  relationship  (since
    2012) it is significant that the appellant's presence in her  life  has
    not resulted in K ceasing to require this heroine substitute or  manage
    the uncontrolled use of diazepam.  The medical  evidence  points  to  K
    continuing to have problems with drug and alcohol abuse.  Her statement
    to Dr Wood that these  have  been  addressed  is  in  my  judgment  not
    reliable.  Dr Wood refers to  K  having  failed  to  attend  dozens  of
    medical appointments in the context of K's explanation that  she  would
    have to leave the house to attend therapy sessions.  There are a number
    of non-attendances noted throughout 2019 but these  do  not  appear  to
    have been in relation to psychotherapy groups but instead in respect of
    attendances at the surgery and the Newcastle Chronic Disease Monitoring
    Service Surgery.  Dr Wood appears to have downplayed the positive  help
    provided by K's mother during the period of the  appellant's  detention
    despite  her  own  health  difficulties  recorded  in  her   statement.
    Furthermore, it is clear that K  is  quite  able  to  get  out  herself
    without assistance in order to see her GP when needed  and  furthermore
    there is  evidence  of  attendance  at  Plummer  Court  for  supervised
    methadone provision.

52. Dr Wood explains that K requested the appellant join the meeting  after
    30 minutes.  The appellant himself indicates that he was with his  wife
    and Dr Wood for some twenty minutes or so.   Dr  Wood  is  not  a  case
    treating psychiatrist or psychologist and if which appears  to  be  the
    case the overall session lasted for some 45 minutes it is  questionable
    whether this was sufficient time given the complexity  of  K's  medical
    history to arrive at a reliable diagnosis.  Given the  request  in  the
    instruction letter for a psychiatric report and the evident need  of  K
    requiring medication for her  depression  it  is  unexplained  why  the
    opinion of a psychiatrist was not sought  or  why  Dr  Wood  refers  to
    instructions to undertake  a  psychological  assessment.   Dr  Wood  is
    imprecise in his diagnoses  of  K  in  referring  to  her  meeting  the
    criteria of severe depressive episode in the  opening  passage  of  his
    report which he elevates to "extremely  depressed"  in  the  concluding
    paragraph but does not explain if  the  diagnosis  is  the  same.   The
    methodology used for the diagnosis by Dr Wood is well respected but  it
    remains uncertain whether the same diagnosis would flow  had  the  long
    term methadone use been factored in as well as the  unapproved  use  of
    diazepam when account was taken of K's reported responses.

53. For the above reasons, I can only  give  limited  weight  to  Dr  Woods
    conclusions.  I am not persuaded that in the  event  of  the  appellant
    being deported, the evidence demonstrates that K is  at  high  risk  of
    suicide.  I readily accept that  she  has  mental  health  difficulties
    expressed in part  by  a  depressive  state  for  which  medication  is
    available and on her own evidence is being taken.  I have no doubt that
    the deportation of the appellant would be greatly distressing for K and
    for a period at least she is likely to struggle to cope but  there  are
    support structures in place that she has and can access  including  the
    NHS and her family.  The appellant has been a part of K's life for  the
    past seven years and I have no doubt that the couple are  fond  of  one
    another and provide each other with mutual support.  The effect of  his
    deportation would undoubtedly be harsh and seen as such by K but  I  am
    not persuaded on the evidence that it would  be  unduly  harsh  as  any
    decline by K can be managed and the evidence does not show that it  can
    only be resolved by deportation being deferred.   I  am  not  satisfied
    that reliable evidence has been provided that such decline would result
    in suicide.  Mr McWatters  accepted  that  there  were  not  compelling
    circumstances over and above these captured  by  consideration  of  the
    factors whether it would be unduly harsh and accordingly  there  is  no
    further issue  in  this  case  that  requires  to  be  addressed.   The
    appellant has resisted deportation on the basis that the effect on  his
    wife would be unduly harsh and for the reasons I have given above I  am
    satisfied it would not.

54. Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.




Signed                                  Date 7 November 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
