
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/07614/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27th February 2018                     |On 24th April 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                    [w s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIon Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Appiah, Counsel instructed by Vine Court
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGill, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by [WS] against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Plumptre, promulgated on 2nd October 2017, to dismiss his  appeal
    against refusal of his protection and private and family life claims.

 2. The brief background to the Appellant' protection claim is as follows.

 3. The  Appellant  was  born  and  raised  in  a  place  called  Tagab  in
    Afghanistan.  His father  and  two  of  his  brothers  worked  for  the
    Taliban, as did a paternal cousin.  Sometime prior to 2008, one of  his
    brothers and his paternal cousin were seen  by  a  taxi  driver  called
    Barryal to be planting a roadside bomb.  Barryal reported what  he  had
    seen to the authorities with the result that his brother  and  paternal
    cousin murdered him.  The Appellant knows of this  because  his  mother
    told him. One of his grounds for fearing return to Afghanistan is  that
    the family members of Barryal will avenge his death by killing him.  In
    2008, the family home was raided  by  government  and  allied  national
    troops.  The Appellant's father ([HG]), his brother (Dr  [S])  and  his
    paternal cousin (Commander [BS])  were  all  killed  during  the  raid.
    Again, the Appellant knows of this because he has been told  of  it  by
    his mother.  The Appellant also had some limited involvement  with  the
    Taliban through a commander called Mullah Ataullah.  The appellant  was
    not involved in any fighting but he did assist the Taliban to transport
    people and weapons on his motorcycle.

 4. It was accepted by the Home Office, and therefore by  the  judge,  that
    the above events had indeed occurred.   The  judge  nevertheless  found
    that the Appellant was not at risk on  return.  This  was  because  she
    concluded that the Appellant's claimed fear of the authorities  -  both
    by reason of his own association with  the  Taliban  and  that  of  his
    family members - was founded on speculation.   There  was  no  rational
    basis for that fear given that the authorities had raided his house  as
    long ago as 2008 but had nevertheless not taken  any  steps  either  to
    apprehend or harm him in the period of 8 years that had  elapsed  since
    that time.  The judge  also  concluded  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    inconsistent as to whether or  not  he  feared  the  Taliban.   In  his
    screening interview he had said he had a problem with the  Taliban  and
    claimed to fear that they  would  catch  and  kill  him  on  return  to
    Afghanistan, whereas in his main asylum interview he said that  he  had
    no problem with the Taliban and that he would be  able  to  live  in  a
    Taliban-controlled area.  Finally, in relation to his  claim  that  his
    removal to Afghanistan  would  contravene  his  right  to  respect  for
    private and family life under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention,
    the judge concluded that his primary family life  was  with  his  close
    family members; that is to say, with his mother and sister who continue
    to live in Afghanistan. Any family life that the Appellant had  enjoyed
    in the UK with his adult paternal  cousin  ([HS])  had  been  of  short
    duration.

 5. I deal with the Grounds of Appeal in turn.

 6. The first ground (drafted by Counsel other than Mr Appiah) is difficult
    to follow.  It appears to suggest that given  the  accepted  facts  the
    judge was bound to conclude that the Appellant would be  at  risk  from
    either  Afghan  government  forces  or  the  Taliban   on   return   to
    Afghanistan.  This ground places reliance upon a  Home  Office  Country
    Policy and Information Note. The relevant passages of this document are
    not quoted in the grounds and were not cited to me at the hearing. They
    are said to state that the risk on return is not dependent upon whether
    a person is a high or low-ranking  member  of  the  Taliban.   However,
    whatever its precise terms may be,  that  information  was  not  placed
    before the judge. This ground would thus appear to be  predicated  upon
    it being an error of law for a judge not to have regard to all relevant
    information that is in the public  domain.   If  that  were  the  case,
    judges would be placed in the impossible position of having to seek out
    for  themselves  information  that  might  conceivably  be   considered
    relevant to the issues in an appeal  with  the  possibility  of  having
    thereafter to reconvene the appeal in order  to  give  the  parties  an
    opportunity to address it. I do not believe that  this  represents  the
    law.  I am in any event unable to follow the logic of  this  ground  of
    appeal, and it is right to observe that  Mr  Appiah  did  not  seek  to
    explain or elaborate upon it at the hearing.

 7. Ground 2 argues that the judge failed to consider whether the Appellant
    would be at risk on return because  of  his  family  profile  with  the
    authorities given that it was accepted  that  the  Appellant's  father,
    brother, and cousin, were all active  members  of  the  Taliban.    The
    ground continues:

         "He therefore has a profile of a person whose majority male  family
         members were part of the Taliban.  The failure to consider the risk
         of the family member of known persons within the  Taliban  and  the
         risk to the Appellant from the authorities in  Afghanistan  amounts
         to a decision which is flawed."

    However, this is simply a restatement of the Appellant's case that  the
    judge rejected for entirely sustainable reasons at paragraphs 37 and 38
    of her decision. In summary, the  Appellant  had  by  his  own  account
    continued to live in the same village in Afghanistan since the time  of
    Barrayal's murder and subsequent raid on the family home in 2008 by the
    authorities, without having since come  to  the  adverse  attention  of
    either the authorities or Barrayal's family.

 8. I turn to the third ground. This  suggests  that  there  is  no  cogent
    reason why the Appellant's photograph would  not  be  with  "the  local
    district" (a  reference,  I  think,  to  the  local  district  police).
    However, this ground is predicated upon a reversal  of  the  burden  of
    proof.  The position at the hearing was that there was no  evidence  to
    suggest that the Appellant's photograph was with  the  local  district.
    The third ground thus appears to suggest that, absent a reason for  not
    doing so,  the  judge  ought  to  have  assumed  that  the  Appellant's
    association with the Taliban had of itself proved  sufficient  to  draw
    him to the adverse attention of the  Afghan  authorities.   Whilst  the
    standard of proof in Protection Claims  is  low,  it  does  not  in  my
    judgement extend to making such unsubstantiated assumptions.

 9. The fourth ground is somewhat stronger than the  other  three,  and  Mr
    Appiah  unsurprisingly  therefore   concentrated   upon   it   in   his
    submissions.

10. I have previously noted that the Appellant had claimed in his screening
    interview that he feared being  captured  and  killed  by  the  Taliban
    whereas in his asylum interview he had stated that he had no difficulty
    with the idea of living in a Taliban-controlled area.  This was a clear
    discrepancy.  To place it in context, the Appellant's settled  position
    at the hearing that he was not at risk from the Taliban.  The relevance
    of his statement to the contrary in his screening  interview  was  thus
    relevant only to his overall credibility rather  than  to  any  claimed
    risk of harm from the Taliban on return to Afghanistan.

11. The judge considered the Appellant's explanation for the discrepancy at
    paragraph 42 of her decision:

         "In rejecting the appellant's claim that as he is now  of  age,  he
         would be forced to join the Taliban on return and would be at  risk
         from the government authorities for this reason, I have  considered
         his answer at Q4.1 of his screening interview:  'I  got  a  problem
         with the Taliban, if they catch me they will kill me.   One  of  my
         brothers was in the Taliban and was  killed'.   I  have  considered
         this explanation at paragraph 3 of his witness statement  that  the
         reason for mistakes in his screening interview was because  it  was
         done through a Farsi interpreter,  whereas  his  main  language  is
         Pushtu and that he speaks only a little Farsi and  Dari,  but  give
         weight to the fact that it is clearly recorded by the Respondent on
         page A that the screening interview was conducted in Dari  and  not
         Farsi as the appellant has stated."

12. The fourth ground makes two  points.   Firstly,  that  "general  online
    research" shows that the  word  Farsi  is  the  Persian  name  for  the
    language known in modern times as Dari in Afghanistan.  The  difference
    in the languages is that Farsi is known more in  modern  times  as  the
    language used in Iran and Dari in Afghanistan, as a way to  distinguish
    between the two.  Both are born from the same origin and are  described
    as two accents of the same language.  It was therefore  wrong  for  the
    judge to suggest that, by stating the language spoken  was  Farsi  when
    the IO described the language as Dari, the Appellant's explanation  was
    not credible.  Secondly, it is of note that the Appellant  stated  that
    he spoke a little Farsi and Dari and thus, it is reasonable  to  assert
    that the Appellant would not have been able to fully understand  either
    language.  Thus, it is argued, the judge's rejection of the Appellant's
    explanation for the discrepancy is without basis and is flawed.

13. The problem with the first point is that  it  once  again  relies  upon
    information that was not  placed  before  Judge  Plumptre  (see,  also,
    paragraph 6 above).  Indeed it was  also  not  before  me.   The  judge
    cannot therefore be criticised for assuming that Dari  and  Farsi  were
    different languages or,  at  least,  different  dialects  of  the  same
    language.   Indeed,  it  was  the  Appellant  himself  who  first  made
    reference to Farsi, as opposed to Dari, by way of explanation  for  his
    discrepant accounts.  He has thus only himself to blame if this led  to
    confusion in the mind of the judge.  However, this  was  not  the  only
    reason that the judge gave for rejecting his explanation.  She  gave  a
    further reason at paragraph 43:

         "I find that  the  discrepancy  of  fearing  the  Taliban/having  a
         problem with the Taliban as recorded in his screening interview  to
         the complete reversal in his oral evidence that he has  no  problem
         with the Taliban and could live in a Taliban controlled area is too
         great a change in his asylum claim to be explained  by  lack  of  a
         proper interpreter about whom he  did  not  complain  and  whom  he
         stated he had understood at the end of the interview.  In  addition
         I find given his claim that he had assisted the Taliban in a modest
         way in Afghanistan that his claim in his screening  interview  that
         he would be killed by the Taliban has no foundation at all."

14. The judge thus makes the point that whatever the language may have been
    (Farsi or Dari) this could not account for the Appellant saying on  the
    one hand that he feared being captured and killed and,  on  the  other,
    saying that he had no such fear.  Moreover, in order  to  explain  away
    what the judge fairly characterised as  "a  complete  reversal  of  his
    position", the problem would have had to lie, not in his  understanding
    of what was being asked of him, but in a fundamental mistranslation  of
    his reply. The judge was thus perfectly entitled to  conclude  that  it
    was not credible that the Appellant's words had been  mistranslated  to
    that extent, whatever the original language may have been.

15. I turn to Ground 5.  Prior to the hearing  there  had  been  a  written
    application to adjourn. This was renewed at  the  hearing  by  Counsel.
    The  application  to  adjourn  was   made   because   the   Appellant's
    representative had made a formal request to the Home Office to disclose
    the reasons and information  that  had  been  provided  to  the  French
    authorities leading to an agreement with the UK  authorities  that  the
    Appellant's protection claim would be determined by the United  Kingdom
    rather than in France where he was residing at that time.  It was  said
    at the hearing that the question of the circumstances in which  the  UK
    authorities had agreed to handle the Appellant's asylum claim were, "at
    the heart of the appeal and  could  give  rise  to  further  additional
    grounds which ought to be considered by the Tribunal".  [See  paragraph
    10 of the decision].  Moreover, Counsel submitted to the Tribunal  that
    there might be additional information which he had give to  the  French
    authorities about the circumstances in which he left Afghanistan.

16. In opposing the application, the  Presenting  Officer  is  recorded  as
    saying (at paragraph 11) that it was not  known  what  information,  if
    any, the Appellant had given to the French authorities and  whether  he
    had been formally interviewed or not. Moreover, such information  would
    not add anything to that about which  the  Appellant  could  give  oral
    evidence concerning his reasons for leaving Afghanistan and his claimed
    fear of the Afghan Government and non-state actors.

17. The judge may have been well advised to have based her decision on  the
    grounds  advanced  by  the  Presenting  Officer,   namely,   that   the
    adjournment application was based  entirely  upon  speculation.   There
    were no reasonable grounds to suppose  that  the  reasons  why  the  UK
    authorities had agreed to deal with the Appellant's  asylum  claim  had
    any bearing upon whether the Appellant was  able  to  substantiate  his
    asylum claim. Indeed, the primary facts were not in any event disputed.
    Moreover, it is widely known that the UK government  reached  agreement
    with the French authorities that they would process  claims  by  minors
    who had an adult relative in the United Kingdom. The Appellant met both
    these criteria. That was in my judgement sufficient  reason  to  refuse
    the application.  It is therefore perhaps regrettable  that  the  judge
    chose to refuse the application on the basis  that  the  Appellant  may
    find himself in a difficult position if the information he gave to  the
    French authorities proved to be different to that which he had given to
    the UK authorities.  That too was based upon speculation.  It  did  not
    however affect the fairness of the ultimate decision.

18. In developing this ground, Mr Appiah referred to what he  characterised
    as the Secretary of State's 'duty of candour'.  The  Respondent  is  no
    doubt under a duty to disclose  evidence  to  the  Appellant  which  is
    capable of either undermining her own case or reasonably assisting that
    of the Appellant.  However, this does  not  extend  to  the  Respondent
    being obliged (to borrow a phrase from the  criminal  jurisdiction)  to
    "hand over the keys to the warehouse". There was in this case no  basis
    for suspecting that the Respondent had  been  breach  of  her  duty  of
    candour, and it could not therefore provide a basis for the adjournment
    that was being sought.

19. I turn to Ground 6.  Before considering this,  it  may  be  helpful  to
    quote in full the fairly brief reference that the  judge  made  to  the
    Appellant's claim under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention  at
    paragraph 51:

         "I was asked to deal with Article 8 but find that  the  appellant's
         primary family life is with his family members i.e. his mother  and
         sister as a minimum who continue to live in  Afghanistan.   I  find
         that any family life with the adult  paternal  cousin  [HS]  is  of
         short duration and that the appellant can rely at best  on  private
         life only.  I give weight to the fact that he has been  in  the  UK
         for less than one year and that Article 8 is  not  engaged  on  the
         facts  of  this  appeal.   Clearly  he  cannot  meet  any  of   the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE."

20. Ground 6 complains that the judge was not entitled to assume  that  the
    Appellant's primary family life continued to be  with  his  mother  and
    sister or that they continued to live in  Afghanistan  given  that  the
    Appellant had said in his witness statement that he did not know  where
    they were.  However, that argument is in  my  judgment  based  upon  an
    artificial construct.  In reality all that the Appellant could say  was
    that his mother had been living in his village in  Afghanistan  on  the
    last occasion that he had seen  her.   Similar  considerations  equally
    applied to his sister who was last known  to  be  living  elsewhere  in
    Afghanistan with her husband.  Given that the burden  of  proof  rested
    upon the Appellant, it seems to me  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that they remained  at  their  last  known  addresses  in  the
    absence of any evidence that the Appellant had made reasonable  efforts
    to trace them.  There was, as I understand it, no evidence  before  the
    Tribunal that the Appellant had made any attempt to  trace  his  mother
    and his sister, or that he had sought the assistance of the Home Office
    or of a non-governmental organisation (such as the  Red  Cross  or  Red
    Crescent) to do so.

21. On the other side of the coin, there were the Appellant's  private  and
    family life ties to the United  Kingdom.  Given  the  relatively  brief
    period during which the Appellant had resided in the United Kingdom  at
    the date of the hearing, it was entirely open to her to  conclude  that
    those ties were minimal.  I therefore find that the judge did not  make
    any error of law in relation to her Article 8 assessment.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 26th March 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly
