
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07917/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 March 2021                     |On 13 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                    CESM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Katani
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a male citizen of El Salvador who was born in 1998. He
    entered the United Kingdom in April 2019. His claim  for  international
    protection was refused by the Secretary of State by a decision dated  5
    August 2019. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  which,
    by a decision promulgated on 24 October 2019, dismissed the appeal. The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the First-tier Tribunal has erred  in  law  such  that  its
    decision falls to be set aside.  My  reasons  for  so  finding  are  as
    follows. The judge accepted that the appellant had been threatened by a
    gang in October 2018. He did not accept that  the  appellant  had  been
    threatened again in 2019. At [42], the judge noted that  the  appellant
    had lived the first 20 years of life in  El  Salvador  without  serious
    incident save for the threat in 2018 and that his family  continued  to
    live in the  country,  apparently  unmolested.  The  problem  with  the
    judge's analysis is that  expert  evidence  adduced  by  the  appellant
    raised difficulties which the appellant would be reasonably  likely  to
    meet on return which the judge has not addressed and an expert  opinion
    on  those  difficulties  which  the  judge  has  given  no  reason  for
    rejecting.  It was the appellant's case, based in part on the  evidence
    of his expert, that he would have problems  travelling  safely  through
    the country from the airport to his home area because of  the  presence
    of gangs who would be likely to stop,  interrogate  and  possibly  harm
    him. At [30] the judge states that he has considered the expert  report
    'very carefully' and  notes  at  [31]  that  other  objective  evidence
    recorded that gang members would stop and  question  strangers  passing
    through 'their area'.  However,  the  judge  has  not  considered  this
    evidence (the relevance of which did not rely upon the judge  accepting
    the entirety of the appellant's account) in determining risk on return.
    Moreover, it does not follow that, because the appellant had  lived  in
    the past in his home area  without  serious  incident,  he  would  now,
    having left it, be able safely to return. In consequence,  the  judge's
    analysis is incomplete and the appellant has not  been  given  adequate
    reasons to explain why his appeal was unsuccessful.

 3. I set aside the decision. I do not find that the  error  which  I  have
    described above has vitiated  the  findings  of  fact  reached  by  the
    Tribunal. In particular, I find that the findings at [19], [33],  [34],
    [35-41] shall stand. I am aware that 18 months have elapsed  since  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing and I am satisfied that the Tribunal  which
    remakes the decision should be able to hear evidence which updates  the
    appellant's circumstances and those pertaining in El Salvador  (a  CPIN
    is now available which the judge in 2019 did not have  the  benefit  of
    considering). Accordingly,  I  return  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo. I give listing instructions in bold type below.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The  findings
    detailed in my decision at [3]  above  shall  stand.  The  parties  may
    adduce fresh evidence  provided  copies  of  any  documentary  evidence
    (including witness statements) are sent to the other party and  to  the
    Tribunal no less than 10 days before the next hearing.

    Listing  Instructions:  Return  to  First-tier  Tribunal  for  de  novo
    hearing;  Glasgow;  first  available  date;  First-tier   Tribunal   to
    determine whether hearing shall be remote or face to  face;  Not  Judge
    McGrade; Spanish (Latin American) interpreter; 2 hours.

Signed                                           Date 31 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






































