
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |Appeal Number: PA/07575/2018     |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 August 2019                 |On 12 August 2019                |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                               hr (Bangladesh)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Gherman, instructed by Solicitors Inn Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of  court  proceedings.   I  make
this direction because this is decision relates to a protection claim.

 1. The appellant is a Bangladeshi national who was born on 1  April  1991.
    He entered the UK lawfully in 2009 and  re-entered  lawfully  in  2011.
    Some time after his leave to remain came to an end he  claimed  asylum,
    stating that he had suffered difficulties in Bangladesh on  account  of
    his membership of the Bangladesh National Party and that  he  would  be
    persecuted on account of his political opinion were he to return.   The
    appellant also stated that he had been politically active in the UK and
    that this would give rise to further problems on return.

 2. In her decision of 31 May 2018, the respondent gave a range of  reasons
    for  rejecting  the  appellant's  account  as  untrue.   The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and his appeal was heard  by  Judge
    Sweet, sitting at Hatton Cross on 30 January 2019.

 3.  In  the  decision  which  followed  that  hearing,  Judge  Sweet  also
    considered the appellant's account to be untrue.  Having noted that  it
    was part of the appellant's case that he was wanted  in  Bangladesh  on
    trumped-up charges dating from 2009, Judge  Sweet  gave  the  following
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's account.  At [33], he noted  that
    the appellant had returned to Bangladesh (in order to  marry)  in  2011
    and had suffered no problems.  At [34], he noted that the appellant had
    delayed significantly in claiming asylum.  At [35], he considered  that
    these two points 'considerably weaken his claim for asylum in the  UK'.
    At [36], Judge Sweet considered the medical  evidence  adduced  by  the
    appellant, which purported to confirm that  he  had  suffered  a  knife
    would at the hands of the opposing Awami League but 'no practitioner is
    able to confirm the exact cause of the injury', he concluded.  At [37],
    the judge held that the appellant's  sur  place  activities  would  not
    place him at risk and, at [38], he  concluded  that  First  Information
    Reports from 2009 would be unlikely to  place  the  appellant  at  risk
    because they were issued ten years ago.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Tufan accepted that the  judge's  decision
    could not stand.  It was apparent that a major plank of the credibility
    findings had been  reached  without  consideration  of  the  background
    material in the appellant's bundles.  The finding at [33]  -  that  the
    appellant would not have been able to return safely  to  Bangladesh  in
    2011 if he was wanted for false charges - could not stand in  light  of
    the conclusions of a Home Office Fact Finding  Mission  ("FFM")  report
    dated September 2017, in which it was recorded that the police and  the
    Immigration Police in Bangladesh have  very  little  communication  and
    that '99 per cent of people attempting to leave the  country,  even  if
    charged with a crime, and particularly if they were low profile,  would
    not face  difficulties  in  leaving  Bangladesh  through  the  official
    immigration channels'.  What appears at first blush to be  a  perfectly
    rational and common sense conclusion drawn by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    is therefore one which was reached without reference to the  background
    material and cannot stand.  I agree.

 5. In fairness to Judge Sweet, I add this.  The appellant was  represented
    by counsel before the First-tier Tribunal.   Although  the  appellant's
    ability  to  return  to  Bangladesh  in  2011  without  difficulty  was
    obviously going to be of concern to the Tribunal, and although the  FFM
    report was before the FtT, there was no reference to that report in the
    skeleton argument (which was titled "Skeleton Argument of the Appellant
    to Allow the Appeal").  The way in which the appellant's  evidence  was
    presented to the FtT further compounded the judge's difficulty.   There
    were four separate bundles, described  as  'files'  before  the  judge,
    three of which had separate indexes.  Even with the  assistance  of  Ms
    Gherman, who did not appear below, it took me some time at the  hearing
    even to locate  the  background  material  which  was  central  to  the
    resolution of  this  appeal.   It  is  scarcely  surprising,  in  these
    circumstances, that Judge Sweet failed to notice that there was  cogent
    evidence before him which undermined what would otherwise have  been  a
    perfectly  sensible  basis  for  doubting  the   credibility   of   the
    appellant's account.  Be that as  it  may,  the  determination  of  the
    appeal involved the making of an error on a point  of  law  and  it  is
    clear that the error was material to the outcome of the appeal.   As  a
    result, I set aside Judge Sweet's decision.  Both representatives urged
    me to remit the appeal to be reheard afresh in those circumstances, and
    I consider that to be the appropriate course.

 6. In an attempt to avoid the recurrence of the problems which occurred in
    the past, I hereby direct that  the  appellant's  representatives  will
    file and serve, not later than 10 days in advance of the  next  hearing
    before the FtT(IAC), a single composite bundle containing  all  of  the
    evidence upon which they seek to rely.  That  bundle  is  to  be  fully
    indexed and sequentially paginated and to be accompanied by a  skeleton
    argument with references to that bundle.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT(IAC) (Judge Sweet) is  set  aside.   The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross to be reheard  de  novo.
Anonymity is ordered as above.
                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
                               09 August 2019
