
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07233/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2018                            |On 28 November 2018           |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   Mr o e
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq born on 21 May 2000.  He arrived in
    the United Kingdom and claimed asylum.  His application was refused  in
    a decision dated 18 July 2017.  He appealed against that  decision  and
    his appeal came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hopkins  for
    hearing on 12 February 2018.

 2. In a decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  5  May  2018,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal.  Permission to appeal was sought one day  out  of
    time on the basis that the judge had erred materially in law:  firstly,
    in applying a higher standard of proof; secondly, in  failing  to  give
    proper consideration to the  expert  report;  thirdly,  in  failing  to
    provide adequate reasons for his findings and attach relevant weight to
    the evidence and erred in relying on a discrepancy as  to  whether  the
    Appellant  was  in  hiding  or  whether  the   authorities   knew   his
    whereabouts.  It was asserted that in terms of the reasons  challenged,
    that this related to  whether  the  Appellant  would  face  prosecution
    rather  than  persecution  and  whether  in  any  event,  treatment  in
    detention would amount to persecution.

 3. An extension of time was granted and permission to appeal in a decision
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Parker dated 30 April 2018, in  the
    following terms:

         "I have carefully considered the judge's decision. The  judge  made
         largely positive findings of fact until he came to consider whether
         the Appellant may be of interest to the authorities from paragraphs
         35 to 36. At paragraph 35 the judge stated that the Appellant could
         not confirm that they are currently looking  for  him  whereas  the
         correct standard of  proof  is  reasonable  likelihood.  The  judge
         relies on a discrepancy about whether the Appellant was  in  hiding
         or whether the authorities knew  his  whereabouts.   There  was  no
         indication that this discrepancy was put to  him  at  the  hearing.
         Reliance upon this alleged discrepancy is arguably a breach of  the
         Rules of natural justice and an error of law.  The judge appears to
         have placed little or no weight on the Appellant's  evidence  about
         the arrest of his  cousin.  The  judge  arguably  did  not  provide
         adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the  Appellant  would   face
         prosecution rather than persecution and  will  not  face  treatment
         amounting to persecution in detention having regard to the evidence
         in the expert report  set  out  at  paragraphs  40  to  41  of  the
         decision.  There is an arguable  error  of  law  in  the  decision.
         Permission to appeal is granted."

    Hearing

 4. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, there was no appearance by or
    on behalf of the Appellant.  His previous solicitors  who  had  drafted
    the grounds of appeal, Duncan Lewis, came off the record on 15  October
    2018 but the hearing notice had also been sent to the Appellant's  last
    known address.

 5. Mr Tan stated that letters had also been sent to the Appellant at  this
    address in July and September  of  this  year  but  the  Appellant  has
    essentially been missing since  May  2018.   His  discretionary  leave,
    granted because he was an unaccompanied minor, had expired but  an  in-
    time application had been made to extend his  leave  on  21st  November
    2017 and the Home Office have been following up on that.

 6. Given that there has been no contact with the Appellant  for  some  six
    months and he has no representative, there would have been little point
    in adjourning the appeal. I proceeded to deal  with  the  appeal  under
    rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,  on  the
    basis that the notice of hearing had been served on the Appellant and I
    considered it to be in the interests  of  justice  to  proceed  in  his
    absence.

 7. I heard submissions from Mr Tan, who acknowledged there was no Rule  24
    response.  He  submitted  there  was  more  detail  in  Judge  Parker's
    consideration than in the actual grounds of appeal.  He disagreed  with
    the submission in the grounds of appeal that the judge had applied  the
    wrong standard of proof at [34] and  [35].   The  judge  had  correctly
    identified the lower standard at [34] when he said, "I find there is  a
    reasonable likelihood that he did take part in the demonstrations on  9
    and 10 October 2015."  In  respect  of  the  discrepancies  as  to  the
    Appellant's whereabouts and whether or not this was put,  he  submitted
    that this was unclear, however this was not material  given  that  this
    was a  point  raised  in  the  asylum  refusal  decision  arising  from
    questions 84 and 85 of the asylum interview record and was addressed at
    [8] of the  Appellant's  witness  statement.   He  submitted  in  these
    circumstances it was open to the judge  to  make  a  finding  that  the
    Appellant's accounts have been inconsistent.  In relation to the arrest
    of the Appellant's cousin, this was not actually raised in the  grounds
    of appeal but was again an inconsistency.  The Appellant stated in  his
    interview record at question 86 that the Appellant's  cousin  had  been
    arrested because the authorities thought he was him  but  then  changed
    this to say that it was because  he  was  his  relative  and  that  the
    Appellant was at the demonstration as well. He submitted  that  it  was
    open to the judge to find as he did at [35]: "This does not explain why
    the authorities did not try to arrest  him  as  well  as  his  cousin."
    Moreover, the Appellant in his witness statement dated 5 September 2017
    said that he was in hiding in Qaladze but  this  is  inconsistent  with
    what he said in interview at question 85 which was that the authorities
    knew where he was.

 8.  In  relation  to  the  issue  of  whether  the  Appellant  would  face
    prosecution rather than persecution, Mr Tan submitted  that  the  judge
    makes reference to the contents of the expert  report  of  Dr  Farangis
    Ghaderi at [23], [24] and [36] and sets out that report in some detail.
     It was open to the judge to find the  Appellant  was  not  of  adverse
    interest to the authorities and on that basis the judge needed to go no
    further.  The claim as to the Appellant  facing  prosecution  was  only
    consideration in the alternative and the judge was entitled to  draw  a
    distinction between those detained on terrorism charges  and  those  on
    vandalism charges, see [40] to [43].  Mr Tan submitted that  the  judge
    was entitled to come to the findings he did and there was no basis of a
    risk of persecution or prosecution for the  Appellant  if  returned  to
    Iraq.  Consequently, there was no material error of law.

Decision and Reasons

 9. The judge made the following findings: at [31]  that  it  was  possible
    that the Appellant's face was shown in one of the video clips from  the
    demonstration in Qaladze on 9 and 10 October 2017; at  [33]  the  judge
    did not hold it against the Appellant that there was some inconsistency
    as to the age of Mohammed Rasul when he died; at [34] the  judge  found
    there was a reasonable likelihood the Appellant did take  part  in  the
    demonstrations on 9 and 10 October 2015 and  that  he  may  have  known
    Mohammed Rasul one of the people reported to have  died;  at  [36]  the
    judge accepted the evidence  of  the  expert  Dr  Ghaderi,  finding  as
    follows:

         "I accept that Dr Ghaderi is right in pointing out  that,  contrary
         to what has been stated in the refusal letter, people who took part
         in the demonstration had been arrested. But this has been in  order
         to charge them with vandalism and unlawful activity.  Non-  violent
         protest has been allowed to continue. The authorities  may  not  be
         aware that the Appellant was involved in the demonstrations or,  if
         they are aware, that he did anything unlawful during them."

10. At [37] the Judge held: "If they are aware of his participation in  the
    demonstration and he is of adverse interest to them the question arises
    whether his fear on return is of persecution or prosecution."  At  [39]
    the judge found that the Appellant was not simply a peaceful protestor,
    in that he threw stones and together with others  broke  into  the  KDP
    offices and trashed them.  At [40] the judge noted Dr Ghaderi's report,
    at [44] he cites sources indicating that the criminal justice system in
    Iraq and the KRI heavily relies on confessions  often  coerced  through
    torture and other forms of ill-treatment.   At  [41]  the  judge  again
    refers to Dr Ghaderi's report in relation to  the  Human  Rights  Watch
    Report, in respect of the demonstrations which records that  more  than
    100 protestors were detained and charged however there was no  evidence
    from her report as to what happened to those people: whether they  were
    kept in custody or ill- treated or did not receive  a  fair  trial  and
    there was no evidence  they  were  prosecuted  in  a  manner  that  was
    persecutory or that they received disproportionate sentences.

11. The judge at [42] found;

         "In the absence of  evidence  that  those  who  were  arrested  for
         vandalism during the protests were ill-treated, I am not  satisfied
         that this will be the case (i.e. that the  Appellant  would  be  at
         risk of an unfair trial or torture).  Further the  authorities  are
         likely to be  less  anxious  to  target  protestors  for  political
         reasons now more than two years after the event."

12. And at [43]:

         "In all the circumstances I am not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant
         would receive a thoroughly unfair trial or that he would receive  a
         punishment that is disproportionate to the acts he  has  committed.
         He may  be  detained  pending  trial  which  would  mean  he  would
         experience hardship but I am not satisfied that this would rise  to
         the level of serious harm which would make his  case  a  matter  of
         persecution rather than prosecution."

13. I have concluded that the decision of the  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
    contains material errors of law, in the following respects:

13.1.    The judge at  [35]  relies  on  a  discrepancy  about  whether  the
    Appellant was in hiding or whether the authorities knew his whereabouts
    and it does not appear that this discrepancy was  put  to  him  at  the
    hearing. Whilst Mr Tan submitted that this is not material  given  that
    the matter was raised in the Respondent's refusal decision, I find that
    the Appellant should have been given the opportunity to comment upon it
    in his oral evidence and thus reliance upon this alleged discrepancy is
    arguably a breach of the rules of natural justice and an error of  law.



13.2. The  judge  appears  to  have  placed  little  or  no  weight  on  the
    Appellant's evidence about the arrest of his cousin  and  whether  this
    would potentially place him at risk on return to Iraq and in fact makes
    no clear finding as to whether or not he accepted that the  Appellant's
    cousin had been arrested.

13.3. In light of the evidence of the expert, cited by  the  Judge  at  [40]
    that the criminal justice system in Iraq and the KRI relies heavily  on
    confessions, which are often coerced through torture and other forms of
    ill-treatment, which evidence the Judge appeared to accept, I find that
    he did not provide adequate reasons  for  finding  that  the  Appellant
    would face prosecution rather than persecution.

13.4.  I  further  find,  in  light  of  that  evidence,  that  the  Judge's
    conclusion that the Appellant would not  face  treatment  amounting  to
    persecution in detention at [41] and particularly, [42] and [43] of the
    decision also lacks adequate reasoning, bearing in mind  also  that  at
    that time the Appellant was a minor.

    Notice of Decision

14. For the reasons set out above, I find material errors  of  law  in  the
    decision of First tier Tribunal Judge  Hopkins.  I  set  that  decision
    aside and remit the appeal for a hearing do novo before the First  tier
    Tribunal.

15. I make the following directions:

         (i)  none of the findings of fact are preserved;

         (ii) the appeal shall be listed for 2 hours;

         (iii)    a Kurdish Sorani interpreter will be required;


         (iv) in light of the Appellant's non-appearance, the Respondent is
             directed to inform the First tier Tribunal pursuant to rule 16
             of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration
             and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014, if he becomes aware that the
             Appellant has left the country. If the Appellant is still in
             the United Kingdom he is directed to contact the First tier
             Tribunal confirming that he wishes to pursue his appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 22 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

