
[pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |Appeal number: PA/07199/2016         |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |                                     |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|Heard at:|Field House               | |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On       |27 September 2017         |    On  1 December 2017       |       |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral                                          |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |[W A]                                             |Appellant    |
|           |(Anonymity Order not made)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr J Dhanji, of Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer.

                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

Anonymity

1.    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order. I have not
      been asked to make one and see no reason to do so.

Introduction

2.    The Appellant has been granted permission to appeal  the  decision  of
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lucas (hereafter "the judge") who, in
      a decision promulgated on 22 June 2017, dismissed his  appeal  against
      the Respondent's decision of 22 June 2015  to  refuse  his  protection
      claim.





Background

3.    The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Pakistan.  He  claimed  international
    protection on the ground that he will be at real  risk  of  persecution
    and ill-treatment in Pakistan on the basis that he will be  subject  to
    forced recruitment by the Taliban.

4.    As the Respondent accepted the Appellant's  account  of  past  events,
    the hearing before the judge proceeded by way of submissions. The  live
    issues before the judge were the issues of  sufficiency  of  protection
    and internal relocation. The judge resolved these  issues  against  the
    Appellant. The judge observed that the Appellant's father was  able  to
    secure the services of an agent to arrange  the  Appellant's  departure
    from Pakistan, and  took  account  of  his  ability  to  relocate  from
    Pakistan to the UK. The judge noted that it was unexplained how or  why
    the Appellant's father did not travel with him and found  that  it  was
    inconceivable that he would entrust the  Appellant's  wellbeing  to  an
    agent without providing his contact details either to the Appellant  or
    to the agent.

5.     The  judge  also  noted  the  Respondent's  efforts  to   trace   the
    Appellant's father, but he had not  been  furnished  with  the  precise
    information provided by the Appellant and noted that no  reference  was
    made by the Appellant to his maternal uncle. The judge  thus  concluded
    that the Appellant had family in Pakistan. The judge  then  dealt  with
    the issue of sufficiency of protection in the following terms:

         "36. The Tribunal does not accept that there is a general  lack  of
         State Protection available in  Pakistan.  There  is  a  functioning
         police  and  military  which  devote  considerable   resources   to
         combating radical groups within that country. There  is  no  reason
         why the Appellant could not avail himself of  State  Protection  in
         any area way from his home area of Pakistan. He has  shown  himself
         to be able to live and adapt to life in the UK. There is no  reason
         why that could not occur in another area  of  Pakistan,  well  away
         from his home area.

         37. The Tribunal does not accept that the Taliban would either have
         the will or desire to attempt to trace and  then  forcibly  recruit
         the Appellant in a big city away from  his  home  area  -  such  as
         Islamabad or Karachi. In any event, there is a  functioning  system
         of State Protection available in these cities."

6.    Those findings were dispositive  of  the  claim  and  accordingly  the
    judge dismissed the appeal.

Permission to Appeal

7.    The grounds seeking permission complain that the judge  erred  in  law
    in allowing a procedural irregularity in not putting to  the  Appellant
    the allegation that he was not telling the  truth  about  his  lack  of
    contact  with  his  father  and/or  maternal  uncle,  and  the  judge's
    assessment in relation to this issue was  factually  incorrect.  It  is
    further argued that the judge failed to engage  with  or  consider  the
    country background evidence relied upon by the Appellant in support  of
    his claim that there was insufficient  state  protection  available  to
    him. First-tier Tribunal Judge Osbourne  considered  that  the  grounds
    were arguable and granted permission on 20 July 2017.





Decision on Error of Law

8.    At the  hearing  both  representatives  made  submissions.  Mr  Dhanji
    amplified his grounds and Mr Tufan,  while  acknowledging  the  errors,
    submitted that they were not material - there is a large population  in
    Pakistan and the Appellant as a young adult who had some experience  of
    travel could relocate to another area of Pakistan.

9.    After hearing the submissions of the representatives, I  announced  my
    decision that I was satisfied that the judge erred in  law  and  I  now
    give my reasons for doing so.

10.   I consider  that  the  central  submissions  made  by  Mr  Dhanji  are
correct.

11.   First, I accept there was a procedural  irregularity  giving  rise  to
    unfairness. The core elements of the Appellant's factual  account  were
    accepted by the Respondent. In the  refusal  the  Respondent  takes  no
    issue with the Appellant's account that he does not have  contact  with
    his family and no contrary submissions were made at the hearing by  the
    Respondent's representative. The judge at [29]  noted  the  concessions
    made by the Respondent  and  thus  the  hearing  proceeded  by  way  of
    submissions. In the circumstances, while the judge was entitled to have
    concerns about the Appellant's evidence, he should  have  raised  those
    concerns at the hearing to  enable  the  Appellant  an  opportunity  to
    address them. I agree with Mr Dhanji that it was unfair not to do so.

12.   Second, I also accept Mr Dhanji's submission that there  is  an  error
    of fact at [32] in that, the judge failed to identify  the  Appellant's
    explanation in his witness statement as  to  why  his  father  did  not
    travel with him, which infects the judge's  conclusion  that  there  is
    family support  in  Pakistan  and,  in  turn,  undermines  the  judge's
    conclusion that internal flight is reasonable.

13.   Third,  I  also  consider  that  the  judge  conducted  no  meaningful
    assessment of whether a sufficiency of protection was available to  the
    Appellant on the basis of evidence. The question of whether there is  a
    sufficiency of protection  is  a  fact  sensitive  issue.  The  judge's
    conclusions at [36] and [37] are formed without  any  analysis  of  the
    facts or background evidence. The Appellant claimed that his life is at
    risk because he was from the NWFP region of Pakistan and that  in  that
    region  the  authorities  are  unable  to  provide  a  sufficiency   of
    protection. The background evidence referred to by  Mr  Dhanji  in  his
    Skeleton Argument before the judge arguably supports that claim.  There
    is no analysis or assessment of that evidence when there ought to  have
    been.  I  am  thus  satisfied  that   the   judge's   conclusions   are
    unsustainable.

14.   In the circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  above  errors  are
    material and are sufficient to render the Decision unsafe. While  I  do
    not say that the judge's decision to dismiss the appeal was not open to
    him, it is the manner and route  by  which  that  conclusion  has  been
    reached which is flawed.

15.   For all the above reasons, I set aside the decision of the judge.  The
    effect of my decision is that the Appellant's appeal will  need  to  be
    determined on the merits on all issues. I  was  unable  to  remake  the
    decision at the hearing as no  interpreter  had  been  booked  for  the
    hearing. Mr Tufan submitted that further evidence would be required and
    invited me to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.  Mr  Dhanji
    did not dissent from such a course.

16.   In most cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the  decision
    will be able to re-make the  relevant  decision  itself.  However,  the
    Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the  Upper
    Tribunal at para 7.2 recognises that it may not  be  possible  for  the
    Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is  satisfied
    that:

         "(a)     the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
             that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
             is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

17.   In my judgment, this case falls within para  7.2  (b).  Given  that  I
      have decided that the Appellant's case will need to be decided on  the
      merits on all issues and  having  regard  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
      judgment in JD (Congo) & Others [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I am of the  view
      that a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal  is  the  right  course  of
      action.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision is set  aside  in  its  entirety.  This
case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing on the  merits  on
all issues by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lucas.







Signed                                             Date: 15 November 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


