
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07521/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided on the papers                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 March 2020                     |On 21 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     A D
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Row promulgated on 15 October 2019  ("the  Decision"),  dismissing  her
    appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 23  July  2019  refusing
    her protection claim.

 2. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant  on
    3 January 2020 but granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith (no  relation)
    on 11 February 2020 in the following terms:

         "1.  The appellant had been accepted to be a victim of  trafficking
         by the Competent Authority.  Although the judge did not have a copy
         of the conclusive grounds decision, and did not know the  reasoning
         adopted by the competent authority (see [13], [32], [56]), arguably
         he should only have departed from that assessment if satisfied that
         the decision was irrational: see MS (Pakistan) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 594.   Arguably,  as  judge
         was unable to engage in any analysis as to  whether  the  Competent
         Authority's decision was irrational (for he had not been  furnished
         with a copy), it was arguably not open to him to conclude that  the
         appellant was not a victim of trafficking.  The  judge's  reasoning
         at [56] is arguably confused, as  the  judge  attempts  to  draw  a
         distinction  between  negative  and  positive  conclusive   grounds
         decisions, yet arguably fails to make sense when  doing  so:  "[the
         competent authority's positive] decision is not binding  on  me  in
         the same way that if the competent authority  had  made  a  finding
         that the appellant had not been trafficked that decision would  not
         be binding on me either."

         2.   Arguably, the judge should have considered the impact that the
         appellant's trauma as a victim of trafficking would have  had  upon
         her ability to give an account  upon  her  arrival  in  the  United
         Kingdom."

 3. On 26 February 2020, the Respondent filed a Rule  24  Reply  indicating
    that she did not oppose the Appellant's  "application  for  permission"
    [sic] "on the basis that the FTT should have had the conclusive grounds
    before it to decide whether or not it was irrational  and  invites  the
    Tribunal to remit the matter back to the FTT for a de novo hearing".

 4. By a decision sent on 28 February 2020, UTJ Allen proposed that, unless
    submissions to the contrary were  received  from  either  party  within
    fourteen days of that date, the matter would be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  hearing.   No  submissions  have  been
    received.  Accordingly, I am satisfied that the  Decision  contains  an
    error of law and I set it aside.  I remit the appeal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing before a Judge other than Judge Row.



Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Row  promulgated  on  15  October
2019 discloses an error of law. I  therefore  set  aside  the  decision.   I
remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing  before  a
Judge other than Judge Row.


Signed[pic]                         Dated:  20 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith



