
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07305/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 April 2019                      |On 10 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Geovanny [T]
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Plowright, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This decision is a remaking  of  the  appeal  of  Mr  [T]  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to deport him dated 12 July 2016 and  the
    refusal of his asylum and human  rights  claim,  those  decision  being
    dated 24 July 2017.  The appeal requires re-making following  an  error
    of law decision dated 25 January 2019 of the Upper Tribunal  which  set
    aside the decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Beach which had allowed
    the appeal against deportation on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department  as  the  respondent  and  to  Mr  [T]  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Ecuador, born on  11  January  1991.   He
    came to the UK in 1998 at the age of 7 years old.  He was  subsequently
    granted indefinite leave to remain (ILR) in 2005 as  the  dependant  of
    his mother.  It is undisputed that he returned to Ecuador on  a  family
    visit for approximately two months in 2009.

 4. It is also  undisputed  that  the  appellant  has  a  very  significant
    criminal history.  On 6 September 2008 he was convicted of robbery  and
    given a six month referral order.  On 31 May 2011 he was  convicted  of
    manslaughter and robbery and was sentenced to ten  years'  imprisonment
    for each offence, to run concurrently.

 5. On 24 August 2011 the appellant was served with a liability to  removal
    notice, to which he responded.  On 14 February 2014 he stated  that  he
    feared persecution and that was treated  as  an  asylum  claim.   On  4
    September 2015 the appellant was served with a decision  to  deport  in
    which the respondent invited him to seek to rebut the presumption under
    Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that  he
    had been convicted of a particularly serious crime  and  constituted  a
    danger to the community.  The appellant responded on 16 September 2015,
    referring to his private and family life in the UK and  asserting  that
    his deportation would breach his Article 8 human rights.

 6. On 12 July 2016 the respondent refused the appellant's  protection  and
    human rights claims and certified  the  claims  under  Section  94  and
    Section 94B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  On 22
    July 2016 the respondent made a deportation order against the appellant
    under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.   Following  litigation
    in  the  higher  courts,  the  respondent  withdrew  the  decision   on
    certification and made a fresh,  non-certified  decision  refusing  the
    appellant's protection and human rights claims on 24 July 2017.

 7. The appellant appealed against deportation on asylum and  human  rights
    grounds to the First-tier Tribunal.  His case  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Beach on 23 May 2018.  The decision allowing the  appeal
    on "very compelling circumstances" grounds was issued on 27 June  2018.



 8. The respondent was granted permission to appeal against the decision of
    Judge Beach on 12 November 2018.  The error of law hearing was heard on
    15 January 2019 before Mrs Justice Farbey sitting as an Upper  Tribunal
    Judge and Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede.  Their decision,  issued  on  25
    January 2019, found  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    disclosed an error of law.  The decision was set aside to be remade  in
    the Upper Tribunal.  The decision was not remade at the same hearing as
    it was considered appropriate to allow the appellant to adduce  further
    evidence concerning cohabitation with his partner and their child.

 9. The decision of the Upper Tribunal finding an error of law was clear as
    to the scope of the remaking required.  The First-tier Tribunal did not
    find that the appellant could meet the provisions of paragraphs 399  or
    399A of the Immigration Rules.  It would not be unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant's partner or child if he were to be deported.  The  appellant
    has not been in the UK lawfully for most of his life and the First-Tier
    Tribunal found that he could not show very significant obstacles to re-
    integration in Ecuador. The Upper Tribunal stated in  paragraph  22  of
    the error of law decision that "We see no reason, however,  to  disturb
    the judge's findings under paragraphs 399  and  399A".  These  findings
    stand,  therefore,  and  must  form  part  of  the   "very   compelling
    circumstances" assessment" that must be re-made where it was  found  at
    paragraphs 19 onwards of the Upper Tribunal decision that the  material
    before the First-Tier Tribunal had not permitted  the  conclusion  that
    there were "very compelling circumstances".

10. It was also my clear view that the provisions  of  paragraphs  399  and
    399A were not met even taking into account the new material  concerning
    the strength of the family life that the appellant has with his partner
    and their child.  It was not disputed that the appellant has  cohabited
    with his partner and child for nearly a year and that their family life
    together would have become stronger during that period.

11. The "unduly harsh"  test  remains  that  approved  in  KO  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 at [27]  from
    the case of MK (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC):

         "Unduly harsh does not  equate  with  uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
         undesirable or merely difficult.  Rather, it poses  a  considerably
         more  elevated  threshold.   'Harsh'  in  this   context,   denotes
         something severe, or bleak.  It is the  antipathy  of  pleasant  or
         comfortable.  Furthermore, the addition of the verb 'unduly' raises
         an already elevated standard still higher."

12. Lord Carnwath indicated in KO that:

         "The expression 'unduly harsh' seems clearly intended to  introduce
         a  higher  hurdle  than  that  of  'reasonableness'  under  Section
         117B(6), taking account of the public interest in  the  deportation
         of foreign  criminals.   Further,  the  word  'unduly'  implies  an
         element of comparison ... One is looking for a degree of  harshness
         going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced
         with the deportation of a parent."

13. Following KO, the appellant's offending behaviour plays no part in  the
    "unduly harsh" assessment. It remains the case that the  evidence  here
    cannot show "a degree of harshness going beyond what would  necessarily
    be involved for any child faced with a deportation of a  parent".   The
    distress  the  family  will  experience,  movingly  expressed  by   the
    appellant's partner in her evidence, is that which any family with  the
    normal, close bonds would face on the deportation of a  loving  father.
    The "unduly harsh" test set by Parliament, as elaborated by the  higher
    courts, cannot be met here.

14. As set out  in  NA  (Pakistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and  Others  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  662,  the  failure  to  meet
    paragraphs 399 and 399A  (and  the  equivalent  provisions  in  section
    117C), forms part of the "very compelling circumstances" assessment.

15. I must also apply the approach set out in the  Supreme  Court  case  of
    Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]
    UKSC 60, in particular, paragraph 46:

         "46. These observations  apply  a  fortiori  to  tribunals  hearing
             appeals against deportation decisions.  The special feature in
             that context is that the decision under  review  has  involved
             the application of rules which have been made by the Secretary
             of State in the exercise of a responsibility entrusted to  her
             by Parliament, and which Parliament has approved.  It  is  the
             duty of appellate tribunals, as independent  judicial  bodies,
             to  make  their  own  assessment  of  the  proportionality  of
             deportation in any particular case on the basis of  their  own
             findings as to  the  facts  and  their  understanding  of  the
             relevant law.  But, where the Secretary of State has adopted a
             policy based on a general assessment of proportionality, as in
             the present case, they should attach  considerable  weight  to
             that assessment: in particular, that a custodial  sentence  of
             four  years  or  more  represents  such  a  serious  level  of
             offending  that  the  public  interest   in   the   offender's
             deportation    almost    always    outweighs    countervailing
             considerations of private or family life;  that  great  weight
             should generally be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  the
             deportation of a foreign offender who has received a custodial
             sentence  of  more  than  12  months;  and  that,  where   the
             circumstances do not fall within rules 399 or 399A, the public
             interest in the deportation of such offenders can generally be
             outweighed only  by  countervailing  factors  which  are  very
             compelling, as explained in paras 37-38 above. (my emphasis)"

16. The case of Olarewaju confirms that, having made  a  finding  that  the
    provisions of  paragraphs  399  and  399A  are  not  met,  there  is  a
    requirement for a  holistic  assessment  of  whether  "very  compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described  in  paragraphs  399  and
    399A" capable of outweighing the public interest are shown.

17. I therefore considered the factors weighing on the appellant's side  of
    the balance in order to assess if they could  meet  the  "considerable"
    weight of the appellant's ten year convictions where a sentence of even
    four years or more "almost always" outweighs family  and  private  life
    considerations.

18.  I  have  indicated  that  the  appellant's  family  life   will   have
    strengthened in the last year  as  he  has  been  cohabiting  with  his
    partner and their child.  There was agreement that a  number  of  other
    positive findings remained extant from the paragraphs 57 to 64  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal decision.  The  appellant  has  significant  family
    ties in the UK with both of his  parents,  aunts  and  uncles  and  his
    siblings and their children. At the hearing  before  me,  as  at  other
    hearings, these relatives  attended  to  show  their  support  for  the
    appellant and his partner.

19. It was also accepted that the  appellant's  mother  is  suffering  from
    mental health issues but that she has other  children  in  the  UK  who
    could provide support were he to be deported.  It is accepted, however,
    that her mental health issues are exacerbated by her anxiety about  the
    appellant's potential deportation.

20. There is also no dispute that the appellant came to the UK when he  was
    aged 7, was granted ILR in 2005 and has lived in the UK for over twenty
    years.  Given the amount of time that  he  has  been  absent  from  the
    Ecuador and his having had only one visit there, it was agreed that his
    ties to the country are minimal but that he retained some  ties  as  he
    had some relatives still  there,  a  paternal  aunt  and  his  maternal
    grandmother as well as having family friends of his father there.   His
    father has also visited the country as recently as 2017.

21. The appellant's partner spoke of her personal  antipathy  to  going  to
    Ecuador because of traumatic experiences she had there when a child and
    of the very significant expense involved.  She indicated that she would
    not wish to expose her own child to the same risks and that it would be
    very difficult to afford to go there even once a year.  I take  all  of
    that into account at its highest.

22. The respondent also accepted that at the  time  of  the  initial  OASys
    assessment the appellant was assessed at low risk  of  reoffending  and
    considered to be at low risk of serious harm whilst in custody  but  as
    high risk of serious harm to the public in the community.   In  October
    2016 this level of risk of harm was reduced from  high  to  medium.   A
    letter from Probation Services dated 6 February 2018 commented  on  his
    insight into his offending behaviour, the fact that  he  has  distanced
    himself from antisocial peers, spends most of his time being an  active
    father and had shown willingness  to  comply  with  the  terms  of  his
    licence.  There was no issue  concerning  reoffending  or  any  adverse
    involvement with the authorities since his release from  detention.   I
    should point out, however, that this is the behaviour  to  be  expected
    from an offender and not a factor  that  could  reduce  the  very  high
    public interest in deportation to any material degree.

23. I placed in the balance all of the positive aspects of the  appellant's
    case as set out  above.   It  remains  my  judgment  that  the  factors
    weighing  on  the  appellant's  side  of  the  balance,  even   weighed
    cumulatively and holistically,  are  not  capable  of  outweighing  the
    public interest in deportation where the appellant has received  a  ten
    year conviction for manslaughter and a concurrent ten year sentence for
    robbery.  As in paragraph 46 of Hesham Ali, Parliament has decided that
    "a custodial sentence of four years or more represents such  a  serious
    level  of  offending  that  the  public  interest  in  the   offender's
    deportation almost always outweighs  countervailing  considerations  of
    private or family life".  The appellant's offending is of a much higher
    magnitude than four years and the factors weighing in  his  favour  are
    clearly not capable  of  meeting  the  very  high  public  interest  in
    deportation here.

24. I make this decision aware that that it will bring  great  distress  to
    the appellant, his partner, his child and his wider family.  All  those
    concerned will be affected, in particular the appellant's  partner  and
    child who may well not feel able to visit him in Ecuador or be able  to
    afford to do so.  It remains the case that the  approach  set  down  by
    Parliament and clarified by the  higher  courts  affords  of  only  one
    outcome on the  evidence  presented  here,  that  there  are  not  very
    compelling circumstances capable of outweighing the public interest  in
    the appellant's deportation.

25. For these reasons, therefore, I remake this appeal as refused.



Notice of Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error on  a  point
    of law and was set aside to be remade.

27. I remake the appeal as refused.


Signed:  [pic]    Date: 8 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

