
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07547/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th August 2018                            |On 18th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                                    [M H]
                             (ANONYMITY ORDERED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Uddin (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against a  decision  to  refuse  his  protection
    claim was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  A  K  Hussain  ("the
    judge") in a decision promulgated on 14th May 2018.   The  judge  found
    the appellant to be an unreliable witness and disbelieved his claim  to
    have been kidnapped in Pakistan.  So far as a fear of  the  authorities
    because of his sexual orientation was concerned, the judge  disbelieved
    parts of the appellant's account and found that he was not at real risk
    of adverse attention from the authorities in Pakistan, as a homosexual.
     The judge also found that the appellant's removal would not breach his
    Article 8 rights, accepting that he had, as at the date of  hearing  in
    May 2018, been in a relationship with a male partner  for  about  three
    months.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier Tribunal Judge on  the
    basis that although the appellant had always lived discreetly, as found
    by the judge, it was arguable that the principles and guidance  derived
    from HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 were misapplied.  There was  no  Rule  24
    response from the Secretary of State.

Submissions on Error of Law

3.   Mr Uddin said that the judge erred in his partial  reading  of  country
    evidence  and  his  finding  that  prosecutions   on   the   basis   of
    homosexuality were rare, at paragraph 17 of the decision.  The  country
    evidence before the Tribunal went further.  So far  as  HJ  (Iran)  was
    concerned, the judge failed to properly apply guidance  given  in  that
    case.

4.    The  respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  is  homosexual.    At
    paragraph 21, the judge found that he has always lived  discreetly  and
    continues to  live  discreetly  as  a  gay  man,  because  of  societal
    pressures.  However, at paragraph 26  of  his  witness  statement,  the
    appellant provided a different account.  He referred  there  to  having
    lived as an openly gay man, stating that he  was  good  at  hiding  his
    sexuality from others in Pakistan to avoid judgment, as well as harm to
    himself.  Having lived openly as a gay person in the United Kingdom, he
    cannot live as he did when he was  in  Pakistan.   The  judge  gave  no
    reasons for rejecting this account and the  appellant's  oral  evidence
    and there was no reasoning in paragraph 21 regarding why the  appellant
    concealed his  sexuality  in  Pakistan.   The  third  of  the  critical
    questions in HJ (Iran) was not answered.  Even if the judge  were  able
    to find that the appellant lived discreetly in the past, he  failed  to
    ask why this was so.  The evidence before the Tribunal showed that  the
    appellant would conceal his sexuality because  of  the  risk  of  harm.
    This was sufficient to meet the  HJ  (Iran)  test.   Paragraph  21  was
    essentially unreasoned.

5.   The evidence before the Tribunal did not show that  the  appellant  had
    always lived discreetly because of  societal  pressures  and  to  avoid
    distressing his parents.  The appellant had another reason  for  acting
    in that way, to avoid  harm.   The  Country  Information  and  Guidance
    showed that social elites might live openly in Pakistan but not  people
    in the appellant's circumstances.  Discretion was required in the  case
    of someone like the appellant.

6.   The judge went on to reject the authenticity of  the  FIR  relied  upon
    but the finding in this context neither added nor  detracted  from  the
    appellant's credibility regarding his sexuality and made no difference.
     The respondent accepted that the appellant was gay.  The  judge  found
    that Article 8 was not engaged, in the  family  life  context  but  the
    appellant had been in a relationship with a male partner for some three
    months by the date of the  hearing.   The  appellant's  partner  was  a
    refugee whose claim was based on sexuality and the  judge  should  have
    found that Article 8 was engaged in these circumstances.

7.   Mr Clarke said that the appellant's credibility was  at  large  in  the
    appeal.  At paragraphs 6 to 13 of the decision, the judge gave  reasons
    for rejecting the appellant's claim to be of adverse interest by reason
    of his political opinion.  At paragraph 14, he began to engage with the
    claim  based  on  sexual  orientation  and   raised   the   appellant's
    credibility as a salient issue.  He considered the  incident  described
    by the appellant in which a report was made to the police  and  an  FIR
    prepared.  The appellant claimed that his family found  out  about  his
    sexuality  at  this  point.   A  witness  statement  appeared  in   the
    appellant's bundle, dated  23rd  August  2014,  four  years  after  the
    incident described in the FIR.  The FIR was apparently filed by someone
    who described himself  as  a  friend  of  the  appellant,  whereas  the
    appellant referred to a "religious  guy"  as  responsible.   The  judge
    moved on, at paragraph  18,  to  maintain  the  focus  on  whether  the
    appellant  practised  his  homosexuality  discreetly  in  Pakistan  and
    without difficulty.  The credibility findings were made  in  the  round
    and the judge was entitled to conclude as he did.  So far as Article  8
    was concerned, the judge had in mind the appellant's case,  as  clearly
    shown at paragraph 27 of the decision.  The finding that Article 8  was
    not engaged in this context was open  to  him  in  view  of  the  short
    duration of the relationship at the time.

8.   In a brief reply, Mr Uddin said that the rejection of  the  case  based
    on political opinion had no real bearing on the appellant's claim to be
    at risk in the light of his sexuality.  Even if the kidnapping incident
    claimed to have occurred did not, in fact, occur at all, this was of no
    real import.  The appellant was living discreetly because of  his  fear
    of being caught by the authorities.

Findings and Conclusions on Error of Law

9.   I find that the decision contains a material error of law.  My  reasons
    for so concluding are as follows.

10.  At paragraphs 17 and 21, the judge referred to the April  2016  Country
    Information and Guidance on Pakistan, concerning sexual orientation and
    gender identity.  He accurately recorded that this guidance states that
    the authorities rarely prosecute individuals for homosexuality and that
    in general, gay men are not at real risk of prosecution.  This is taken
    from the summary at paragraph 3.1.1  of  the  document.   However,  the
    judge makes no mention of paragraph 3.1.2, also in the  summary,  where
    the guidance states that there is no effective protection  provided  by
    the authorities against widespread  and  systemic  state  and  societal
    discrimination, including harassment and violence.  This treatment may,
    in individual cases, amount to persecution or a risk of serious harm.

11.  At paragraph  21,  the  judge  summarises  what  he  describes  as  the
    objective evidence in the County Information and  Guidance  as  showing
    that homosexuality is tolerated in the  community  so  long  as  it  is
    practised discreetly.  This is a partial reading of the  guidance.   At
    paragraph 7.1.5, for example, evidence drawn from EASO  (and  drawn  in
    turn from sources reporting to EASO) shows that even in  large  cities,
    those in the LGBT community are at risk  of  exposure  to  violence  or
    blackmail if  they  seek  to  live  together  in  same-sex  or  similar
    relationships  and  this  becomes  known.   There  is  some  tolerance,
    according to these sources, where a claimant is  urban,  well  educated
    and from the middle or upper middle classes.

12.  The absence of a real risk of prosecution by the authorities does  not,
    of itself, show an absence of a real risk of persecution.

13.   Furthermore,  paragraph  26  of  the  appellant's  witness   statement
    supports the submission made by Mr Uddin that  the  appellant  did  not
    hide his sexuality and  live  discreetly  merely  because  of  societal
    pressures and a desire not to distress his  parents  or  embarrass  his
    friends.  That paragraph refers expressly to  a  fear  that  return  to
    Pakistan would require him to hide his sexuality "to avoid persecution"
    and a statement that when he lived in Pakistan, he was good  at  hiding
    his sexuality "from others to  avoid  judgment  as  well  as  harm  to"
    himself.  The case he presented engaged the Refugee Convention.

14.  The decision contains  insufficient  reasoning  to  fully  explain  the
    conclusion that the appellant was not at real risk  of  persecution  on
    return to Pakistan.  Although the judge might  have  reached  the  same
    overall conclusion, greater engagement with the  country  evidence  and
    with the particular case advanced by the appellant was required.

15.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and must be set aside and re-made.  In a brief discussion with  the
    representatives, both were agreed that as full  fact-finding  would  be
    required, and as the credibility of the appellant's core  claims  would
    be in issue, the appropriate venue is the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It  will  be  re-made
in the First-tier Tribunal, before a judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge A K Hussain, on the first available date.  No  findings  of  fact  are
preserved.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



ANONYMITY

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no order  or  direction  prohibiting  the
identification of the appellant.  I make an order under Rule  14(1)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, prohibiting  the  disclosure
or publication of any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, his partner or any member of  his  family.   Failure
to comply with this order may amount to a contempt  of  court.   This  order
applies to both parties.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


