
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07971/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6th February 2018                 |On 23rd February 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                    [A H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant first arrived in the UK on the 15th of January  2016  and
    claimed asylum shortly afterwards. His application was refused and  his
    appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes in  a  decision
    promulgated on the 16th of February 2017. Following a challenge by  the
    Appellant that decision was set aside by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede
    for the reasons set out in the decision of the 30th of August 2017.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever  at
    Newport on the 17th of October  2017  and  dismissed  in  his  decision
    promulgated on the 1st of November 2017. In that decision  Judge  Lever
    found that the Appellant's account was not credible. The  reasons  were
    given in paragraphs 20 to 31. The Judge noted that it was accepted that
    the Appellant was an Iraqi Kurd and that the area he said he  was  from
    was not challenged. The Judge rejected the Appellant's claim  of  being
    of interest to ISIS, his detention and subsequent escape and had regard
    to his failure to  claim  asylum  when  passing  through  a  number  of
    European countries. With regard to his return to Iraq the  Judge  found
    that the Appellant had lived in the IKR and could do so and had  family
    members who could assist him in obtaining the necessary documentation.

 3. The grounds of application argue that  the  finding  that  it  was  not
    credible that ISIS would hold someone for 9 months was  unreasoned  and
    not supported  by  objective  evidence.  The  second  ground  was  that
    Appellant's Facebook posts were public and would  place  him  at  risk,
    third and fourth grounds related to the safety of return, the lack of a
    safe route and the Appellant's lack of  documentation.  Permission  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge E S Martins on the 7th of December
    2017.

 4. At the hearing the Appellant was not represented. The case was put back
    to obtain an interpreter in Kurdish Sorani to assist the Appellant.  At
    the start of the hearing it was established that the Appellant and  the
    interpreter understood each other and the procedure was explained.  The
    grounds of application were taken as the basis of the Appellant's  case
    and summarised for his benefit. The Appellant had nothing to add at the
    first stage of the hearing.

 5. For the Home Office it was submitted that the challenge  that  findings
    were unreasoned, particularly paragraph 21, ignored the  evidence  that
    was summarised in paragraphs 5 and 6 and that had been produced by  the
    Appellant's representatives.  The  Judge  had  referred  to  background
    evidence in paragraphs 20, 21, 47 and 48. The challenge overlooked  the
    fact that the Appellant had  not  been  found  credible.  The  evidence
    showed the position in-country and the intensity of ISIS.  The  finding
    was consistent with that in paragraph 22.

 6. With regard to the Appellant's Facebook posts many of those  relied  on
    did not show the globe icon, only page 13 did so,  many  had  not  been
    translated, others were the Appellant sharing posts. It  was  submitted
    that the findings were open to the Judge.

 7. So far as the position under AA was concerned in paragraph 23 the Judge
    had considered the risk, the Appellant had stayed in the IKR for over 6
    months and there was no well-founded fear from Arabs. The Appellant was
    a Kurd living in a Kurdish region and had worked. In paragraph  25  the
    Appellant's failure to claim on  route  reduced  his  credibility.  The
    Appellant would be returned to Baghdad and the claim to have no  family
    was rejected.

 8. In reply the Appellant said that he had video evidence.  In  France  he
    had decided to stay but the Police raided the camp  and  arrested  them
    and the same happened in Dunkirk. I reminded  the  Appellant  that  the
    focus was on the Judge's decision. The Appellant maintained that he was
    an active member on Facebook. After the Newport hearing there had  been
    fighting between Iraqi and Kurdish forces. ISIS had  invaded  Iraq  and
    taken over 50% of the territory and victims had included Yazidis, Arabs
    and Kurds, a more thorough investigation would have  seen  a  different
    decision. All the Appellant's documents had been left  behind  and  the
    area was controlled by ISIS. He was smuggled  as  he  did  not  have  a
    passport.

 9. The grounds complain that the Judge gave no basis for his  observations
    on the nature of ISIS but the grounds do not point to any evidence that
    would support that a different conclusion would be justified. The Judge
    referred to the background evidence and sources are to the effect  that
    ISIS  is/was  a  brutal  and  uncompromising  organisation,  the  well-
    publicised beheadings and mass  slaughter  of  captured  Iraqi  troops,
    information clearly in the public domain, indicate that.  The  findings
    set out in  paragraphs  21  and  22  were  justified  on  the  evidence
    generally  available  and  public  and  open  to  the  Judge   in   the
    circumstances that the Appellant had outlined including his ability  to
    escape and emerge "unscathed".

10. The Facebook issue was discussed in paragraph 24.  The  timing  of  the
    setting up of the account was a relevant feature as was the  flurry  of
    activity described and the nature of the  material  being  posted.  The
    absence of translations would have reduced the  weight  that  could  be
    attached. The Judge did not  consider  this  aspect  superficially  and
    rejected the claim that it was in the public domain and I bear in  mind
    the observations  about  the  globe  icon  recorded  above.  The  Judge
    observed that there would be many millions of such posts in  any  event
    and rejected the suggestion that the Appellant would be  identified  by
    anyone within the IKR. The complaint made ignores the approach that the
    Judge took and does not demonstrate that  the  reasoning  and  findings
    were flawed.

11. In rejecting the Appellant's general credibility on contentious matters
    the Appellant's claims about his ability to obtain  documentation  were
    inevitably going to be approached with great caution.  In  addition  to
    the Appellant's ability to live and work in the IKR, an uncontroversial
    aspect of his case, the Judge found that the Appellant  had  family  in
    Iraq who could vouch for  him  in  terms  of  obtaining  the  necessary
    documents.

12. The guidance in AA  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944  explicitly  recognises  the
    importance of family members in both obtaining  documentation  such  as
    the CSID and in assisting in relocating to the IKR. In finding that the
    Appellant has family members he could turn to, a finding not challenged
    in the grounds, and one clearly open to the Judge following  the  other
    reasons for rejecting the Appellant's credibility,  an  application  of
    the guidance in paragraph 10  of  the  20  of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision it would follow that with such assistance the Appellant  would
    be able to return to Iraq and to relocate.

13. The grounds are a disagreement with findings properly made and open  to
    the Judge for the reasons given. The grounds do not show that the Judge
    erred in law and I am satisfied that the approach taken  by  the  Judge
    was appropriate and more than sufficiently  reasoned  and  sustainable.
    The decision has to be read as a whole but the grounds do not take that
    approach.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 16th February 2018
