
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07772/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 of the                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules   |On 02 July 2020                |
|2008                                        |                               |
|On 22 June 2020                             |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     AP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant is a citizen of [xxx].   I  make  a  direction  regarding
    anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal
    Rules) Rules 2008.  I do so because this is  a  protection  claim  (see
    Guidance note 2013 No 1: Anonymity Orders).   Unless and until a  court
    directs otherwise the appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  refer  to  her  or  her
    family members.  This direction applies both to the  appellant  and  to
    the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

The Background

 2. The Secretary of State, with permission, appeals against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Howorth) (hereinafter referred to  as
    the "FtTJ") who, in a determination promulgated  on  16  January  2020,
    allowed her protection and human rights claim.

 3. For the ease of reference, I intend to refer to  the  parties  as  they
    were before the FtTJ.

The factual background:

 4. The background to the appellant's protection and human rights claim  is
    set out in the determination of the FtTJ and in the decision letter  of
    the Secretary of State issued on 31 July 2019.

 5. In a decision letter dated 31 July  2019  the  respondent  refused  her
    claim for asylum. Reference was made to the referral made  to  the  NRM
    and that following the reasonable grounds decision,  a  conclusion  was
    reached that her account did not meet the definition of modern  slavery
    or of a victim of trafficking.

 6.  The  respondent  set  out   issues   of   credibility   relying   upon
    inconsistencies in her account and that she had provided  a  number  of
    different aliases. In determining her claim consideration was given  to
    section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,  et
    cetera) Act 2004 noting that after she arrived in  the  United  Kingdom
    she did not claim asylum but made a claim after  being  notified  of  a
    decision of removal. It was not  accepted  that  she  had  any  genuine
    subjective  fear  on  return  to  [xxx]  and  that  any  fear  was  not
    objectively well-founded because there was  sufficiency  of  protection
    provided by the authorities and because it was not accepted that should
    be at risk from her father's enemies. The decision set out  information
    from the US Department of  State  report  at  paragraph  79  -  81  and
    concluded at paragraph 82 that there was sufficiency of  protection  in
    relation to her claim. For the same reasons, her claim for humanitarian
    protection was refused as was a claim under Articles 2  and  3  of  the
    ECHR. The decision letter also dealt with Article 8 and a consideration
    of discretionary leave on account of her medical circumstances.

 7. The claim was refused on all grounds.

 8. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  against  that  decision.  The
    appeal against that decision came before the FtTJ  on  the  13  January
    2020. The  appellant  was  represented  at  that  hearing  however  the
    respondent did not appear. There was no application for an  adjournment
    and the FtTJ went on the decide the appeal on  the  evidence  that  was
    before him. In the decision promulgated on 7 October  2019  he  allowed
    the appeal.

 9. The FtTJ  considered  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  alongside  the
    documentary evidence  that  had  been  advanced  on  her  behalf  which
    included medical evidence. The judge set out his findings  of  fact  at
    paragraphs 17-47.

10. The judge began  his  consideration  with  an  assessment  of  the  NRM
    decision in the context of medical evidence that had been  served  post
    that decision.  At  paragraphs  18  -  26  the  judge  carried  out  an
    assessment of psychiatric evidence and at [26] concluded that he  found
    the evidence to be reliable concerning the appellant's account  of  her
    experiences which were consistent with the symptoms and  diagnosis  set
    out in the report. At paragraphs [27] - [31], the FtTJ also assessed  a
    further medical report (on scarring of injuries) where  it  was  stated
    that the scars were consistent with the explanations given.  The  judge
    accepted the evidence of Dr C "in its entirety".

11. The FtTJ went on to consider  matters  of  credibility  that  had  been
    raised in the refusal letter dealing with the  inconsistencies  in  her
    factual account. At paragraphs [32] - [35], the judge concluded that in
    view of the medical evidence (which he accepted as reliable and  cogent
    ) it was likely that any inconsistencies in her account were due to the
    "sustained trauma that she had faced throughout adult life." The  judge
    then proceeded to set out his omnibus conclusions that he accepted  the
    core of her claim to be true. The judge found that  she  had  been  the
    subject of a serious sexual assault by her brother as a child and  that
    she had ended up  in  prostitution  being  controlled  by  a  gang.  He
    concluded that a combination  of  drug  use,  extreme  and  sustainable
    trauma and passage of time  had  resulted  in  inconsistencies  in  the
    retelling her account, particularly in respect of dates. He also  found
    that in the light of the medical evidence that there  were  events  the
    appellant had experienced were not recalled by  the  appellant  at  all
    (see report of Dr M).  At paragraph [36] the judge  also  accepted  her
    account in respect of the use of false names and  concluded  that  that
    was behaviour that had been forced upon her as  a  result  of  criminal
    activity for the gang.

12. At [37] he overall concluded that the NRM conclusive  grounds  decision
    was incorrect and that the decision-maker did not have  access  to  the
    medical evidence that had been put before the  FtTJ  which  would  have
    provided reasoning for inconsistencies in the appellant's account.  The
    FtTJ therefore concluded that the appellant was a victim of trafficking
    who had had escaped trafficking when she was arrested in 2016.

13. In accordance with  the  jurisprudence  the  judge  noted  that  former
    victims of trafficking and "former victims of  trafficking  for  sexual
    exploitation" are capable of being members of a particular social group
    within Regulation 6 (1) (d) of the  Protection  Regulations  and  found
    that she formed part of a "particular social  group"  as  a  former  of
    victim of trafficking. This was in response to the parts of the refusal
    letter in which it was asserted that there was no Convention reason  in
    the appellant's claim.

14. At paragraph [40] the judge made reference to  the  appellant's  father
    and whilst he accepted her account in respect of  his  criminality  and
    that he was a gang member, wanted by the police  and  other  criminals,
    the judge did not find that his enemies would seek to harm her  in  any
    way.

15. However, at [41] when  considering  risk  on  return,  he  reached  the
    conclusion that she would be at risk of being re-trafficked or punished
    for  reporting  crimes  of  her  traffickers,  or  for   escaping   the
    traffickers. The judge made reference to evidence  in  the  appellant's
    bundle of "rife gang membership across [xxx], and  that  the  objective
    material reported 2484 gang members in those [xxx]".

16. At [42] he took into account the length of time since the appellant had
    resided in the [xxx] and that "it may be that the appellant  would  not
    be at risk". However, the judge went on to state "I have found that she
    was trafficked from [xxx] to the UK in either 2000 or 2005 that she has
    been under their control until 2014 - 2015. I do find  it  likely  that
    the persons whose control she was under in the UK are  likely  to  have
    links to [xxx] (place of return) gangs and that the appellant would  be
    under significant risk of being re-trafficked if returned."

17. He therefore concluded that it was reasonably likely that the appellant
    would be re-trafficked on return and therefore found  that  she  had  a
    well-founded fear of persecution for a convention reason.

18. At paragraphs 45 - 46 the judge went  on  to  consider  sufficiency  of
    protection.

19. At [45] the FtTJ said this: "sufficiency of protection appears unlikely
    since  the  [xxx]  Guardian  report  refers  to  the  police  force  as
    overburdened and this would appear from the objective  evidence  to  be
    the case. Secondly, the appellant has previously, when being controlled
    by the gangs, had not been sufficiently protected by the police against
    the gangs. Finally,  Dr  M  refers  to  the  appellant  as  being  more
    distrustful and not wanting to tell professionals what has happened  to
    her. This is also likely to be the case if returned to [xxx]  and  even
    if the police could protect her, I find it unlikely due to  her  mental
    state that she would seek such protection."

20. At "[46]  In  respect  of  whether  the  appellant  could  live  safely
    elsewhere in [xxx], I find that in accordance with the previously cited
    report, gang membership is prevalent throughout [xxx] and the appellant
    would be at risk all over the country."

21. He therefore allowed her appeal on protection and human rights  grounds
    (Articles 2 and 3).

22. The appellant applied for permission to appeal the  decision  advancing
    two grounds.

23. Ground 1: it was submitted that the FtTJ had materially  erred  in  law
    when finding that the appellant would be at risk of being re-trafficked
    in [xxx] at paragraph [42]. The FtTJ in  his  own  findings  questioned
    whether the appellant would be at risk having been  absent  from  there
    for 15 - 19 years. This cannot  be  reconciled  with  the  judge  later
    finding that the appellant would be at significant risk  of  being  re-
    trafficked.

24. Furthermore, the judge noted that the appellant was no longer under the
    gang's control in the UK from 2014/15 and ceased to have  contact  with
    them. However, the judge failed to have regard to  the  fact  the  gang
    since 2014/15 demonstrated they no longer had an  adverse  interest  in
    the appellant or did not have the means to  locate  her  despite  their
    previous lengthy time of controlling the appellant.  This  analysis  of
    the evidence was critical to the assessment as to whether she would  be
    at real risk  of  being  re-trafficked.   It  was  submitted  that  the
    findings were devoid of sufficient reasons and were unsafe.

25. Ground 2: the FTTJ's findings on  internal  relocation  are  flawed  at
    [45]. Whilst the judge noted  at  [41]  that  the  background  evidence
    suggested that there were 2484 gang members operating  in  [xxx]  which
    highlighted the prevalence of gangs, it is submitted that the  evidence
    is wholly insufficient to suggest that the entirety of the islands  are
    affected by gangs. He failed to support  his  findings  with  objective
    evidence as to how he had reached such  finding  which  falls  foul  of
    Budhathoki (reasons  for  decision)  [2014]UKUT  341  (IAC)  where  the
    tribunal found that "it is  generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for
    first-tier Tribunal judgements to rehearse every detail or issue raised
    in the case. This leads to judgements becoming overly long and confused
    and is not a proportionate approach to deciding cases. It is,  however,
    necessary for judges to identify  and  resolve  key  conflicts  in  the
    evidence and explaining clear in brief terms their reasons, so that the
    parties can understand why they have won or lost."

26. It was submitted that the FtTJ's defective findings had not  given  the
    Secretary of State any proper explanation as  to  why  the  appeal  was
    allowed therefore the decision was wrong in law.

27. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    however  on  3  March  2020  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Mandalia   granted
    permission to the Appellant on Ground 2 only. UTJ  Mandalia  stated  as
    follows:

         "At paragraph [42] of the decision, the judge refers to the  length
         of absence from [xxx]. It is of course  possible  that  because  of
         that length of absence the appellant would not be at risk. However,
         the judge found that the appellant was trafficked  to  the  UK  and
         that she has been under gang control until 2014/15. The judge found
         it is likely that the persons whose control she was  under  in  the
         UK, are likely to have links to [xxx] gangs and the appellant would
         be under a significant  risk  of  being  re-trafficked  if  she  is
         returned. That was a finding open to the judge on the evidence  and
         permission is refused on ground one.

         However, the judge arguably failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for
         finding  at  paragraphs  45  and  46  that  there  is  insufficient
         protection available to the appellant and she could not  internally
         relocate. Although  the  respondent  was  not  represented  at  the
         hearing of the appeal, the judge does not appear  to  have  engaged
         with  the  background  material  that  was  referred  to   in   the
         respondent's decision. Permission is granted on ground 2 only."

28. The matter was  then  listed  for  an  oral  hearing.  The  matter  was
    adjourned in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic and  the Upper Tribunal
    issued directions sent out on the 29th April in the light of the Covid-
    9 pandemic, inter alia, indicating that it  was  provisionally  of  the
    view that the error of law issue could be determined without a  hearing
    and inviting submissions on that issue and also the  error  of  law  of
    issue.

The submissions of the parties.

The submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State:

29. On 15 May 2020, the Secretary of State responded. It  was  acknowledged
    that permission had  been  granted  on  ground  2  only  and  that  the
    secretary of state continued to rely upon this ground.

30.  It  was  submitted  that  the  FtTJ's  findings  on   sufficiency   of
    protection/internal relocation were flawed at paragraphs [45] and [46].
     Whilst the FTTJ noted at  [41]  that  there  were  2484  gang  members
    operating in [xxx] which highlighted the prevalence  of  gangs  on  the
    island, that evidence was wholly insufficient to suggest  the  entirety
    of the islands would be affected by gangs when the  objective  material
    suggested that the activities were predominantly in  areas on [xxx].

31. Furthermore, the judge failed to  address  the  obvious  point  that  a
    person who is of interest to a particular group is not automatically of
    interest to every gang in  the  islands.  As  the  threat  was  from  a
    nonstate agent, the judge had erred in  law  by  collectively  grouping
    "gangs" as a singular risk or in  the  alternative  failed  to  provide
    reasoning by way of reference to evidence in coming to that conclusion.
    The FtTJ had rejected the appellant's claim that she would be  at  risk
    due to any links with her father (former gang member) at [40]. At  [42]
    whilst acknowledging that those who traffic the appellant  and  the  UK
    may have links to gangs in the islands, it is submitted that the  judge
    had failed to apply those findings  to  the  consideration  of  whether
    there  would  be  a  sufficiency  of  protection,  or  internal  flight
    alternative. As the appellant has had no contact with  the  traffickers
    since 2014 - 15 in the UK, it is unclear why they would be  willing  or
    able to locate her on return especially as she has not been there since
    at least 2005, or provide reasons why she would be of interest  to  all
    traffickers regardless of location. The  judge  failed  to  conduct  an
    individualised assessment as required.

32. As to the issue of sufficiency protection  the  findings  at  [45]  are
    wholly inadequate. The judge only referred to one source of evidence in
    relation to the abilities of the authorities to provide protection  and
    failed to engage with the argument and the objective material  outlined
    in the refusal decision at paragraph 78 - 87.

33. Furthermore, the judge appeared to support his findings  based  on  the
    failings of the police to protect the appellant in the  past.  As  they
    were events that took place at least 15  -  20  years  previously,  the
    judge erred in law by  conducting  a  consideration  of  the  issue  on
    historical evidence rather than current. Even if the appellant could be
    considered to be hesitant to approach the authorities, the judge should
    have adequately assessed the provision of protection in order  as  part
    of a holistic assessment of the issue.

34. The judge failed to support his findings with  objective  evidence  and
    that fell foul of the decision in Budhoki (as cited above).

The appellant's submissions:

35. The appellant's solicitors sent submissions in reply on 20 May 2020. It
    was submitted that the FtTJ made clear and adequate findings in respect
    of matters of risk of  persecution  upon  return,  the  sufficiency  of
    protection available and to internal relocation set out  at  paragraphs
    41 - 48 of the decision.

36. At paragraph [41] the judge identified reasons as to why he found  that
    the appellant remained at risk of being re-trafficked  or  punished  by
    her traffickers which related to being punished for reporting crimes of
    the traffickers or from escaping from them.

37. At [42] the judge acknowledged the period of time  that  the  appellant
    had resided outside of the place of return and had considered this as a
    material fact as part of the decision but was entitled to  view  it  in
    the light that the appellant had been under gang control in the UK from
    either 2000 - 2005 until 2014 - 2015 and that it was likely that  those
    whose control she was under in the UK were likely to have links to  the
    gangs in the place of return. As this was as recently as 2014  -  2015,
    it was open to the judge to find that there was a reasonable likelihood
    to be a more recent connection between  the  appellant  and  the  gangs
    operating in the place of return. It was therefore open to the judge to
    find that there was a risk to the appellant from gangs in the place  of
    return who had links to her traffickers.

38. The written submissions refer to the background material which referred
    to by the judge at [41] which demonstrates the prevalence and existence
    of gangs in the place of return. However, the judge made clear findings
    as  to  why  the  appellant  would  specifically  be  at  risk  from  a
    traffickers and gang members affiliated to those  who  are  trafficked.
    Consequently, the reference to the background material is irrelevant to
    the overall findings in respect of  the  risk  to  the  appellant  upon
    return.

39. At [43] the judge had found that  the  appellant  had  previously  been
    subjected to persecution and whilst  not  expressly  stated,  paragraph
    339K applied in assessing the risk the appellant on return  which  gave
    further reinforcement to the reasoning of the FtTJ.

40. As to the issue of sufficiency protection, the FtTJ referred to  having
    considered the available background material. In particular, the  judge
    found that after considering the background material there was evidence
    that the police force was "overburdened". Whilst it was not  explicitly
    stated,  it  is  reasonable  to  imply  that  finding  referred  to  an
    inadequacy of state  protection  in  the  place  of  return.  This  was
    sufficient reasoning on the part of the judge.

41. The Judge also found at [45] that the appellant  had  previously,  when
    controlled by the gangs, had not been  sufficiently  protected  by  the
    police against them. Furthermore, at [45] the judge found that  due  to
    the appellant's mental state, even if the police could protect her, she
    would be unlikely to seek such  protection.  These  were  not  contrary
    findings and that the judge had considered the appellant's  ability  to
    seek protection if it were available.

42. It is further submitted  that  the  judge  had  viewed  the  background
    material as set out in the refusal letter and had made an informed  and
    proportionate decision in reaching the findings  of  fact.  Whilst  the
    respondent  had  failed  to  attend  the  court  hearing,   the   judge
    acknowledged and engaged with the arguments set  out  in  the  decision
    letter.

43. In conclusion it was submitted that no error of law had  been  made  by
    the FtTJ and that the determination should be upheld.

The respondent 's reply:

44. The Secretary of State responded in submissions sent by email on the 21
    May 2020.

45. It was submitted that whilst the FtTJ finds the appellant  is  at  risk
    from her former traffickers at [41], the  FtTJ  relies  on  an  overall
    prevalence of gangs to establish a current  risk.  As  the  appellant's
    interaction with her  traffickers  was  historical,  it  was  therefore
    incumbent on the FtTJ to identify evidence  that  clearly  demonstrated
    the link between her traffickers and which portion (if any) of the 2484
    gang members placed her at risk, and therefore their ability to  locate
    her or pose a risk across the entirety of [xxx].

46. It is further submitted that the FtTJ provided inadequate reasons as to
    why the same risk is present on return some 15 years  later  given  the
    appellant's profile,  and  how  it  would  not  be  alleviated  through
    protection from the authorities or internal flight.

47. As to the consideration of the issue of sufficiency of protection  this
    is extremely brief and the FtTJ referred to one  item  of  evidence  in
    that regard at [45]. Also, the FTTJ addressed internal relocation  very
    briefly at [46] as argued in the previous representations.

48. In answer to the submissions on behalf of the appellant, the fact  that
    the FtTJ cited the refusal decision at some point in the  determination
    did not indicate that the judge had  regard  to  the  State  Department
    report and its contents.

49. Furthermore, the finding in relation to the appellant being mistrustful
    of the police in the past due to  their  lack  of  diligence  does  not
    automatically mean that she would feel/act the same on  return.  It  is
    noted that Dr Murphy's  report  at  para  170  is  silent  on  how  the
    appellant would act in the future. It is submitted that this finding at
    [45] is not supported by the evidence, and the FtTJ  fails  to  provide
    adequate reason as to why given the appellant's  experience  she  would
    now not be willing to seek assistance from the authorities if required.
    Given the developments in law  enforcement  since  2005  and  focus  on
    victims as set out in the refusal decision,  it  again  highlights  the
    need for the FtTJ to have engaged with the current objective evidence.

50. I have carefully considered all  of  the  submissions  that  have  been
    provided by the parties in reaching a decision on the  relevant  issues
    and I have done  so  in  the  light  of  the  documentation  before  me
    including the decision under challenge.

Decision under Rule 34 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008

51. Having had full regard to the  Pilot  Practice  Direction:  Contingency
    arrangements in the  First  -Tier  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal,  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 2020 and all documents submitted by the
    parties, I have reached the decision that the decision on  this  appeal
    should be made without a hearing.

52. In the preceding paragraphs I have set out the submissions advanced  on
    behalf of the appellant and the respondent. In my judgment there is  no
    complexity which necessitates an oral hearing to ensure  fairness.  The
    parties have been given full opportunity to  advance  their  respective
    submissions and to fully participate in  the  decision-making  process.
    Each party has submitted their written submissions and have been  asked
    to address the issues identified by the Upper Tribunal.  There  are  no
    issues or concerns to which fairness demands the  parties  be  given  a
    further opportunity to respond or a hearing and both parties have  been
    given a full opportunity to engage in the proceedings  and  to  advance
    their respective cases. Neither party have requested  an  oral  hearing
    and I have therefore concluded that the matter can be fairly and justly
    determined without a hearing and that I should go on to consider  those
    issues which the parties have provided their respective submissions on.

Decision on the error of law:

53. It is accepted on behalf of the Secretary of State that permission  has
    been granted on ground 2 only. The original grounds as  pleaded  assert
    that the FtTJ's findings on internal relocation were  flawed  based  on
    the FtTJ referring to the level of gang  membership  in  the  place  of
    return  and  that  it  did  not  demonstrate  the  prevalence  of  gang
    membership  throughout.  The  ground  also  asserted  that  the  FTTJ's
    "defective" findings did not give the Secretary of State an explanation
    as to why the appeal was allowed. Ground 2 is a "reasons challenge."

54. The subsequent written submissions go further than the original grounds
    as pleaded but as the appellant  has  been  given  the  opportunity  to
    address those issues, I am content to deal with them.

55. When considering the grounds and the written submissions which now seek
    to raise the issue of sufficiency of protection  as  well  as  internal
    relocation, it is important to set out  the  evidence  which  the  FtTJ
    accepted and formed the factual basis for his assessment of risk.

56. The FtTJ made  clear,  adequate,  and  sustainable  findings  that  the
    appellant had been the subject of serious childhood abuse and trauma in
    the place of return (see [35]).  She  had  also  been  the  subject  of
    serious sexual assaults and was forced into prostitution between 1994 -
    2000. That there were three locations where she had been the victim  of
    trafficking-from  the  US  to  [xxx]  (the  place  of  return),   being
    trafficked from the place of return to the UK in 2001 and being  forced
    into prostitution and being subject to ill treatment  (beaten  by  gang
    members) until she was able to escape/arrest in 2016.

57. The FtTJ accepted the medical evidence in the form of a scarring report
    and  a  psychiatric  assessment  and  gave  reasons  for  reaching  the
    conclusion that the evidence contained  was  reliable  and  cogent  and
    treated the evidence as being capable of corroborating her account that
    she had been a victim  of  trafficking  and  had  suffered  significant
    trauma (at [38]).

58. In  reaching  those  findings,  the  FtTJ  gave  consideration  to  the
    credibility  points  raised  in  the  decision  letter  and   expressly
    considered the inconsistencies and discrepancies including the  use  of
    false  names.  He  concluded  at  [21]  and  [32   -   36]   that   the
    inconsistencies in her account were due to the  sustained  trauma  that
    she had faced throughout adult life.

59. The FtTJ therefore found her to be a former victim of  trafficking  who
    continued to present  and  function  as  a  vulnerable  woman  who  was
    suffering from complex PTSD,  depression  with  suicidal  thoughts  and
    physical problems (as set out in the report of Dr M).

60. The account in the appellant's witness statement was that  she  had  no
    connections to the place  of  return  nor  any  support  and  would  be
    vulnerable due to her mental and physical health needs and having  been
    a victim of trafficking (see paragraph 41).

61. Against that background the FtTJ  considered  the  issues  of  risk  on
    return. Whilst the FtTJ did not accept that she would  be  at  risk  on
    account of her relationship with her  father,  the  judge  reached  the
    conclusion that on the evidence before him that  she  was  at  risk  of
    persecution on return and this was as a result of the risk of being re-
    trafficked.

62. Contrary to the grounds the FtTJ  did  give  adequate  and  sustainable
    reasons for reaching the conclusions set out at paragraphs [41] - [46].
    The FtTJ concluded that the risk of re-trafficking was as a  result  of
    her  particular  background  history  (see  paragraphs  41  -  42)  and
    expressly found the risk as a result of being  punished  for  reporting
    the crimes against her traffickers and for having escaped those who had
    trafficked her. The judge found that the persons who had controlled her
    until 2015 would likely to have links to the  gangs  in  the  place  of
    return and that she  would  face  "a  significant  risk  of  being  re-
    trafficked."

63. This is based on the evidence from the appellant and also the objective
    material  in  the  appellant's  bundle.  The  appellant's  account  and
    evidence were that the majority of gang members who controlled  her  in
    the place of return were nationals of  that  country  and  had  a  wide
    network (paragraph 34). The appellant made reference to  the  place  of
    return as being very small (paragraph 28) and that it  consisted  of  a
    "tightknit community" where gang members had connections to  the  place
    of return. She believed that the traffickers would  easily  locate  her
    because it was a small country with a tightknit community controlled by
    corrupt police and violent gangs and that  this  was  as  a  result  of
    having spent so long under their control and in  different  houses  and
    brothels throughout [xxx] (the place of return) (see paragraph 37).

64. It is not as asserted in the grounds that the FtTJ relied on an overall
    prevalence of gangs within the place of return to establish  a  current
    risk. The  FtTJ  referred  to  the  issue  of  gangs  within  [xxx]  as
    background evidence to his assessment but did not solely rely upon this
    in his assessment of risk. The FtTJ accepted  the  appellant's  account
    that  there  was  a  reasonable   likelihood   that   those   who   had
    trafficked/controlled her in the UK up until 2015/2016  still  retained
    links with those who are trafficked her from the country of return  and
    therefore she was likely to remain at risk.

65. The  FtTJ  considered  this  alongside  the  issue  of  sufficiency  of
    protection. The grounds submit that the FTT 's assessment of  this  was
    "wholly inadequate"  and  failed  to  engage  with  the  arguments  and
    objective material in the decision letter set out at paragraph 78 - 87.

66. I have given careful consideration to  those  written  submissions  but
    when seen in the light of the material before the  FtTJ  alongside  his
    factual assessment, I consider that the  criticism  is  unwarranted.  I
    shall set out my reasons for reaching this view.

67. This was a hearing where the respondent did not  attend  and  therefore
    the FtTJ was required to consider the evidence submitted on  behalf  of
    the respondent and the  issues  raised  in  the  decision  letter  (see
    Surendran guidelines).

68. The FtTJ also had a bundle provided on behalf of  the  appellant  which
    included the full reports of the US State Department  report  on  human
    rights and the trafficking report alongside other material relating  to
    gang memberships and issues of trafficking.  By  contrast,  there  were
    only extracts in the decision letter from those main reports which  was
    selective.

69. The points raised in the decision letter  relating  to  sufficiency  of
    protection were set out at paragraph  79  -  84.  Paragraph  79  is  an
    extract from the US  State  Department  human  rights  report  and  the
    extract cited  gives  simply  a  description  of  the  police  and  the
    coastguard before an acknowledgement that "there are  issues  with  the
    police force" but concluded that there was still a  functioning  police
    force from whom the appellant could obtain sufficiency of protection.

70. The extract provided in the decision letter does not make reference  to
    the full report or "the  issues"  which  had  been  highlighted.  Those
    problems were the "open-ended investigations which "created  a  climate
    of impunity", corruption with  officials  including  the  police  (page
    136), allegations that the police had  close  relationships  with  gang
    members  and  accepted  bribes  to  facilitate  human   smuggling   and
    trafficking (page 137) and that the police often hesitated to engage in
    domestic violence law and that  serious  sexual  assault/abuse  was   a
    pervasive problem (page 138).

71. The material in the appellant's bundle (2019 crime and  safety  report)
    referred to the serious risk of crime and violent crime to the  general
    population (page 179) and that the majority of violent crime  was  gang
    related.

72. The Guardian article referred to by the FtTJ referred to the prevalence
    of gang membership and  the  article  also  referred  to  the  lack  of
    convictions made under the Anti-Gang Act 2018, passed in 2019 but  that
    this had been ineffective with no convictions.

73. At paragraphs 81 - 84 under the heading "protection" there  were  three
    paragraphs which were taken from the Trafficking in Persons report. The
    judge had the benefit of the full report in the appellant's  bundle  at
    paragraph 107 - 111. The three paragraphs cited in the decision  letter
    were selective when seen in the light  of  the  contents  of  the  full
    report. Whilst the material made reference to protection for victims of
    trafficking, there was reference to the antitrafficking law  2011  that
    had been passed but had not secured a conviction, that there was a lack
    of screening of victims and due to this the government  penalised  some
    of the trafficking victims. The section quoted in the  decision  letter
    missed out the following "there was insufficient government funding for
    comprehensive victim care", victims  often  did  not  receive  services
    (with CTU) and the government had kept and screened trafficking victims
    in detention without providing them  with  victim  care.  The  shelters
    referred to in the refusal letter made no reference to observers having
    reported an absence of appropriate shelters  with  adequate  staff  and
    security personnel. A further matter not set out in the refusal  letter
    referred to there being corruption in police and immigration which  had
    been associated with facilitating prostitution and sex trafficking (see
    page 110).

74. It was not necessary for the FtTJ to make reference to all the material
    that was before him and it is plain that the FtTJ did  have  regard  to
    the case advanced by the respondent from the decision letter as set out
    at paragraph 9 and the reference to the  credibility  issues  which  he
    resolved in his factual assessment.

75. In the light of the material before the FtTJ, it was  open  to  him  to
    reach the conclusion that there was a reasonable likelihood that  there
    would be no sufficiency of protection for  this  particular  appellant.
    Whilst he referred to the police as being "overburdened"  the  material
    relied upon by the respondent (although not set out  in  the  extracts)
    made reference to the failings within the police  including  issues  of
    corruption and links to gang members involved in trafficking of women.

76. The FtTJ also gave further reasons which refer to the past  experiences
    of the appellant where she had not been sufficiently protected  by  the
    police. It was  open  to  the  judge  to  consider  that  her  previous
    treatment by the police, even if historic, when  viewed  alongside  the
    more recent evidence, this highlighted continuing problems in terms  of
    effective protection for the appellant.

77. It was also open to the FtTJ to consider the effect of the  appellant's
    vulnerability upon her ability to  engage  with  the  police  (who  had
    previously failed to protect). At [45] the FtTJ referred to the medical
    evidence where she had been described  as  being  distrustful  and  not
    wanting to tell professionals about what had happened to her. The  FtTJ
    concluded from the evidence that in relation to the appellant that this
    was also likely to be the case on return to [xxx] and that in light  of
    her mental health needs (complex PTSD and depression) that she would be
    unlikely to seek protection from the police.

78. The written grounds submitted on behalf of the respondent assert that a
    finding of past mistrust  on  the  part  of  the  appellant  would  not
    automatically mean that she would  feel  the  same  now  and  that  the
    medical report was silent on how  she  would  act  in  the  future  and
    therefore this finding of the FtTJ was not supported by the evidence.

79. I do not accept that submission as it fails to take  into  account  the
    evidence given by the appellant in  her  witness  statement  which  was
    before the FtTJ and also the contents of the medical report by Dr M.

80. The appellant made reference to the complicity of the police  with  the
    gangs and that she would not feel safe residing in a country where they
    would be her only protection  (see  paragraphs  28,  29  and  30).  The
    medical report also referred to the appellant being mistrustful of  the
    police after her experiences in [xxx] (the country of return) and  that
    the police had never helped her and so why should she trust them?  (see
    paragraph 87); she was never protected  by  people  who  are  meant  to
    protect her (paragraph 109) she had long-standing problems in  trusting
    other people (paragraph  140)  which  were  reflected  in  the  current
    situation at paragraph 171 that she had never trusted the police  after
    her experiences and as the police had never helped she would not  trust
    them.

81. I therefore consider that it was open to  the  FtTJ  to  conclude  that
    there was a reasonable likelihood of the appellant being  re-trafficked
    and that in her particular case she would not be provided with adequate
    or sufficient protection.

82. The respondent also submitted that the FtTJ failed to address the issue
    of internal relocation and did so "briefly" at [46].

83. The finding at paragraph [46] should be read alongside the findings  of
    fact and earlier assessment  of general insufficiency of protection  at
    [45] where the FtTJ concluded that the appellant was not likely  to  be
    offered effective protection against the risk  of  re-trafficking  from
    the police. That being the case, it was open to the FtTJ to  find  that
    the risk was likely to arise wherever  she  lived  in  the  country  of
    return. The grounds fail to take account of the fact that the place  of
    return is a small place which has a total population  of  1,  300,  000
    which  was  referred  to  by  the  appellant  as  a  "small  close-knit
    community", and a place  where  the  appellant  described  having  been
    trafficked in a  number  of  locations.  The  objective  material  made
    references to the links between gang members and the  police  therefore
    it was open to the judge to conclude overall that  there  was  no  safe
    place of relocation for the appellant.

84. Having considered the written grounds of challenge in the light of  the
    material that was before the FtTJ and his assessment,  I  am  satisfied
    that the FtTJ did not fall into error and that  he  gave  adequate  and
    sustainable reasons to reach the conclusion that having been  found  to
    be a victim of trafficking that there remained a reasonable  likelihood
    that she would be re-trafficked if returned to [xxx]. When  considering
    claims of international protection, a judge is required to consider the
    core issues and  to  make  findings  upon  them.  Following  Budhathoki
    (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 341 (IAC) judges  need  to  resolve
    the key conflicts in evidence and explain  in  clear  and  brief  terms
    their reasons for preferring one case to the other so that parties  can
    understand why they have lost. Reasons need not  be  extensive  if  the
    decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to the material accepted
    by a judge: Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013]  UKUT  85
    (IAC), at [10].



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow
the appellant's appeal did not involve the making of an error of law.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds                         Dated:
22 June 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email

