
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: pa/07621/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 February 2018                           |On 4 April 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                            MR Waseem Abbas Shah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ince, allowing the appellant's appeal against
    a decision of the respondent made on 12 July 2016 that he is  a  person
    who is to  be  deported  as  a  foreign  criminal  and  to  refuse  his
    protection and human rights claims.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who came to the  United  Kingdom
    in 2010 as a student with the relevant entry clearance.  He  had  prior
    to that, been forced into marriage with a  younger  cousin.   After  he
    came to the United Kingdom he arranged to be divorced from his wife  in
    Pakistan and then on 29 February 2012 married his current wife, KK, and
    applied for leave to remain as  the  spouse  of  a  UK  citizen.   That
    application was granted and he was for two years until later he applied
    for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  the  marriage.   Before
    that application was determined, he  was  convicted  of  conspiracy  to
    facilitate the commission  of  a  breach  of  UK  immigration  law  and
    sentenced on 19 June 2015 to 45  months'  imprisonment.   There  are  a
    number of  other  previous  convictions.   On  16  April  2014  he  was
    convicted of resisting or obstructing a police officer, driving without
    a licence without insurance, resulting in a final disqualification from
    driving for twelve months.  On 12 June 2014 he was convicted of similar
    offences but given an  absolute  discharge  and  after  the  conspiracy
    conviction  in  November  2014  he  was  convicted  of   resisting   or
    obstructing a police officer and possessing a false ID card  for  which
    he was fined �630.  A further charge of drunk driving  followed  on  11
    June 2015 resulting in a ten week prison sentence suspended for  twelve
    months.

 3. With regard to the conviction  for  conspiracy,  he  was  convicted  of
    arranging and facilitating the marriages of  Pakistani  nationals  with
    two Czech nationals who were exercising treaty rights.   The  marriages
    were due to take place on 24 July 2014 but did not as all were arrested
    before the ceremonies could take place.  As Judge  Ince  noted  in  his
    decision [25] the appellant was at the top of  the  hierarchy  and  had
    benefited financially from the arrangements.

 4. Subsequent to his conviction the appellant  claimed  asylum  which  the
    respondent refused.

 5. The appellant's case is that he fears  his  family  in  particular  his
    uncle (the father of his first wife) for  divorcing  his  daughter  and
    bringing shame on the family.  The respondent did not accept his  claim
    and considered that in any event  he  could  obtain  a  sufficiency  of
    protection from the authorities or  could  reasonably  be  expected  to
    relocate.  This  she  considered  also  that  he  did  not  fulfil  the
    requirements of paragraph 399 of the Immigration  Rules  and  that  his
    deportation was proportionate.

 6. The Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant had a  family,
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with KK's daughter as he
    did not live with them as part of her family but lived with her aunt.

 7. The respondent accepted that the relationship between the appellant and
    his wife had been formed when he was here lawfully and when his  status
    was not precarious; that they had a genuine and subsisting relationship
    but that it had not been unduly harsh for KK to live  in  Pakistan  nor
    would it be unduly harsh for her to remain in the United Kingdom  where
    she could continue to receive medical treatment and have the support of
    her sister and mother noting  that  she  had  lived  there  during  the
    appellant's imprisonment in June 2015.

 8. The judge found:-

      i) That the appellant and KK were  credible  about  the  asylum  claim
         [79];  that  the  certificate  made  under  Section  72(9)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was not made out;




     ii) and that if he returned to Pakistan he would be at risk in his home
         area but that it would  not  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  him  to
         relocate to another part of Pakistan [88] and  this  would  not  be
         unduly harsh [90], concluding that there would not be a sufficiency
         of protection for him from the police [92];



    iii) it would not be unduly  harsh  to  be  separated  from  his  wife's
         daughter given that she did not  live  with  the  appellant  except
         weekends  and  had  little  communication  with   him   since   his
         imprisonment in 2015 and there was no  evidence  to  suggest  there
         would be any health repercussions if he were removed [93];



     iv) that it would be unduly harsh to expect KK to relocate to  Pakistan
         with the appellant given the finding in respect of the asylum claim
         that if they returned together that they would  be  traced  by  his
         family as they  would  become  known  and  thus  inadvertently  and
         vicariously she would be put at risk [95];



      v) that it would be unduly harsh to expect KK to remain in the  United
         Kingdom without the appellant given the effect of separation on her
         health to the extent that she  has  started  suffering  from  panic
         attacks and depression and on account  of  suffering  intimate  and
         suicidal thoughts in the past, the prospect of the appellant  being
         coming home to be  would be the only thing to keep her going;



     vi) That in assessing  the  public  interest  it  was  noted  that  the
         appellant was not a danger to the community, had insight  into  his
         offending and that he was satisfied he would not  reoffend  in  the
         future and therefore he was rehabilitated and taking account of the
         fact that there was sufficiently compelling circumstances such that
         this is one of the rare instances  where  the  public  interest  is
         outweighed.

 9. The respondent sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge had erred in application the unduly harsh test in failing to have
    regard, as set out in MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450 in  not  weighing
    the appellant's criminal and immigration history and significant public
    interest in the appellant's deportation against his  Article  8  right,
    materially affecting the outcome of the decision; and, erred in finding
    that the appellant's rehabilitation weakens the public interest in  his
    deportation, thus failing to take  into  account  OH  (Serbia)  v  SSHD
    [2008] EWCA Civ 695 where it was found that rehabilitation has not been
    the most important factor in the public interest and the need to  deter
    a foreign nationals  from committing crimes is an  important  facet  of
    the public interest.  It was also noted the public revulsion at serious
    crimes was also one of the aims of the deportation order.  It  is  also
    averred that that the judge failed to have any regard to the  statutory
    factors set out in Sections 117B, 117C of the 2002 Act.

10. In what is otherwise  a  detailed  and  commendable  decision  from  an
    experienced Immigration Judge, there is no mention  of  Sections  117B,
    117C of the 2002 Act which in the light of MM (Uganda) fell to be taken
    into account in assessing whether the effect on the appellant's wife of
    his removal would be unduly harsh.

11. Despite the respondent's submissions as  set  out  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, I consider that the judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant's wife to go to  live  in
    Pakistan because of the sustainable  and  indeed  unchallenged  finding
    that her presence in Pakistan would bring him to adverse attention  and
    thus they would both suffer ill-treatment  of  sufficient  severity  to
    engage  Article  3  of  the  Human   Rights   Convention.    In   those
    circumstances, there is nothing in  the  public  interest  which  could
    possibly outweigh that.

12. Despite Ms Cleghorn's best efforts, I am not persuaded the judge had in
    fact taken into account the proper test in  assessing  undue  harshness
    given that there is simply no  mention  of  what  was  taken  into  the
    account and as he should have taken account of the factors set  out  in
    Section 117B and 117C.  Whilst it was not necessary to cite them, there
    should at the least have been an assessment of those factors.

13. Accordingly, for these  reasons,  I  was  satisfied  that  the  judge's
    decision did involve the making of an error of law.

14. I announced my  decision  and  invited  further  submissions  from  the
    parties.  I also heard brief evidence from KK who  confirmed  that  her
    mother whom she supports, still requires help due  to  her  health  and
    that she goes there at least three times a week, staying  overnight  on
    occasion.  She said that her daughter has significant medical  problems
    in that she requires monthly injections as the bones in her leg are not
    growing properly despite the fact that she is 16.  She  also  confirmed
    that she had lost three stone in weight and had had panic attacks  when
    the appellant was in prison.  Her situation was  now  better  and  they
    were now living back together in the matrimonial home.

15. The Secretary of State's powers to deport  foreign  national  offenders
    are set out in Section 32 UKBA 2007.   It  is  not  disputed  that  the
    claimant is  a  foreign  criminal  as  defined  in  that  section.   By
    operation of section 32 (5) UKBA, the Secretary of State  must  make  a
    deportation order in respect of a foreign criminal  unless  she  thinks
    that an exception in section 33  of  the  Act  applies.   That  section
    provides, so far as is relevant, as follows:-

    33 Exceptions

    (1) Section 32(4) and (5)-

         (a) do not  apply  where  an  exception  in  this  section  applies
         (subject to subsection (7) below), and

         (b) are subject to sections 7 and 8 of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
         (Commonwealth citizens, Irish citizens, crew and other exemptions).

    (2) Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign criminal  in  pursuance
    of the deportation order would breach-

         (a) a person's Convention rights, or

         (b) the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.

    (3) Exception 2 is where the Secretary of State thinks that the foreign
    criminal was under the age of 18 on the date of conviction.

16. Paragraph 399(b) of the Immigration Rules provides as follows:-
    (b)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and
         (i)  the  relationship  was  formed  at  a  time  when  the  person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and
         (ii)  it would be unduly harsh for that  partner  to  live  in  the
             country to which the person is  to  be  deported,  because  of
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and
         (iii)     it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain  in
             the UK without the person who is to be deported.

17. The appellant is a foreign criminal as defined in Section 117D  of  the
    2002 Act.  I am therefore bound to consider the matter as  set  out  in
    Section 117B in addition to  117C which provides as follows:-

         "117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

              (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

              (b)      C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and

              (c)      there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

18. As noted above the finding that it would be unduly harsh to  expect  KK
    to live in Pakistan  is  maintained.   It  therefore  follows  that  an
    assessment must be made as to whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect her to remain in the United Kingdom and to be separated from the
    appellant.

19. I accept on the basis of the unchallenged and sustainable  findings  of
    the judge that KK has had a difficult past.  She  is,  as  Ms  Cleghorn
    submitted, a fragile person.  She has as  is  clear  from  the  medical
    records, previously been addicted to heroin and  was,  after  treatment
    with methadone and tranquilisers, able to come off  heroin  and  is  no
    longer dependent on drugs.  She achieved that with the support  of  the
    appellant but it is equally notable that her addiction  was  such  that
    this is what prompted Social Services to ask her sister and brother-in-
    law to take over care of her daughter who is still in  their  care.   I
    accept also KK's evidence that she has suffered from panic attacks  and
    she has also had suicidal thoughts in the past.  I accept also that she
    suffered from anxiety as a result of the appellant being in prison  and
    then in immigration detention.  I conclude that she has shown  that  if
    the appellant were to be removed,  effectively  permanently,  from  the
    United Kingdom that would have a significant effect on  her  well-being
    which would be greater given her fragility than would otherwise be  the
    case.

20. There is also the fact that this is not a situation in which she  could
    go to visit the appellant in his home country because of the risk  that
    would occur to him and to her were she to do so.  It is  not  clear  if
    they would be able to meet in a third country and it is plausible  that
    the appellant would have difficulty getting a visa for another  country
    given his criminal record in the United  Kingdom  and  the  deportation
    order.

21. Further points in the appellant's favour are that  he  has  never  been
    dependent on benefits, speaks English, and began his relationship  with
    KK whilst he was here with  leave.   Indeed,  it  is  conceded  by  the
    respondent that his position here was not precarious when the  marriage
    took place and the relationship was formed.

22. I bear in mind also that the point  of  deportation  is  that  it  does
    separate families.  It does  split  up  marriages  and  there  must  be
    something of a compelling nature which takes this out of  the  ordinary
    such that the public interest is  outweighed.   In  reality,  the  only
    factor in this case is the effect on KK.

23. There is little medical evidence as to the effect that there  would  be
    on KK although there is some to be gleaned from the medical records put
    before the First-tier Tribunal which indicate that when  the  appellant
    was imprisoned she lost  a  significant  amount  of  weight.  She  also
    suffered  from  anxiety  and  panic  attacks,  and  it   appears,   had
    intermittent suicidal thoughts. She has also in  the  past  self-harmed
    and has been a heavy abuser of alcohol as well as illegal  drugs.  None
    of this was challenged, nor was KK's evidence that the prospect of  the
    appellant coming home to her was the only thing that kept her going. It
    is of note also that the medical evidence is that counselling  did  not
    work.

24. The evidence from KK's family is that  she  has  stabilised  since  she
    began her relationship with the appellant. She also provides  care  for
    her mother who also has chronic health problems.  Again,  this  is  not
    challenged in the submissions made to me.

25. Since the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  promulgated,  the
    appellant and KK have resumed their  married  life  again.  I  consider
    that, given  how  his  imprisonment  affected  her,  future  separation
    arising from deportation will have a similar effect and is likely to be
    more severe, given that the relationship will be severed. They will not
    be able to meet easily.

26. It is likely that KK would be able to live again with her mother, but I
    am not satisfied given the mother's medical conditions that  she  would
    be able to offer much emotional support (and KK is her mother's carer),
    and the evidence of what happened in the past is that she was unable to
    assist  her  mother  while  she  was  affected   by   the   appellant's
    imprisonment. It also affected her relationship with her daughter  with
    whom the appellant also has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  step-parental
    relationship (see First-tier Tribunal decision at  [42]).  Although  it
    was found that separation  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  [93],  it  is
    nonetheless a factor to be borne in mind in the overall  analysis,  not
    least as she is a minor and has significant health problems  which  she
    mentioned in oral evidence and were not challenged.

27. Drawing all these factors together, I conclude that KK's mental  health
    is likely to be severely impaired by the  appellant's  deportation  and
    the separation from him. This is a case in which  medical  intervention
    has been of little assistance, and it is the appellant's presence which
    has stabilised her. I accept also that there is no  realistic  prospect
    of similar assistance from family, or support from counselling, as this
    did not assist sufficiently in the past.  The effect of the appellant's
    deportation on KK will inevitably be harsh.

28. That does not, however, mean that  deportation  is  unduly  harsh  when
    weighed against the  public  interest  in  deportation  in  this  case.
    Against that there are a number of factors which weigh strongly in  the
    public interest.  The starting point must be that  there  is  a  strong
    public interest in deporting foreign criminals from the United Kingdom.
     Second, the more serious the crime  as  expressed  in  the  length  of
    sentence and  other  factors,  is  capable  of  increasing  the  public
    interest in that respect.  In this case, the public interest is all the
    more weighty given the length of sentence, 45  months,  and  the  other
    offending behaviour which showed a previous pattern of offending.

29. There is a pattern of driving  offences  whilst  uninsured,  without  a
    licence and whilst under  the  influence  of  alcohol.   These  are  in
    themselves an indication of a willingness not to  obey  the  rules  and
    norms of society.  Further, the nature  of  the  crime  for  which  the
    applicant was sentenced to 42  months'  imprisonment  was  a  concerted
    attempt to undermine the immigration system in the United Kingdom.  The
    appellant's participation in this was not  at  a  low  level.   On  the
    contrary, he was at the top of the hierarchy.  These are factors  which
    aggravate the seriousness of the crime and increase the public interest
    in his deportation significantly.

30. That said, it must also be borne in mind that the  appellant  satisfied
    the First-tier Tribunal that he had changed  and  had  in  effect  been
    rehabilitated to the extent that there was no realistic prospect of him
    being convicted of an offence in future. That is not, however, a factor
    which detracts from the public interest in this case.

31. Weighing these matters, and bearing in mind that a  child  is  affected
    also, I am satisfied that the public interest is so high in  this  case
    that it outweighs the harsh effect on KK and  her  daughter  such  that
    deportation is not unduly harsh. That is not a decision which  I  reach
    lightly or without trepidation.  I therefore  remake  the  decision  by
    dismissing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

Signed                                  Date:  27 March 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


