
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07159/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford via Skype          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2020                  |On 08 December 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 PUI LING NG
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Briddock instructed by Milestones Solicitors.

For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Beg promulgated on 3 September 2019 in which the Judge
       dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  refusal   of   her
       application for international protection and/or leave  to  remain  in
       the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.
    2. Permission to appeal was initially refused by a Designated  Judge  of
       the First-tier Tribunal but granted on a renewed application  by  the
       Upper Tribunal,  the  operative  part  of  the  grant  being  in  the
       following terms:



        i. Although the  grounds  are  verbose  and  read  initially  as  a
           disagreement with the findings made by the  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge, it is arguable the judge has conflated irrelevant  issues
           in reaching her findings as to whether the appellant is gay  and
           has failed to give adequate  reasons  for  ting  (sic)  evidence
           which is directly related to  the  appellant's  claim  .  It  is
           arguable the judge has imposed her own view on how an individual
           would behave rather than assess the evidence as a whole  in  the
           context of the appellant's personality.


       ii. Permission is granted on all grounds although the  appellant  is
           expected to refine and particularise the grounds  prior  to  the
           hearing.


Background

    3. A Rule 24 response received from the  Secretary  of  State  dated  12
       March 2020 asserts:

           2.      The  respondent  opposes  the  appellant's  appeal.   In
                summary, the respondent will  submit  inter  alia  that  the
                judge  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal   directed   himself
                appropriately.


           3.     The appellant arrived in  the  UK  as  a  visitor  on  22
                November 2016. She overstayed and on 14  July  2018  claimed
                asylum on the basis of her sexuality.


           4.     It is evident that Judge Beg has considered  all  of  the
                evidence presented including  oral  evidence  given  by  the
                witnesses. She has made findings based on the  evidence  and
                contrary to the assertion in the grounds that she  did  not,
                she gave sufficient reasons for finding that  the  appellant
                is not a gay woman as claimed. The  Judge  repeatedly  noted
                the shortcomings  of  the  provided  evidence  and  properly
                applied section 8 of the  2004  Act  in  making  credibility
                findings.


           5.     It is trite law that a high threshold needs to be reached
                to succeed on grounds of irrationality. It is submitted that
                the judges reasoned findings are clearly not tainted by  the
                assertion made in the grounds of appeal. Her findings cannot
                be categorised as being so unreasonable that  no  reasonable
                person acting reasonably could have made them.


           6.      The  assertion  that  the  learning  judge  applied  her
                subjective view as to what would or would not have  happened
                is with respect unfounded.


           7.      It  is  submitted  that  there  are  no  errors  of  any
                materiality in the determination.


Error of law

    4. The appellant asserts the Judge's decision,  whilst  at  first  blush
       appearing to contain findings that are adequately reasoned, does not.
       Three grounds are relied upon which are discussed below.
    5. I find the Judge has not erred in law by not setting out or recording
       the evidence given in the decision as there was  no  need  to  do  so
       provided that evidence was considered with  the  required  degree  of
       anxious scrutiny.
    6. The Judge had the benefit of not only the  documentary  evidence  but
       also of seeing and hearing oral evidence being given by the appellant
       and her witnesses.
    7. The Judge noted the basis of the appellant's claim that  she  is  gay
       and  will  be  at  risk  on  return  to   Malaysia   where   same-sex
       relationships are illegal.
    8. The Judge considered relevant  cases  and  the  UNHCR  Guidelines  of
       International Protection claims based upon  sexual  identity  between
       [17-21]. No error arises in relation to the same.
    9. Ground 1 of the challenge to the decision is based upon an  assertion
       the Judge failed to give reasons for her  core  findings  and/or  has
       failed to take account of relevant evidence.
   10. In relation to the reasons challenge, it was noted in MD  (Turkey)  v
       SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 that adequacy meant no more nor  less  than
       that.    It was not a counsel of perfection.    Still less should  it
       provide an opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment  of  the
       reasons to see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on their
       merits.  The purpose of the duty to give  reasons,  is  in  part,  to
       enable the losing party to know why she has lost and it  is  also  to
       enable  an  appellate   court   or   tribunal   to   see   what   the
       reasons  for  the  decision are so that they can be examined in  case
       there has been an error of approach.
   11. In relation to the assertion the Judge failed  to  consider  all  the
       evidence, At  paragraph  49  of  MA  (Somalia)  [2010]  UKSC  49,  it
        was  said  that  "Where  a  tribunal  has  referred  to  considering
        all  the  evidence,  a  reviewing  body  should  be  very  slow   to
       conclude  that  that  tribunal   overlooked   some   factor,   simply
       because  the  factor  is  not   explicitly   referred   to   in   the
       determination  concerned".
   12. The challenges require an examination of the actual finding made  and
       challenge to the same in the detailed grounds  of  appeal  which,  in
       summary, are as follows:

             a) The Judge found the  appellant  gave  very  little  evidence
                either in her oral testimony  or  in  her  asylum  interview
                about how and why she became  physically  attracted  to  How
                Sing with whom she had  been  friends  [22].  The  appellant
                asserts the reasoning for this appears at  [23]  but  states
                this bears  no  relationship  to  [22]and  that  it  is  not
                possible to know why the Judge  found  as  she  did.  It  is
                settled law that a reader of a decision should  be  able  to
                understand why a judge has found as they have. In this  case
                the decision must be read a whole. The finding  in  [22]  is
                based upon the evidence specifically  referred  to  in  that
                paragraph. The Judge had the benefit  of  both  written  and
                oral evidence and was able to assess the same and the weight
                to be given to the evidence.


             b) In relation  to  [23],  the  Judge  records  that  when  the
                appellant was asked a question at 58 of her asylum interview
                to explain a little more about what she  meant  by  'feeling
                safe' she was not able to credibly do so, she said "this was
                the feeling I had when I had my first female  friend"  [23].
                In the same paragraph the Judge records at question 66,  the
                appellant  being  asked  about  her  emotions  rather   than
                physical acts and stated that  it  was  "a  feeling  like  a
                couple in love". In  reply  to  question  69  the  appellant
                claimed  the  relationship  turned  from  friendship  to   a
                romantic one in response to which the Judge finds that given
                the appellant had a relationship with this person  for  five
                years she had provided no credible evidence  of  their  time
                together. There are no photographs of the places  they  went
                together. This is a summary of the weight the Judge gave  to
                the evidence relating to this issue which has not been found
                to be outside the range of findings reasonably open  to  the
                Judge on the evidence. The statement in the grounds this  is
                no more than an assertion is not made out. The  finds  of  a
                lack of evidence of the five years the  appellant  allegedly
                spent in a relationship with this person has not been  shown
                to an irrational finding by reference to evidence given that
                would prove  the  contrary,  even  if  the  purpose  of  the
                interview question was more focused. The Judge was assessing
                the evidence as a whole.


             c) The Judge noted the appellant's immigration history and  the
                fact she claimed to have  entered  the  UK  solely  for  the
                purpose of a two-month holiday but overstayed. The appellant
                stated this was because of the relationship she  had  formed
                with another woman named Kiki. The Judge  observes  that  if
                the appellant was genuinely in fear of return  to  Malaysia,
                she would have claimed asylum  sooner  rather  than  waiting
                from the 22 November 2016 date of entry to  July  2018.  The
                finding is this damages the appellants credibility  pursuant
                to section 8 Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants)
                Act 2004 for which adequate reasons are given. This was  not
                found to be determinative by the Judge but one of  a  number
                of elements of concern [24]. The Judge is criticised for not
                taking into account the appellants explanation for  why  she
                did not claim asylum on arrival which is her claim  she  did
                not know she  could  make  such  a  claim  for  a  same  sex
                relationship until 2018. It is not made out the Judge failed
                to consider the evidence on this point, but this  was  given
                by the appellant who the Judge has found lacks  credibility.
                Section 8 of the 2004 Act was introduced to reflect the need
                for a person to claim asylum when they arrive in the  UK  or
                as soon as they think it would be unsafe for them to  return
                to their own country. The appellant  has  always  maintained
                she is at risk in Malaysia if she lived openly with  a  same
                sex partner yet did not claim until two years after entering
                the UK and only when another named individual made a  claim.
                The  high  profile  given  to   claims   for   international
                protection in the media in the UK and information  available
                with  the  LGBT  community  for  those  at  risk  makes   it
                implausible that the appellant would not have been aware  of
                the  ability  to  claim  if  she  had  a  genuine  fear   of
                persecution as she claims. The adverse finding  pursuant  to
                section 8 has not  been  shown  to  be  one  not  reasonably
                available to the Judge on the evidence.


             d) The Judge found the appellant had claimed asylum because she
                had been told to do so by a friend Sam and  a  Ms  Yong  who
                herself had claimed asylum in 2018 that she could. This is a
                finding on the evidence and one available to the Judge.  The
                Judge also finds the reason the appellant claimed asylum was
                a means of staying in the UK not as a result of  a  credible
                fear of persecution. This is the Judges  assessment  of  the
                evidence given by the witnesses. The weight to be given  the
                evidence was a matter for the Judge [25].


             e) The Judge's finding there are no  text  messages  from  Kiki
                Chan is factually correct as the  appellant  stated  in  her
                evidence she had deleted the same whilst  also  stating  she
                had not deleted photographs of this person. The Judge  finds
                it  not  credible  that  the  appellant  would  delete  text
                messages but retain photographs of a person she  claims  not
                to want to have any contact with on the basis they were in a
                relationship that had broken up acrimoniously with a  person
                the  appellant  claimed  was   not   trustworthy   and   was
                controlling. This is not a legal  question  per  se,  but  a
                finding based upon the assessment of  the  factual  evidence
                and the view the Judge formed  of  the  credibility  of  the
                claim. It has not been shown to be  a  finding  outside  the
                range of those available to the Judge on the evidence  [26].
                The appellant challenged this finding  asserting  the  Judge
                gave no reasons for the same, but a  reading  disclosed  why
                the Judge  found  as  she  did.  It  is  not  an  irrational
                conclusion that a person deleting text messages as a  result
                of  the  deterioration   and   acrimonious   ending   of   a
                relationship was unlikely to  have  kept  photographs  which
                would be a visual reminder of the person concerned. This has
                not been shown to be a finding outside the  range  of  those
                available to the Judge.


             f) The assertion by the Judge the claim made by Ms Yong in  her
                oral evidence that she had met the  appellant  and  Kiki  in
                China Town does not  appear  in  her  witness  statement  is
                factually correct. The Judge finds that as there is no  such
                mention this witness is not  credible  [27].  The  appellant
                asserts the Judge was not entitled to reject the entirety of
                the witness statement on the basis of this one issue.  There
                is also reference in the grounds to replies given  in  cross
                examination, but the Judge makes refence to these  in  [27].
                The Judge considered this  evidence  along  with  the  other
                material, the main thrust  of  which  is  to  refer  to  the
                appellants alleged relationship with Kiki. Evidence relating
                the witnesses own situation, the right of  a  gay  woman  to
                live openly and not to  be  forced  to  live  discreetly  in
                Malaysia is not disputed and should not have been  found  to
                lack credibility, but such issues are not  material  to  the
                first issue which is whether the appellant  had  established
                she is a gay woman at all, HJ (Iran) question 1 refers.


             g) The witness Mok Yin Wen was found not to be credible by  the
                Judge. This witness stated she became  aware  the  appellant
                had arrived in the UK when she telephoned her  in  2016  and
                started living in her house from that time.   The  basis  of
                the adverse finding is set out at [28] in  which  the  Judge
                finds the witness was well  aware  that  the  appellant  was
                coming to the UK before she arrived  and  repeatedly  stated
                throughout her evidence that she had invited  the  appellant
                to the UK many times when she visited Malaysia once or twice
                a year. The witness also  stated  the  appellant  was  in  a
                relationship with Kiki Chan.


             h) In relation to the finding at [28] it is important  to  note
                [29] in which the Judge refers to the re-examination of this
                witness. In which the witness stated she was  aware  of  the
                fact the appellant would come to the UK but did not know the
                exact time of her arrival. It has not been shown the finding
                the witness did invite the appellant to come to the  UK  and
                that the appellant informed her she was coming  here  before
                her  arrival  is  a  finding  outside  the  range  of  those
                available to the Judge. It is not unreasonable to  expect  a
                person  visiting  another  country  to  have  informed   her
                potential host for the visit of the day and approximate time
                of her arrival. A specific finding at the  end  of  [29]  is
                that the Judge did not find either Ms Wen or  the  appellant
                credible on this issue. This is a  finding  having  assessed
                the weight the Judge thought it appropriate to give  to  the
                evidence on this point.


             i) At [30] the Judge records the evidence of Ms  Wen  that  she
                was a close friend  of  the  appellant  yet  she  could  not
                explain why the appellant had not told her she was gay  when
                they met in Malaysia. The appellant stated in  her  evidence
                that Ms Wen was in her  50's  and  that  she  had  no  other
                friends of that age. The Judge finds it surprising  that  if
                Ms Wen was  only  a  customer  at  the  appellants  shop  in
                Malaysia she would have offered the appellant a home shortly
                after she arrived in the UK, although  this  appears  to  be
                more of an observation rather  than  being  expressed  as  a
                specific finding.


             j) At [31] the Judge makes a specific finding that she did  not
                find Ms Weng to be a credible witness   in  respect  of  her
                evidence that she did not know the appellant was  coming  to
                the UK before she arrived and  did  not  find  credible  her
                evidence the appellant was in  a  sexual  relationship  with
                Kiki Chan. The Judge also observes that despite claiming  to
                be friends she never visited the appellants home and appears
                to have had no contact with  the  appellant's  mother.  This
                finding is challenged  on  the  basis  the  Judge  given  no
                reasons. I find the  finding  in  relation  to  the  alleged
                relationship with Kiki Chan was considered together with the
                other evidence on this point which  resulted  in  the  Judge
                rejecting the claim as not  being  credible  and  for  which
                sufficient reasons are given. The aspect of the challenge in
                relation to the lack of a  home  visit  or  not  seeing  the
                appellants mother is  of  concern  as  there  is  inadequate
                reasoning of the same or reference to cultural  norms  which
                would explain the importance of such an omission. I  do  not
                find this error, however, material to the overall  decision.




             k) At [32] the Judge finds the photographs provided  are  of  a
                group of young women and do not provide cogent  evidence  of
                the appellants sexual orientation and  that  the  appellants
                attendance at gay clubs and on a Gay Pride march are not  on
                their own credible evidence that the appellant is gay  [32].
                The appellant accepts in her grounds  that  the  photographs
                and attendance at a Gay Pride march do not prove  she  is  a
                gay woman but asserts the Judge was required to give further
                reasons for why the evidence  was  not  credible.  There  is
                merit in a submission  of  Mr  Melvin  that  the  appellants
                grounds are seeking to undermine the findings on  the  basis
                the Judge did not give  reasons  for  her  reasons  for  her
                findings. The Judge did not accept the visual  material  was
                sufficient to support the appellants claim. The evidence  is
                as the Judge describes it. Nothing more was required of  the
                Judge on the point.


             l) The Judge finds less weight can be attached to a letter from
                the witness Hui Sin Wong, also known as Sam, as she did  not
                attend the hearing and so could not be cross examined  [33].
                This finding is not specifically challenged in the grounds.


             m) Taking the evidence into account as whole and  applying  the
                lower standard of proof, the Judge records that she does not
                find the appellant is gay and that she came to the UK for  a
                holiday and no longer wants to live in Malaysia  [34].  This
                finding is not specifically challenged in the grounds.


             n) The Judge finds the appellant has produced  no  evidence  to
                prove her relationship with Kiki Chan was a gay relationship
                at [35] and finds the appellant is not credible at [35]. The
                Judge is criticised for failing to  take  into  account  the
                appellants claim to have deleted the text  messages  but  if
                she did, the finding of the Judge  is  correct.  As  is  the
                finding for lack of Facebook evidence even though there  may
                be a good reason for  the  same.  This  was  not  however  a
                determinative issue. The adverse credibility finding at [35]
                related to the appellants claim to have renewed her Facebook
                account when it was put to her in cross examination that she
                had  been  unable  to   produce   any   evidence   of   that
                relationship, but produced no evidence of any correspondence
                with Facebook to prove the point.


             o) The Judge finds the appellant does not have  a  well-founded
                fear of persecution as there was no credible evidence before
                the Judge that she will be at  risk  of  suffering  harm  on
                return [38]. There is no specific challenge to this although
                the individual aspect of the grounds clearly  indicates  the
                appellants disagreement with the same.


             p) The Judge finds the respondent's decision  is  proportionate
                when considering Article 8 ECHR [42].

   13. The findings are adequate in enabling  a  reader  to  understand  the
       reason for the findings made. It is not made out the Judge failed  to
       consider the evidence with the required degree of anxious scrutiny.
   14. Ground 2 asserts the Judge made  irrational  findings.  As  such  the
       appellant  is  required  to  establish  that  the  specific  findings
       mentioned are not based on reason or clear thinking; not  reasonable.
       This has not been made out.  Suggesting  other  alternative  findings
       that the Judge could have made, disagreeing with the weight given  to
       the evidence  by  the  Judge  and/or  the  findings  made,  does  not
       establish that are outside the range of those available to the  Judge
       on the evidence, especially in light of the rejection of Ground 1.
   15. An example of the lack of merit in the challenge  is  illustrated  by
       [50] of the  grounds  where  the  Judge  is  said  to  have  made  an
       irrational finding in holding against the appellant that she did  not
       provide correspondence with Facebook relating to  her  account  being
       hacked and not being able to access it. It  is  perfectly  reasonable
       for the Judge to have found as she did as  this  issue  was  put  the
       appellant in evidence.  She claimed she had contacted Facebook  about
       the same but had no evidence to support such a  claim.  Even  if  her
       account had been hacked this would not have  prevented  contact  with
       Facebook customer services team.
   16. Ground 3 asserts the Judge rejected the claim on the  basis  of  what
       would or would not have happened  and  not  on  the  toality  of  the
       evince.
   17. This ground is without merit. The Judge considered the evidence, both
       written and oral, gave the evidence the weight she thought able,  and
       then made finding as to what was accepted and what was not. The  core
       account that the appellant is a gay woman was not found to be  proved
       for which adequate reasons have been given.
   18. In his submissions Mr Briddock also suggested that it appeared to him
       as if the Judge  was  building  a  case  against  the  appellant  and
       rejecting the evidence in a domino effect, but such has not been made
       out. The Judge assessed the evidence she was asked to  consider.  The
       Judge made findings  upon  the  evidence  including  that  which  was
       accepted and that which was not. The effect of the structure  of  the
       decision shows that as each aspect of the evidence was considered the
       problems for the appellant were revealed leading to the appeal  being
       dismissed. This is not the  Judge  building  a  case  but  the  Judge
       properly assessing the material. A number of the challenges are based
       upon the authors interpretation of the findings as  submitted  by  Mr
       Melvin.
   19. The findings made have not been shown not to be within the  range  of
       those reasonable open to the Judge on the evidence. It has  not  been
       made out it is appropriate for the Upper Tribunal  to  interfere  any
       further in this appeal.

Decision

   20. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   21. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 1 December 2020

