
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07183/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff CJC                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 February 2019                      |On 27 March 2019                 |
|                                           |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                                     M S
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Magennis, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iran.  He made a claim  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection on 13 February 2018.   The  respondent  refused
    that application in a letter dated 20 May 2018.  The appellant appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State under Section 82 of the Immigration, Nationality and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Coaster  on  6
    July 2018.  In a decision promulgated on 22 August 2018  she  dismissed
    his appeal on all grounds.  The appellant sought permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper  Tribunal.   Permission  was  refused  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and granted on renewal to the Upper Tribunal by Upper Tribunal
    Judge Blum on 5 December 2018.  Permission was  granted  on  the  basis
    that although the Judge gave a number of detailed reasons for rejecting
    the appellant's account Judge Blum was  satisfied  that  she  may  have
    failed to give adequate reasons or take account  of  relevant  evidence
    for the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal.  The appeal therefore
    comes before the Upper Tribunal to determine whether or not there is  a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   At the hearing Mr Howells accepted that there were material  errors  of
    law in the form of plausibility  findings  not  founded  on  background
    evidence including that a Kurd could not be a member of Ettelaat,  that
    a Kurdish woman could not be educated and that Kurdish women would  not
    be able to have a relationship outside marriage.

3.   I asked Mr Magennis whether he agreed in the light of  the  concessions
    made this would be a matter that should be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  He submitted  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  could  remake  the
    decision and that once the credibility findings that were  accepted  as
    having been materially flawed were taken away there was no objection to
    credibility and on the evidence before the court on the material issues
    the appeal should be allowed.  He submitted that  the  evidence  before
    the court  was  sufficient  to  determine  the  matters  in  issue.   I
    concluded that the respondent was correct to make  the  concessions  in
    relation to the plausibility findings highlighted in  the  grounds  and
    that there was a material error of law in respect  of  those  findings.
    However the effect of those errors was that the findings were  vitiated
    and that credibility was still at  large.   In  the  circumstances  the
    appropriate course was for the matter to be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal de novo before a judge other than  Judge  Coaster.   With  the
    agreement of the parties I give brief reasons for  finding  that  there
    was a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



4.   There  are  three  grounds  of  appeal,  firstly  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal reached conclusions without any evidential basis  in  relation
    to the appellant's account that his former partner's father could  work
    for Ettelaat as a Kurd.  Secondly that the Judge failed  to  take  into
    account relevant evidence and  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  and
    thirdly in relation  to  the  question  of  the  appellant's  political
    activism  that  the  Judge  failed  to  take  into   account   relevant
    considerations.

5.   At paragraphs  42  to  44  of  the  decision  the  Judge  rejected  the
    appellant's account that his former partner's  father  could  work  for
    Ettelaat on the grounds that he was a Kurd.  This was not a point  that
    was raised in the refusal letter or at the hearing.  The  assertion  in
    the grounds that there was no evidence or argument before the Judge  as
    to the likelihood or otherwise of Kurds working for Ettelaat is a sound
    one.  The grounds highlight the respondent's  Country  Information  and
    Guidance Iran: Kurds and Kurdish political groups, Version 2 dated 2016
    which acknowledges  that  Kurds  suffer  from  discrimination  in  Iran
    including in employment.  However, it is noted  that  there  is  little
    detail given on the nature of this discrimination nor is  it  suggested
    that Kurds are unable to work for the state or security  services.   It
    is submitted that the evidence does not show that it is unlikely that a
    Kurd may be a member of Ettelaat.   The  grounds  also  highlight  that
    there is evidence in the Country Information and Guidance at  paragraph
    11.1.1 which shows that pressure can be put on the families of  Kurdish
    political activists by depriving them of access to higher education  or
    employment in public positions and on this basis the grounds argue that
    therefore there is evidence that shows that  Kurds  can  access  higher
    employment and public positions given that they can  be  revoked  as  a
    punishment.

6.   I accept on the basis of this evidence that the Judge's  findings  were
    not only made in the absence of a reference to objective and background
    materials before her but also that there was material that contradicted
    this finding.  Further it is argued that the Judge's findings that  his
    former partner could have studied when she met him was not supported by
    objective evidence was made in the absence of reference  to  background
    materials and indeed that the Country Information  and  Guidance  shows
    that female Kurds could access higher education.   I  accept  that  the
    Country Information and Guidance at 11.1.1  and  8.2.1  do  demonstrate
    that female Kurds  can  access  education  and  consequently  that  the
    implausibility finding in this respect cannot stand.

7.   Further  the  Judge  concluded  that  it  was  not  credible  that  the
    appellant's former partner would meet  with  him  and  commit  adultery
    given the risks it posed.  The background material in  the  appellant's
    bundle at C21 to 23 demonstrates that this  finding  again  was  not  a
    sound one.  I also accept that the Judge's findings in relation to self-
    immolation did not take into account the most recent evidence  referred
    to in the appellant's skeleton argument at C24 to  43  of  the  bundle.
    For these reasons, therefore, I find that there were material errors in
    relation to the findings  on  the  implausibility  of  the  appellant's
    account which were  made  in  the  absence  of  reference  to  material
    background  evidence  and  therefore  cannot  stand.   The  appeal   is
    therefore remitted de novo to be heard by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Coaster with no findings preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and I set it aside with no findings preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 26 March 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
