
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/07326/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28th January 2019                   |    On 16th April 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                    m s s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Sandhu (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against a  decision  to  refuse  his  protection
    claim was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  C  H  Bennett  ("the
    Judge") in a decision promulgated on 26th November 2018.  Having  taken
    into account country evidence, the Judge made a decision not to  follow
    country guidance determinations in A (Turkey) [2003] UKIAT 00034 and IK
    (Turkey) [2004] UKIAT 00312.  He  found  the  appellant  not  to  be  a
    reliable or credible witness and concluded that he would not be at real
    risk on return.  The Judge went on to consider  whether  the  appellant
    might qualify for leave under Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    ("the rules") or paragraph 276ADE.  He  concluded  that  the  appellant
    could not show that the requirements of the rules  were  met  and  that
    there  were  no  compelling  or  exceptional   circumstances   in   the
    appellant's case.  Removal to Turkey would not  breach  his  Article  8
    rights, or those of anyone else.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on
    19th December 2018, on the basis that  the  Judge  may  have  erred  in
    declining to follow the country guidance case of  IK  (Turkey)  without
    taking into account risk factors including family connections with  HDP
    and links to the PKK, the appellant's Kurdish ethnicity,  ill-treatment
    in Turkey, the lack of a current Turkish passport, the  fact  that  the
    family come from the south-east of Turkey, a request that the appellant
    become an informer and the absence of any military  service  undertaken
    by him.  The current state of emergency and heightened state  of  alert
    on the part of the Turkish  authorities  might  increase  the  risk  of
    detention on arrival.  In  granting  permission,  the  Judge  noted  an
    arguable error on the basis that the adverse credibility findings might
    have been the result of undue weight given to previous applications for
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom.

3.   There was no rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

4.   Mr Sandhu relied upon the written grounds.  The conduct of the  hearing
    gave rise to concerns and the  determination  was  very  lengthy.   The
    Judge sought to depart from the country guidance case of  IK  (Turkey).
    At paragraph 29 of the decision, the Judge  found  that  the  appellant
    should  not  be  considered  a  credible  witness  because  of  earlier
    applications for entry  clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom.   He  gave
    adverse weight also to the absence  of  formal  court  proceedings,  an
    arrest warrant or medical records giving details of ill-treatment.  The
    Judge misunderstood the country guidance case and erred  as  a  result.
    The appellant supported a left wing political party, currently the HDP.
     The Judge made no adequate analysis of the  IK  risk  factors  and  no
    overall assessment of the risk factors, even if the adverse credibility
    findings were treated as sustainable.  The factors were listed  in  the
    written grounds (and reflected in the grant of permission  to  appeal).
    Turkey was currently in a state of  emergency  and  the  appellant  was
    likely to be detained on  arrival  and  his  background  checked.   The
    evidence was not assessed in the light of the appellant's vulnerability
    and his circumstances.

5.   Mr Sandhu said that the Judge gave undue  weight  to  two  applications
    for entry clearance made in May and October 2012, which were given  too
    much prominence in the overall narrative.  Several pages  were  devoted
    to departure from IK (Turkey).  There  was  insufficient  consideration
    given to risk factors including the history  of  arrests,  surveillance
    and his brother's arrest.  The appellant felt demoralised.  The Judge's
    error in giving undue weight to the two  entry  clearance  applications
    was illustrated by paragraph 29(a)  of  the  decision,  concerning  the
    entry clearance application in October 2012.

6.   On arrival at the  airport,  the  appellant  would  be  flagged  up  as
    someone who had not undertaken military service.

7.   Mr Avery said that the decision contained no error of law.   The  Judge
    was entitled to take the entry clearance applications into account  but
    it was apparent that they were  not  given  undue  weight.   The  Judge
    assessed all the relevant factors.  In dealing  with  IK  (Turkey),  he
    engaged with relevant country evidence.  The decision  in  IK  (Turkey)
    was now very old and the Judge was entitled to depart from it where the
    background evidence showed that this was the  appropriate  course.   He
    properly assessed circumstances in Turkey at the present date.  Nothing
    in the grounds undermined this approach.  The  Judge  was  entitled  to
    find that the appellant was not a credible witness and the decision was
    thorough and well-reasoned.  This was  so  even  though  there  was  no
    mention of PD12, regarding departure from country guidance.

8.   In a brief response, Mr Sandhu said that the absence of any mention  of
    PD12 was important.  The Judge mentioned his own experience of  Turkish
    cases but this gave rise to concern rather than confidence.  Events  in
    2016 and 2017 in Turkey showed that circumstances were now  worse  than
    in earlier years.  The appellant was from the south-east of Turkey  and
    a Kurdish area.

Findings and Conclusions on Error of Law

9.   I conclude that no  material  error  of  law  has  been  shown  in  the
    decision.  The Judge maintained an appropriate focus on all the salient
    features of the appellant's case and the adverse findings regarding the
    core claims and risk on return in the  light  of  current  country  and
    medical evidence were all open to him.

10.  Dealing first with Mr Sandhu's submission that too  great  an  emphasis
    was placed on the entry clearance applications in May and October 2012,
    reflected in paragraph 6 of the  written  grounds,  I  find  that  this
    ground is not made out.  The decision does indeed begin with the  entry
    clearance applications but this is simply where the Judge sets out  the
    relevant immigration history, including the appellant's arrival in  the
    United Kingdom, the screening  and  substantive  interviews  that  took
    place after his asylum claim, the political activities and  periods  of
    detention relied upon by the appellant as showing that he is at risk on
    return, events in Turkey following his departure and the visits made by
    the authorities to the family home.

11.  The Judge returned to the October 2012 entry clearance  application  at
    paragraph 29(a) as one part of the reasoning that led to  a  conclusion
    that the appellant is not  a  credible  witness.   The  decision  shows
    clearly that there was no undue emphasis on this aspect and  the  Judge
    went on to explain why he disbelieved the appellant's core  account  of
    political activity, detention and ill-treatment.  He  returned  to  the
    entry clearance applications at paragraph 29(e) (on page 36)  in  order
    to pull together the threads of analysis but there is no sensible basis
    for finding that they were given undue weight.

12.  The decision by the Judge to depart from  the  conclusions  reached  by
    the Immigration Appeal Tribunal ("IAT") in A (Turkey) and  IK  (Turkey)
    is cogently reasoned.  He summarised the conclusions  reached  in  2003
    and 2004 in the light of the country evidence available  at  the  time.
    Over several pages, he then set out the country evidence made available
    by the parties in the present appeal, including country reports  dating
    from  2013,  and  more  recently  from  2017,  from  reputable  sources
    including the United States State Department and  Human  Rights  Watch.
    There was a cogent analysis of that evidence, the  Judge  finding  that
    the conclusion reached by the IAT in A (Turkey), cited in IK  (Turkey),
    that "the background evidence is that torture continues to  be  endemic
    in Turkey" is no longer supported by more recent country evidence.   He
    found that there continue to be reports that government officials  have
    employed torture  or  ill-treatment,  particularly  in  police  custody
    rather than in other places of detention (see the material  drawn  from
    the 2013 US State Department Report in paragraph 24 of  the  decision).
    It is true, as the  representatives  noted,  that  the  Judge  did  not
    mention Practice Direction 12 but the decision shows that  he  had  the
    relevant test in mind, found at paragraph  12.2.   This  provides  that
    country guidance decisions are to be regarded as authoritative, where a
    subsequent appeal relates to the country guidance issue in question and
    "depends upon the same or similar evidence".  The  decision  to  depart
    from guidance in the IAT decisions did not depend upon the mere passage
    of time.  The Judge had regard to recent country evidence and explained
    why the earlier guidance should not be followed.

13.  The adverse credibility findings made by the Judge, which  he  set  out
    in considerable detail over several pages (pages 33 to 42),  were  open
    to him.  He paid  close  attention  to  the  immigration  history,  the
    discrepancies in the accounts given by the appellant in  interview  and
    to the medical expert, the appellant's oral evidence, his activities in
    the United Kingdom, his ill-health, the letters written in support  and
    the evidence from the  appellant's  witness  and  from  the  person  he
    claimed to be in a relationship with.

14.  The risk factors set out in paragraph 9 of  the  written  grounds  were
    not overlooked by the Judge.  He engaged with the  appellant's  account
    of political activities and family connections to  left  wing  parties,
    his  Kurdish  ethnicity,  the  claims  regarding   ill-treatment,   the
    immigration history, the location of the family in  Turkey,  the  claim
    that he was asked to be an informer  and  the  fact,  accepted  by  the
    Judge, that the appellant has not performed military service.

15.  In relation to military service, there is, again,  an  engagement  with
    country evidence, much of it dating from September 2018, regarding  the
    consequences of a failure to report, the likely imposition  of  a  fine
    and a term of imprisonment and, overall, the absence of a real risk  of
    persecutory ill-treatment facing a person in the appellant's  position.
    The Judge took into account in this context  Sepet  and  Bulbul  [2003]
    UKHL 15 and country evidence from reliable sources including the United
    States State Department.

16.  The decision shows that the Judge had all aspects  of  the  appellant's
    case clearly in mind and that he weighed all the evidence  relied  upon
    by the parties.  His findings of fact are cogently reasoned, as is  his
    decision to give weight to recent country evidence and to depart from A
    (Turkey) and IK (Turkey).  His overall conclusion that the appellant is
    not at real risk of persecution or ill-treatment on  return  to  Turkey
    was open to him, as was his conclusion that  the  appellant  could  not
    succeed on human rights grounds.

17.  As no material error of  law  has  been  shown  in  the  decision,  the
    decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge C H Bennett shall stand.





Signed                                  Date 12 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

Anonymity

The anonymity direction made by the Judge at paragraph 56  of  the  decision
shall continue until varied or brought to an end  by  this  Tribunal  or  an
appropriate court.





Signed                                  Date 12 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell









