
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07709/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 March 2019                     |On 26 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. A.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Soltani, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant, a citizen of Sudan, entered the UK illegally and made a
protection claim which was refused on 6 June 2018. The Appellant's appeal
against that decision was heard, and dismissed, by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Hands, in a decision promulgated on 30 July 2018.

The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was granted by Upper
Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 19 November 2018 on the ground that it was
arguable the Judge had made inconsistent findings of fact, so that the
assessment of risk of harm faced by the Appellant as a member of the Berti
tribe was materially flawed. The Respondent did not reply to that grant
with a Rule 24 response.

The Appellant's case was that he had come to the adverse attention of the
Sudanese authorities, and that he had been arrested on a number of
occasions at demonstrations. The Judge found in paragraphs 16 and 20 of her
decision that he had not. However in paragraph 15m she had earlier found
that he had been arrested, without identifying when, where, or in what
circumstances this had occurred.

 Before me the Respondent accepts that this inconsistent approach renders
the Judge's decision unsafe, and, that a hearing afresh is required. For
the Appellant Ms Soltani accepts that a fresh hearing is the only pragmatic
course open. I agree. None of the findings of fact made by the Judge are
safe, or can be preserved. In circumstances such as this, where it would
appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been considered by the
First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has been to deprive
the parties of the opportunity for their case to be properly considered by
the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of 13
November 2014. Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding exercise
required is such that having regard to the over-riding objective, it is
appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal;
paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.

    To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other
    than First tier Tribunal Judge Hands, at the North Shields Hearing
    Centre. An Arabic interpreter is required. The parties accept they have
    already filed the evidence they wish to place before the Tribunal.
    Accordingly the remitted appeal is suitable for the short warned list.
    The parties should expect the appeal to called on for hearing at short
    notice.

Notice of decision

 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing de novo, with the directions set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 22 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

