

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/07668/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27 February 2018                       |On 11 May 2018                   |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE NICKLIN
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     sNA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, Counsel instructed by Connaughts
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an unusual case. The appellant is a national of  Pakistan  born
    in September 1983.  The Secretary of State refused his claim for asylum
    on 31 July 2017.  The basis of that claim  was  that  he  had  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution in Pakistan on the basis of his  membership
    of a particular social group, i.e. a gay man from Pakistan.  It is not
    necessary for us to go into the details for the refusal. The  appellant
    sought to appeal that  decision.  The  appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Anstis  on  11 September  2017  and  the  decision  was
    promulgated on 19 September 2017.  It was part of this appellant's case
    that he had been in a relationship with a BLQ for a period of over  two
    years and that that was clear proof that he was gay and that  therefore
    he had a well-founded fear of persecution if he were to be returned  to
    Pakistan.

 2. The Judge heard the evidence.  He did not hear from BLQ,  and  we  will
    come back to that in due course, but the conclusion of  the  judge  was
    that he did not accept that the appellant was gay. In paragraph 40, the
    Judge said

         "I have come to the conclusion that the Appellant has not shown, to
         the lower standard of proof, that he is gay and therefore  at  risk
         of persecution on a return to  Pakistan.   This  is  because  of  a
         combination of the following factors:

         (i)  The lack of any substantial documentary evidence  in  relation
             to his sexual orientation  (including  his  relationship  with
             Henry or [BLQ]) prior to late 2016 (around the time his asylum
             claim was lodged)...

         (iii)    The lack of any evidence from [BLQ], or an explanation for
             the lack of that evidence."

    The fourth factor was evidence given by the appellant's brother and the
    judge treated that evidence some scepticism. On that basis  the  appeal
    was dismissed.

 3. Ordinarily, an appellant would face an uphill challenge to the findings
    of fact made by a Tribunal Judge on the basis of the evidence  that  he
    had heard.  This was an unusual case and here is why. After the hearing
    in the appellant's case, the very  next  day,  on  12  September  2017,
    before Tribunal Judge Aziz, BLQ appealed the decision of the  Secretary
    of State refusing his asylum claim.  We are told that the two, BLQ  and
    this appellant, made their applications for asylum together on the same
    basis: that they were  gay.  That  point  was  not  picked  up,  or  it
    certainly was not picked up by the Tribunal.  BLQ's  asylum  claim  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on 4 August 2017 and BLQ  lodged  his
    notice of appeal on 14 August 2017.  It was part of his  case  that  he
    had a well-founded fear of  persecution  were  he  to  be  returned  to
    Pakistan because he was gay and that he relied  upon  his  relationship
    with this appellant.

 4. BLQ relied on his relationship with the appellant in his case. Tribunal
    Judge Aziz, who allowed the appeal and  quashed  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing his asylum claim, was  satisfied  that  BLQ
    did have a well-founded fear of persecution  because  he  was  gay.  In
    paragraph 69(4) of his decision the Judge was satisfied that, since his
    arrival in the United Kingdom, BLQ  had  had  a  number  of  homosexual
    relationships:

         "They have included a relationship with a  man  called  Adam  which
         lasted nine months.  He was also in a four-year  relationship  with
         an Australian man called Steven.  His last relationship was  a  man
         called SNA between March 2015 and April 2017."

    Those dates tally with the dates recorded in Judge Anstis's decision of
    the relationship with BLQ alleged by the appellant.

 5. A strange aspect of this case is that the two appellants had  the  same
    solicitors and counsel. I have been told that the relationship  between
    BLQ and the appellant was not good and that they were not  co-operating
    in relation to each other's asylum claim or  appeal.  Nevertheless,  it
    should have been obvious to the solicitors that there  was  a  risk  of
    inconsistent decisions if the claims were not  heard  together  because
    central to both of the appeals was the  relationship  between  BLQ  and
    this appellant. The Tribunal should have been alerted to the connection
    between the two cases even if the appellants in each case were not  co-
    operating with one another. It  is  clear  that  BLQ  relied  on  other
    evidence, but it was unwise to have two  separate  Tribunals  assessing
    essentially the same question and, as it turns out, reaching  different
    conclusions.  Miss Jones who has appeared for the appellant  today  has
    given  us  a  perfectly  acceptable  explanation.   She,  as   a   busy
    immigration barrister, was instructed in  relation  to  both  of  these
    claims, but it had not become clear to  her  when  preparing  for  this
    appellant's claim, that BLQ was the very person who was  himself  going
    to advance a similar claim in his own case. Although in  hindsight  the
    solicitors should probably have given more thought to  this  and  taken
    action to avoid the situation we are now in, we are where we are.

 6. We are quite satisfied what result must be achieved today. It is simply
    not  right  that  two  different  Tribunals  can  reach  two  different
    conclusions as a matter of fact on the same point,  particularly  where
    that point would be  highly  material  if  not  determinative  in  this
    appellant's appeal.  I accept  that  lawyers  -  applying  the  law  of
    evidence in an adversarial system - can  rationalise  and  justify  two
    contradictory Tribunal decisions on the same factual issue. That is  to
    look at matters through the eyes of a lawyer.  Against  that  there  is
    the view of the person in the street who might  find  it  difficult  to
    accept how such decisions could stand together. We have  been  referred
    to the case of AA Somalia and AH Iran [2007] EWCA Civ  1040.   In  that
    case, the Court of Appeal reviewed the relevant  authorities  and  Lord
    Justice Ward said this:

         [73] This appeal  raises  an  interesting  and,  as  far  as  I  am
             concerned,  a  troublesome  problem.  Take  the   hypothetical
             example I put in argument. There is  a  meeting  of  political
             dissidents in Ruristan at which  A  and  B  are  present.  The
             security police raid the meeting. A and B dive out of a window
             and flee  to  England  where  they  claim  asylum.  The  other
             dissidents are  rounded  up  and  summarily  executed  by  the
             police. Immigration judge X  hears  A  and  B  give  evidence,
             believes them, and grants A asylum. Immigration judge  Y,  who
             has X's decision before him, hears A and B  give  exactly  the
             same evidence, but disbelieves them and refuses B asylum.  Can
             that be right?

         [74] I have no doubt that the man in the street would  answer,  'Of
             course it cannot be right. Either X or Y  has  got  it  wrong.
             Both cannot be right. Justice has not been done.' The logic is
             unassailable. On the  other  hand,  the  lawyer  would  reply,
             'There is no estoppel and the important principle of  judicial
             independence demands that each judge try  every  case  on  the
             evidence before him or her.'

         [75] It seems to me, after careful reflection,  that  the  apparent
             conflict  between  those  two  positions  is  met  within  the
             Devaseelan principles to which my Lords have referred and that
             they should be held to apply in a case such as this.

         [76] The guidelines, as such, were approved by  this  Court  in  LD
             (Algeria) [2004] EWCA  Civ  804,  with  the  emphasis  on  the
             flexibility of the approach. They were then extended  by  this
             Court in Ocampo -v- SSHD [2006] EWCA 1276 to apply to  a  case
             where  there  is  'a  material  overlap  of   evidence',   the
             guidelines to be adapted as might be needed 'according to  the
             nature of the new evidence, the circumstances in which it  was
             given  or  not  given  in  the  earlier  proceedings  and  its
             materiality to securing a just outcome in  the  second  appeal
             along  with  the  consistency  in  the  maintenance  of   firm
             immigration control'."

 7. For reasons we will explain, it is relevant that the Secretary of State
    has not sought to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz
    in BLQ's case.  We accept Mr Wilding's submission that the absence  of
    an appeal is not necessarily the same as an acceptance of  the  factual
    determinations. It is well-known that the avenues of  appeal  from  the
    First-tier Tribunal are fairly limited and the Secretary of State would
    need to show an error of law. In light of that, it was  perfectly  open
    to the Secretary of State to decide not to appeal the decision  on  the
    basis that it was based upon factual findings  of  the  Tribunal  after
    hearing evidence. In our judgment, the relevance of the fact that BLQ's
    decision has not been challenged is this. There are  two  decisions  of
    different First-tier Tribunal Judges that make findings  of  fact  that
    are inconsistent with each other. The position is not quite the same as
    the circumstances outlined by Lord Justice Ward because neither BLQ nor
    the appellant gave evidence in the  other's  appeal,  so  the  evidence
    before each Judge was  not  the  same.  Nevertheless,  the  fundamental
    principle seems to us to be that, if a  single  Judge  had  heard  both
    appeals at the same time, s/he would have had to make a single  finding
    as to whether the appellant and BLQ had been in a relationship for some
    2 years. If a relationship was found to have existed then, barring some
    very unusual circumstances, that would have led to the conclusion  that
    both were gay. As things stand, in my judgment we  are  left  with  two
    irreconcilable decisions on matters of fact.  The question therefore is
    what to do about it.

 8. In fairness, Mr Wilding has, as he is required to do,  pointed  to  the
    potential difficulties in the path of allowing an appeal.  Principally,
    he says that there is no error of law in the decision of Judge  Anstis.
    He says that this appellant cannot impeach the decision based upon  the
    Judge's assessment of the evidence. Those submissions  would,  for  the
    reasons we have already given, have some force. But we are not  in  the
    position of studying Judge Anstis' judgment in isolation.

 9. It appears to us there are two bases on  which  it  is  appropriate  to
    allow the appeal in this case and to remit the  matter  for  rehearing.
    The first is that we consider that procedural unfairness has arisen  as
    a result of these two claims not being heard together.  We are not in a
    position to attribute  blame  as  to  why  this  has  happened.  In  an
    immigration case, where anxious consideration is being given to  asylum
    rights, unless the court were driven to the conclusion that  there  had
    been a calculated decision by an appellant to  try  and  overreach  the
    process, no Tribunal would put the blame at  the  foot  of  the  asylum
    seeker. We do not find it necessary to attribute blame  in  this  case.
    We are where we are, but the reality is that it now appears, and it has
    become clear, that there has been  a  procedural  irregularity.   These
    claims  should  have  been  heard  together.   They  should  have  been
    considered by one judge that had all of the evidence and  the  findings
    of fact would then been binding on all parties.  That has not happened.
     The two Tribunals have come to different decisions.  In  our  judgment
    it is plain that this situation cannot stand.  There is no  question  -
    because there has been no appeal against it  -  that  the  decision  in
    BLQ's case is going to stand.  That means that it is this decision that
    will have to be reconsidered. We are satisfied that there has  been  an
    error  of  law  arising  from  the  procedural  unfairness   of   these
    irreconcilable decisions.

10. If we were wrong about that, the second basis on which we  would  allow
    the appeal and remit the matter for reconsideration  would  be  on  the
    ground of fresh evidence. The evidence  relating  to  the  decision  in
    BLQ's case can be admitted on this appeal under the Tribunal's power in
    Rule 15(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  This
    provides that the Upper Tribunal may:-

      a) admit evidence whether or not:-

          i) the evidence would be admissible  in  a  civil  trial  in  the
             United Kingdom; or

         ii) the  evidence  that  was  available  to  a  previous  decision
             maker...

11. Had First-tier Tribunal Judge Anstis  had  available  the  findings  of
    Judge Aziz, his decision may have been influenced by them, particularly
    in light of his findings about the credibility SNA.  The  evidence  may
    have had a material impact on his decision and, viewed  that  way,  the
    decision is unsafe and that there has been therefore an error  of  law.
    Put another way, evidence has now become  available  to  the  appellant
    that would have been potentially material to the decision made  by  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  fairness  requires  that  this  fresh
    evidence be considered at a re-hearing.

12. In our judgement there is no absolutely no doubt as to what the  answer
    should be and that is that the decision of Judge Anstis should  be  set
    aside and the matter remitted for a  rehearing.   Borrowing  from  Lord
    Justice Ward's judgment, we think it is more important that  the  court
    system commands respect in the eyes of the public generally than  to  a
    limited  circle  of  lawyers  who  can  see  good  legal  reasons   why
    irreconcilable decisions on the facts should be allowed to  stand.   In
    the context of asylum claims, any doubt about this should  be  resolved
    in favour of the person claiming asylum.

13. What happens next is a matter that will require some  thought.   It  is
    true that the decision in BLQ's case is not  binding  on  any  Tribunal
    that were to rehear this matter.  Having said that, all we  can  do  is
    leave it to the best judgment of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that
    hears the case.  It may very well be that, when this matter is reheard,
    BLQ will give evidence in support of SNA's appeal.   We  do  not  know.
    Whatever happens, in our view, however, the Secretary of  State  should
    give separate and fresh consideration to the conclusions of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Aziz in BLQ's case and their impact on SNA's  claim  for
    asylum, particularly in light of the fact that she is  not  challenging
    the findings in BLQ's case. We have not reached a concluded view  about
    this, but there might be fairness arguments were the Secretary of State
    to advance a positive case at the rehearing of SNA's  appeal  that  BLQ
    and SNA were not in a relationship for some 2 years. We are quite sure,
    however, that the Secretary of State would have carried out a review of
    SNA's case in any event now that the decision in BLQ's  case  has  been
    drawn to her attention because she will be as astute as the Tribunal to
    ensure that anxious consideration is given claims for asylum  based  on
    an alleged well-founded fear of persecution.

14. For these reasons the appeal is allowed.



Notice of Decision

               1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

               2) The matter is remitted for a rehearing by a judge  of  the
                  First-tier Tribunal other that Judge Aziz .



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: [pic]          Date: 27 February 2018
     Mr Justice Nicklin
