
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07030/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 1 March 2019                 |On 6 March 2019                 |
|Prepared on 1 March 2019        |                                |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. H.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, Londinium Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  claims  to  have  most
         recently entered the United Kingdom,  legally,  in  November  2005,
         with entry clearance granted to him on 26 October  2005,  following
         the issue to him of a work permit. An  application  to  extend  his
         leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules  was  refused  on  14
         December 2006. He did not appeal, and, thus became an overstayer in
         November 2006.
      2. Although this was not detected at the time, the  Appellant  used  a
         different identity to apply for indefinite leave  to  remain  on  5
         April  2016.  The  application  was  rejected,   because   it   was
         inconsistent with the immigration status he was  then  representing
         himself to hold, without other consideration of its merits. He then
         made an application for naturalisation as a British  citizen  on  9
         January 2017. It was this which led to the detection as  a  forgery
         of the Bangladeshi passport  he  was  relying  upon,  so  that  the
         application was refused on 24 April 2017, and the  forged  passport
         retained.
      3. Somewhat surprisingly, no other action was taken by the  Respondent
         in relation to the Appellant at that stage, so that he was  neither
         prosecuted, nor made subject to immigration detention.
      4. The  Appellant  was  next  encountered  by  chance  whilst  working
         illegally, in the course of an  immigration  enforcement  visit  to
         restaurant premises on 17 November 2017. Having been  detained,  he
         then made a protection claim based upon the risk of  harm  he  said
         that he faced as a result of his political activities in Bangladesh
         prior to November 2005. That protection claim was refused on 21 May
         2018, and the Appellant's appeal against  that  decision  was  then
         heard and dismissed by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fisher  in  a
         decision promulgated on 16 August 2018.
      5. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was granted by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 3 October 2018.
      6. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged  in  response  to  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal. Neither party has applied  pursuant  to  Rule
         15(2A) for permission to  rely  upon  further  evidence.  Thus  the
         matter came before me.


    The challenge
      7. Ms Cleghorn, who was not the author of the grounds,  accepted  that
         although they purported to offer a  number  of  challenges  to  the
         Judge's decision, there were in reality only  two  viable  grounds.
         The second ground stood, or fell, with the  first,  and  the  third
         added nothing to either of those that had gone before.
      8. Thus two complaints were advanced. First, that the Judge had  given
         inadequate reasons for the wholescale rejection of the  Appellant's
         evidence. Second, that the Judge's consideration of the  Article  8
         appeal was cursory at best, and flawed for failure to recognise the
         "family life" the Appellant had established in the UK.
      9. There is in my judgement no merit in either  of  these  complaints.
         The first is in reality  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
         Judge's assessment of  the  weight  that  could  be  given  to  the
         evidence relied upon by the Appellant, dressed up  as  a  complaint
         that he gave inadequate reasons for his decision. The second, as Ms
         Cleghorn accepted, is based upon  a  misconceived  claim  that  the
         Appellant had established a "family life" in the UK, when that  was
         not in fact his evidence.
     10. The Appellant came before the Judge as a man of proven  dishonesty,
         perfectly prepared to advance false identities to  the  Respondent,
         and to dishonestly claim an immigration  status  that  he  did  not
         enjoy. That was the context in which  the  Judge  was  required  to
         consider the evidence that the Appellant  advanced  before  him  in
         support of a protection claim.
     11. The Judge was also perfectly entitled to find  that  the  Appellant
         could and should have made that protection claim over twelve  years
         earlier, if it were genuine,  and  arguably  any  other  conclusion
         would have been perverse [20].
     12. The Judge did not, as suggested, take those points,  either  alone,
         or together, as fatal to the Appellant's appeal. He considered  the
         Appellant's evidence about  the  problems  he  had  experienced  in
         Bangladesh, and found that evidence to be  incredible  in  its  own
         right. The Appellant's own party had been in power in Bangladesh at
         the  date  the  Appellant  claimed  to  have  faced  problems  from
         supporters of another party, and yet his explanation for not making
         any complaint to the authorities was that the authorities were from
         that  same  opposition  party.  He  was  cross-examined  about  the
         apparent inconsistency in this explanation, and the Judge  recorded
         his conclusion that the Appellant was unable to give a satisfactory
         explanation  for  it.  It  is  not  enough  for  Ms  Cleghorn,   on
         instructions, to advance now an explanation for that inconsistency,
         that could and should  have  been  offered  to  the  Judge  by  the
         Appellant himself.
     13. Nor did the Judge ignore the corroborative evidence that was relied
         upon by the Appellant, as given by Mr C. The Judge observed that he
         found Mr C's evidence to be of no assistance, as it  was  so  vague
         that he was unable to attach any material weight to it. He set  out
         the gist of what Mr C had to say [11-2], and it is plain that Mr  C
         accepted before the Judge that he had no direct knowledge  of  what
         the Appellant had, or had not, done in Bangladesh prior to entering
         the UK. Indeed Mr C had never met the  Appellant  until  they  were
         both living in the UK,  and  he  claimed  to  have  never  had  any
         knowledge of the Appellant's lack of immigration status in the  UK.
         The Judge had the benefit of seeing, and hearing from, Mr C. He was
         well placed to assess the weight that could  be  given  to  Mr  C's
         evidence, and it was open to him to make  the  assessment  that  he
         did, for the reasons that he gave.
     14. In any event it is clear, when the decision is  read  as  a  whole,
         that the Judge did not reject Mr C's evidence simply because he was
         vague. The reality was that however vague he was, he had no  direct
         first hand evidence to offer; at best he was simply repeating  what
         he had been told by the Appellant himself, or others  who  had  not
         given  evidence.  The  Judge  was  obliged  to  consider   Mr   C's
         corroborative evidence in the light of the observations of  Ouseley
         J in CJ (on the application of R) v Cardiff County  Council  [2011]
         EWHC 23, concerning the importance of the approach in Tanveer Ahmed
         v  SSHD  [2002]  Imm  AR  318.  Corroborative   evidence,   whether
         documentary, or provided by  a  supporting  witness,  needs  to  be
         weighed in the light of all the evidence in the case. Provenance is
         as important in the case  of  documents,  as  will  be  first  hand
         knowledge  in  the  case  of  a  witness.  In  neither  case   does
         corroborative evidence carry with it a presumption of authenticity,
         which specific evidence must disprove, failing  which  its  content
         must be accepted. What is required is its appraisal in the light of
         all of the evidence, especially that given by the claimant.  In  my
         judgement, there was no  error  in  the  Judge's  approach  to  the
         evidence of Mr C.
     15. Accordingly, the Judge's rejection of the Appellant's  evidence  as
         untrue, on the applicable low standard of proof, was well  open  to
         him, and it was adequately reasoned.
     16.  Turning  then  to  the  Article  8  appeal.  Notwithstanding   the
         assertions that were made in the grounds  of  the  appeal  about  a
         relationship, (repeated in  the  grounds  of  the  application  for
         permission to appeal) the Appellant confirmed to the Judge that  he
         was a single man who was not in a relationship. He did not claim to
         have any children in the UK. Thus the claim advanced on his  behalf
         that he had established a "family life" in the UK had no evidential
         basis. Indeed, Ms Cleghorn accepted before me  that  this  was  the
         case.
     17. The nature of the Appellant's "private life" as established by  the
         evidence before the Judge, was that he was keen cricketer, who  had
         the benefit of a number of letters of support. He had lived in  the
         UK for over twelve years. On the other hand there was  an  enhanced
         public interest in his removal, as a result of his dishonesty,  and
         his illegal working. He gained no benefit from the terms of s117 of
         the 2002 Act, since the "private life"  he  relied  upon  had  been
         created whilst he was present in the UK unlawfully. On the evidence
         before the Judge it was plainly proportionate to  remove  him  from
         the UK, as the Judge concluded. Indeed Ms Cleghorn accepted as much
         before me, and on reflection also accepted that she could  identify
         no error in the Judge's approach to the Article 8 appeal.


    Conclusion
     18. Accordingly, notwithstanding  the  terms  in  which  permission  to
         appeal was granted, the grounds fail to disclose any material error
         of law in the approach taken  by  the  Judge  to  the  appeal  that
         requires his decision to be set aside and remade.



    DECISION


    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    164 August 2018 contained no material error of law in the  decision  to
    dismiss the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to  be  set
    aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.


Signed [pic]




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 1 March 2019


