
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08978/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 September 2020               |On 29 September 2020               |


                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                 KHALID [O]

                                                                  Respondent



                                DETERMINATION


1.   Parties in the UT are as above, but  the  rest  of  this  determination
refers to them as they were in the FtT.

2.   This determination is to be issued with a further copy of  my  decision
on error of law, and directions, issued on 7 August 2020, and is to be  read
with that decision; with the  appellant's  submissions,  dated  4  September
2020; and with the SSHD's submissions, dated 12 August 2020.

3.   While no findings are formally preserved,  the  appellant  advances  no
asylum claim, and the only issue to be  resolved  is  whether  it  would  be
unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without him.

4.   In light of both submissions above, the decision  of  the  FtT  is  set
aside, and the case is remitted  to  the  FtT  for  a  fresh  hearing.   The
member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not  to  include  Judge
Swinnerton.

5.   No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


[pic]

UT Judge Macleman
25 August 2020






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

