
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/08782/2019
      & PA/08785/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|By Skype for Business                         |                              |
|On 15 March 2021                              |On 14 July 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS

                                   Between

                                     FP
                                     MP
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SEcretary of State for the Home Department

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lee, Counsel, instructed by Ata and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lewis
sent on 20 March 2020 dismissing the appellants' appeals against the
decisions dated 29 August 2019 refusing their protection claims. Permission
to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on 18 September 2020.

The hearing was held remotely.  Neither party objected to the hearing being
held in this manner.  Both parties participated by Skype for Business.  I
am satisfied that a face-to-face hearing could not be held because it was
not practicable due to the current COVID-19 situation and that all of the
issues could be determined fairly by way of a remote hearing.  Neither
party complained of any unfairness during the hearing.

Anonymity

This direction is made because this is a protection matter and the first
appellant is a vulnerable individual with mental health problems.

Background

The appellants are a mother and daughter, both nationals of Afghanistan.
The first appellant lived with her husband and children in Afghanistan
prior to the family relocating first to Pakistan and then to the United
Arab Emirates because of her husband's work.  She travelled to the UK as a
visitor in March 2018 with her family. The first appellant's husband
claimed asylum on 17 May 2018 with the first and second appellants as his
dependents. After her husband's asylum appeal was dismissed on 14 January
2019, the first appellant claimed asylum in her own right on 13 May 2019.
Her husband is now dependent on her asylum claim.  The second appellant
claimed asylum in her own right on the same day as her mother.

The appellants claim to fear serious harm on return to Afghanistan.  The
first appellant asserts that her son converted to Christianity many years
ago and her husband's extended family do not approve. She and her husband
are afraid of her husband's stepbrothers because they want to force their
daughters into marriage and will hurt them on account of their son's
Christian beliefs. The second appellant is also frightened that she will be
forced into marriage and fears that the extended family will harm her
because they suspect she has also converted to Christianity. The appellants
also fear the Taliban who have tried to extort money from the family and
threatened them. This was essentially the same account which was put
forward in the first appellant's husband's claim for asylum.

It is also asserted that both appellants have significant mental health
problems and that they would experience treatment contrary to Article 15(c)
on account of their mental health problems in Kabul.

By way of a letter dated 29 August 2019, the Secretary of State refused the
asylum claims. The respondent pointed to a lack of detail and
inconsistencies in the accounts and relied on the findings of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Stedman in the first appellant's husband's appeal which was
heard on 4 June 2019. These findings formed the starting point for the
second appeal because the appellants relied on the same factual matrix.
Judge Stedman found that the first appellant's husband had fabricated his
account of being attacked and threatened by the Taliban in April 2018. The
judge found that there was no real risk of serious harm to the first
appellant's husband from the Taliban. The judge found that any difficulties
with the appellants' father's family was not connected with the Taliban.
The respondent also relied on the findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Stedman in respect of the claim of the fear of forced marriage. In summary,
First-tier Tribunal Judge Stedman accepted that the family were affluent,
educated and successful; that there had been a long standing property
dispute with the extended family and the first appellant's husband may have
been at risk of robbery because of his wealth. The judge also found that
the extended family may have had concerns about the son's conversion to
Christianity and may have asked for the family's eldest daughter's hand in
marriage. However, the judge found that since forced marriage is a breach
of sharia law and the family including her father supported her decision
not to marry the extended family member, she was not at risk of being
forcibly married. Further, she could seek the protection of the police.

The respondent rejected the first appellant's new claim that the second
appellant had been threatened as a result of a suspicion that she had
converted to Christianity because a photograph, taken of her in front of a
church, was posted on social media because of inconsistencies in the
account.

The Secretary of State considered that it would not be unduly harsh for the
appellants to return to Kabul as women because they would be returning as a
family unit with the first appellant's husband.  The respondent, in
accordance with the Country Guidance, considered that there was no risk of
treatment contrary to Article 15(c) on account of indiscriminate violence
merely be being present in the country. The respondent considered the
medical evidence and noted that treatment was available in Afghanistan.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

Both appellants gave oral evidence.

The judge took First-tier Tribunal Judge Stedman's findings in the first
appellant's husband's appeal as his starting point. The judge assessed the
evidence of both appellants and found that there were considerable
inconsistencies in the evidence as well as difficulties with it. The judge
addressed the further evidence which was produced in support of the appeal
including the medical evidence, screenshots from a mobile phone as well as
a letter from the Taleban and an expert report.

At [45] the judge noted that the expert who had been asked to verify the
documentation did not support the appellant's account. Dr Guistozzi,
through one of his trusted researchers, approached the Taleban directly.
The Taliban military commission member approached, stated that the 'Taliban
warning letter' was not written by the Taliban and was a scam.

The judge commented that much of the evidence of the witnesses was
secondhand testimony as to what happened to the first appellant's husband,
whose account had been disbelieved in the first appeal. The judge then went
on to address the medical reports at length. The judge found that neither
appellant had a well-founded fear of persecution on return to Afghanistan.
The judge turned to Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive. The judge
took into account evidence from the UNHCR and the European Asylum Support
Office. He found that there was no Article 15(c) risk to either appellant
on their return to Kabul. He found that any Article 3 or 8 ECHR medical
claim was not made out. The judge found that there would be no breach of
Article 8 ECHR and dismissed both appeals.

The Grounds of Challenge

The appellant submits that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
flawed in the following material respects:

Failure to take into account material considerations/taking into account
irrelevant considerations

          i) The judge failed to take into account relevant factors
             including the evidence of the expert Dr Antonio Giustozzi that
             the provision of mental health care in Afghanistan is almost
             non-existent and the UNHCR guidelines include individuals with
             disabilities including mental disabilities and persons
             suffering from mental illness in the category of those
             potentially at risk on return.

         ii) The judge failed to take into account the evidence that for a
             very significant period of time the appellants were not in
             Afghanistan. In the last 20 years, the first appellant has
             spent only four of those years in Afghanistan and that is
             clearly relevant to an assessment of whether looking forward
             the first appellant would be able to manage her mental health
             difficulties in Afghanistan in much the way it has hitherto.
             The judge failed to take this into account, and it was
             material to the assessment.

        iii) The judge failed to take into account the first appellant's
             evidence that she was unable to secure any medication on a
             consistent basis in Afghanistan and was reliant on times on
             fake and sub-standard medication.

         iv) The judge's approach to the medical support available in
             Afghanistan is equally flawed. The judge states that it is not
             suggested that there were no mental health facilities in
             Afghanistan and points to the relative affluence of the
             appellants as given them an advantage. This leaves out of
             account the evidence of Dr Giustozzi about the lack of
             treatment and there was no evidence that relative affluence
             can facilitate access to mental health treatment and
             medication. This consideration was irrelevant.

The Rule 24 Response

The respondent asserts that the judge directed himself appropriately.  The
judge applied the Devaseelan guidelines and observes at [27] that the
claims being advanced by the first and second appellant was, at their core
identical to those advanced in the earlier proceedings. At [44] the judge
refers to the various medical and expert reports observing at [45] a report
by Dr Giustozzi contradicts the appellant's claim that the appellant's
husband received a demand for money from the Taliban.

It is submitted that the judge gave detailed and anxious scrutiny to the
medical evidence and its implications throughout the determination and
particularly at [48] to [58] and [104] to [112] The judge made a plethora
of cogent findings based on the medical reports and had the additional
benefit of observing the appellants in person during the hearing. The judge
observed at [51] that Dr Heke did not consider or offer any opinion in
respect of the first appellant's experience of giving evidence previously
and any subsequent impact on her mental health. It was open to the judge to
reject the diagnosis of PTSD at [59].

The issue of return to Afghanistan is considered at length by the judge
from [98] and the judge finds that the appellants would not be at risk,
taking into account their mental state, the fact that they are returning to
their home city and that the first appellant's husband owns property in the
area thus they will not be financially unsupported. They also have a family
network available from whom they can obtain practical and emotional
support.

Discussion and Decision

    General background

Mr Lee clarified at the outset of the appeal that the judge's findings in
respect of the asylum claim are not under challenge. It is accepted that
neither appellant will face a real risk of serious harm on account of a
Convention reason if returned to Afghanistan. There is also no challenge to
the judge's negative credibility findings.

It is important to note that the two appellants are a mother and daughter
who would be returning to Afghanistan with the first appellant's husband
who is the father of the second appellant in a family unit. It is agreed
that the family's hometown is Kabul and that the family own property there.
The issue in this appeal is not the reasonableness of internal relocation
because there is no suggestion that the appellants will be subject to
treatment amounting to serious harm anywhere in Afghanistan.

The judge's findings are also made against the background of this family
having spent considerable periods abroad. The appellant's husband worked
abroad in Pakistan until 2010 and thereafter the family returned to
Afghanistan before they travelled to the United Arab Emirates in 2014
because the first appellant's husband had employment there. In 2018 the
family travelled to the United Kingdom on a visit visa and claimed asylum.
The family are affluent, educated and have the means to travel
internationally with a history of working in Pakistan, India and the UAE.

The first appellant's oldest daughter has claimed asylum in her own right
and their son has status in the UK having claimed asylum in the UK many
years ago.

There is no challenge to the judge's finding at [103] that the first
appellant's husband retains control over a significant property portfolio
in the city, that the family has access to accommodation and have
substantial family funds. The judge made this finding after hearing oral
evidence from the first appellant's husband that he owned several
properties and land in Kabul. The judge also found that he retains control
over these properties because he has continued to own them despite spending
considerable time abroad. There is also no challenge to the judge's finding
that he is not satisfied that the first appellant does not have a family
network in in Kabul from whom the appellants can draw practical, emotional
and further financial support.

    Judge's findings on first appellant's mental health

In order to determine whether the judge erred in respect of the
availability of treatment in Afghanistan it is necessary to consider the
judge's findings in respect of the first appellant's mental health.

No challenge is made to the findings of the judge following his detailed
examination of the evidence of the first appellant's mental health
problems. This analysis stretches from 53(i) to (xi). I summarise only this
lengthy consideration.

The judge accepts that Dr Heke has the qualifications and experience to
prepare such a medical report. The judge notes that the first appellant was
examined in one session lasting 2 hours in which the first appellant 's son
constantly interrupted, and Dr Heke ran out of time. The judge notes that
the first appellant's depression predated the specific events currently
relied upon and that she had been depressed for over 20 years due to
constantly moving around. The first appellant was said to be worried about
her family and current social circumstances and the impact on her son's
relationship with his wife as a result of the family living in her son's
home.  Her depression was also exacerbated by her immigration situation.

The judge also noted that the doctor did not have full regard to the issue
of the first appellant's weight loss which was not recorded in detail in
the GP records and may have been attributable to a change of diet. This fed
into Dr Heke's diagnosis of PTSD.

The judge found that the appellants had not given a candid account of their
situation to Dr Heke.  For instance, they stated that they would be
destitute in Kabul to Dr Heke, however in the course of the evidence in the
hearing it became apparent that they own properties. Dr Heke's conclusions
in relation to the first appellant being overwhelmed with the fear of being
destitute and having a suicide risk based on destitution are not reliable
in these circumstances.  Dr Heke did not consider the first appellant's
return to Afghanistan in the context of her returning with her husband and
daughter. Her opinion was given on the basis of the appellant returning as
a single woman who would establish herself independently. Dr Heke also
failed to overtly acknowledge the limitations in self-reporting in
psychometric measure in a situation where the questionnaires had been
filled in so that he first appellant obtained the maximum scores.

At [54] the judge notes that Dr Heke's opinion is that the first appellant
"meets the full diagnostic criteria for a severe major depressive disorder
and comorbid PTSD and severe anxiety" and "the depression has been very
long-standing predating her immigration problems, whereas the anxiety is
primarily related to her hopelessness and worry regarding her and her
family further should she be returned to Afghanistan".

The judge found that report suggests that the appellant is worried about
her specific circumstances rather than meeting the criteria of generalised
anxiety disorder.

The judge at [56] rejected the doctor's opinion that the PTSD was "directly
attributable to consistent reports of being threatened in Afghanistan and
living through daily war related traumatic events" and that it is "the
accumulative and repeated exposure that has led to the severity of the
symptoms rather than specific traumatic events". The judge found that
depression was the primary problem and noted that the first appellant has
not reported being the direct recipient of any specific threat either
whilst in Afghanistan or otherwise and at interview did not express a fear
for herself rather than for her daughters. The judge noted that the family
were planning to return to Afghanistan until 2018 and that the lack of
available time and Dr Heke's misunderstanding of the first appellant's
experience have undermined her ability to make a proper assessment.

At [58] the judge states

       "Overall, I consider Dr Heke to have prepared a careful report- as is
       indicated by the nuanced consideration of the PTSD symptoms. However,
       as Dr Heke acknowledges there were limitations in the time available
       for the assessment and the interventions of M presented FP for
       speaking for herself at times. Further in my judgement Dr Heke was
       impeded by the inaccurate reporting of FP's circumstances and
       prospects particularly with regard to the notion of possible
       destitution. Dr Heke also unjustifiably focussed on FP's ability to
       function independently: in reality there was no foundation for
       certain premises of the assessment. Moreover, I consider Dr Heke to
       have been insufficiently critical on her consideration of the nature
       of the self-reporting psychometric measure assessment tools. Dr Heke
       was seemingly also unaware that FP had previously given evidence in
       an appeal before FTT(IAC). Bearing in mind the other concerns I have
       expressed about the misrepresentation of circumstances during the
       assessment, I find that the presentation of FP's symptoms was
       exaggerated. This is not to deny the essential nature of the
       underlying diagnoses of depression and anxiety, but it is to conclude
       that I am not satisfied that either condition is properly to be as
       characterised as severe".

At [59] he continues;

       "Pursuant to my observations above, I do not accept the diagnosis of
       PTSD. I accept that FP has chronic depression the onset of which
       predates and is therefore unrelated to the particular events advanced
       in support of the asylum claim"........

The judge's findings have not been challenged as inadequately reasoned or
as irrational. The grounds do not challenge the judge's approach to the
medical report.

Dr Heke noted that the first appellant was currently taking naproxen,
citalopram 40mg and Amais 8mg. She had not had counselling at all and there
were barriers to accessing counselling because of an inability to focus.
The first appellant stated that the medication was not helping but that she
was worried she would not able to access it in Afghanistan. The doctor
recommends that she continue her medication and have CBT therapy. The first
appellant's own evidence was that she had long term depression and had been
taking medication for depression and high blood pressure. She also referred
to medication in Afghanistan being fake and ineffective and getting better
medication in Dubai.

    Mental health of the first appellant's husband

The judge's findings on the first appellant's husband are at [88] following
a similarly extensive and detailed examination of the medical report by Dr
Joliffe at [87] (i) to (x). The judge accepts the diagnosis of PTSD and
anxiety but finds that his symptoms have been exaggerated.

The grounds do not challenge the judge's approach to the medical evidence
nor the findings on the first appellant's husband's mental health.

    Judge's summary of findings on mental health

The judge's ultimate findings in respect of the first appellant's and her
husband's mental health conditions are at [109] and are as follows;

       "For the reasons already given, I am not satisfied that GP's mental
       health symptoms are as extreme as claimed or as found by Dr Joliffe.
       I am not satisfied that he is significantly functionally limited such
       that he cannot cope with all aspect of daily living activities or
       continue whether personally by instructing others, to manage his
       property portfolio. I accept that FP has chronic depression, but that
       this is something she has managed with for 20 years or more. I
       acknowledge that her anxiety arising from her particular predicament
       - she does not strictly speaking meet the criteria of generalised
       anxiety disorder  - is unlikely to reduce upon the prospect of return
       to Afghanistan. However, I am not persuaded that that cannot be
       managed in much the way it has hitherto - through family support and
       medication".

    Judge's findings on availability of treatment.

At [110] the judge states;

       "I have had regard to the materials to which I have been referred in
       the Skeleton Argument in respect of mental health in
       Afghanistan...... ..Otherwise it is to be acknowledged that there has
       been a significant mental health impact on the population of
       Afghanistan by reason of years of conflict and insecurity and the
       limited medical facilities have struggled to meet such needs. That
       said, it is not suggested that there are no mental health facilities
       in Afghanistan. In my judgement the relative affluence of FP and GP
       will give them a significant advantage in accessing medical support".

At [112] the judge states;

       "I find that the appellants have not shown that the mental health
       conditions of either FP or GP cannot adequately be managed in
       Afghanistan with the care and support, as well as practical
       assistance of MP and ZP, and if necessary FP's bother and family and
       through available medical facilities. In respect of the availability
       of medical facilities, I am not satisfied that the family is unable
       to access a significant level of care on a private basis because I am
       not satisfied that GP has been candid about his means".

Discussion on grounds of appeal

    A - Failure to take into account the fact that for a very long period
    the appellant was not in Afghanistan and that this was material to any
    assessment of the first appellant's ability to manage her condition as
    she has done "hitherto".

It is manifest from reading the decision that the judge was aware that the
first appellant had lived abroad and that she had only resided in
Afghanistan for a brief period of four years between 2010 to 2014 in more
recent times.  At [4] he sets out the chronology of where the family have
lived commenting that the family lived in Pakistan between 2000 and 2010
when they returned to Afghanistan before relocating to the UAE in 2014
until 2018 from where the family travelled to the UK on visit visas.

This period of living abroad is mentioned at various places in the decision
including in the detailed analysis of the medical report which refers to
the first appellant running to one city to another over a number of years.
The judge has manifestly taken into account that the first appellant has
lived outside of Afghanistan when considering the impact on her mental
health on her return. The judge finds that the first appellant has been
depressed for many years including times when she was living in Pakistan,
Afghanistan, UAE and the UK. The evidence before the judge was that the
first appellant had managed her depression with anti-depressants and family
support. The judge accepts that she will continue to be depressed on her
return to Afghanistan.

The submission that the judge erred by failing to take into account the
lengthy period she has lived outside Afghanistan is not sustainable. The
judge manifestly took this into consideration.

    B - The judge does not take into consideration the first appellant's
    evidence that she was unable to source medication on a consistent basis
    in Afghanistan and was reliant on fake and sub- standard medication.

The first appellant's evidence was she had taken ineffective medication in
Afghanistan and her regime was changed in Dubai. She also stated that there
is fake medication in Afghanistan.

The judge does not explicitly refer to this evidence when making his
findings about the availability of treatment to the first appellant in
Afghanistan, but I am satisfied that the issue of fake and substandard
medication was dealt with at length by Dr Guistozzi in his report which was
considered by the judge and I deal with this ground below. I also note that
the judge found all of the witnesses to be lacking in credibility and to
have exaggerated various aspects of their accounts and in respect of some
of the witnesses to have been evasive about their living circumstances in
Afghanistan.

    C - Failure to take into account the expert evidence on the
    availability of medication  in respect of the lack of comparable
    medical treatment, that facilities were badly compromised and that the
    judge's conclusion that the appellants would be able to access medical
    treatment because of their relative affluence is flawed because this is
    not supported by the background evidence or the expert report.

It is also submitted by Mr Lee that there was no evidence to support the
judge's conclusion that the relative affluence of the appellants in some
way gave them an advantage in obtaining healthcare and that the judge took
into account an irrelevant factor.

The evidence before the judge in respect of the availability of medical
treatment was partly in the form of expert evidence from Dr Guistozzi.

At paragraph 41 of his report he states;

       "In Afghanistan Mrs P would not receive a level of mental health care
       even remotely comparable to what she would received in the UK.
       Outside a few cities (see below) the provision of mental health care
       in Afghanistan is almost non-existent. The country's only mental
       health hospital (Kabul) is in a bad condition due to war damage and
       lack of maintenance. The provincial hospital in Jalalbad has a mental
       ward, which however lacks the support of any fully qualified
       psychologist or psychiatrists. Furthermore, it lacks equipment. The
       hospital has 60 beds according to 2011 statistics. In 2012 the Kabul
       mental health hospital still only has 60 places although the number
       of psychiatrists operating there has gone up to 6 from 2 in 2020.
       Plans to expand facilities with the building a new hospitals were
       never implemented. There is a problem of understanding as many of the
       already limited number of trained mental health profession have left
       the country. In 2010 there were only two fully trained psychiatrists
       in the whole of Afghanistan, a few psychiatric nurses and not even
       one psychologist; 40 more psychiatrists and psychologists had
       received partial training. There are about 30 other doctors who have
       received some training in mental health care without being fully
       qualified psychiatrists. By 2017 the number of partially trained
       doctors had gone up from 70 to 101. It should also be noted that to
       be admitted to this  hospital in Kabul it is necessary to be
       accompanied by a relative all the time".

At 42 he states;

       "If we consider that according to the WHO as of 2010, about 60% of
       Afghans suffer from various forms of mental health problems, it is
       obvious that the chances of having access to care for the average
       Afghan patient with mental health conditions are slim indeed. The
       opportunities for psychosocial support are almost non-existent in
       Afghanistan, mainly because of the extreme shortage of trained mental
       health professionals... This situation led a doctor to define the
       mental health care system of Afghanistan as almost non-existent
       during a briefing to the Congress of the United States in 2006. Since
       then, little has changed".

Dr Guistozzi then goes on to deal with the fact that the European Union is
supporting the rehabilitation of the mental health hospital in Kabul and
paid for the construction of a new building. The capacity is of 60 beds.
Counselling is available in small clinics thinly distributed around the
country. In Kabul they are few and far between. Some international NGO's
offered training and help to the Afghan mental health service.

He then turns to the availability of medication and in summary states that
in recent years a number of psychotropic drugs have become available in
Afghanistan usually imported from Pakistan and mostly illegally (80%).
Patients have to pay for these drugs, there is no subsidy on medication.
The only cheap option is unreliable Pakistani products. "Imports from the
Arab Gulf or Germany are expensive and clearly unaffordable to the poorer
strata of the population. There are issues with the quality of medicines
due to counterfeits manufactured in Pakistan". It is estimated that up to
half of medicines circulating in Afghanistan are Pakistani counterfeits. It
is said that the percentage of the population with access to essential
psychotropic medication is less than 1%. The cost of antidepressant
medication is 9 Afghanis (16% of the daily minimum wage).  Dr Guistozzi
then discusses the problems of distribution which is also problematic. He
states that there is no 24 hours supervised care hostel for patients. All
that is available is counselling for PTSD with 16 psycho-social centre
spread around the Afghan cities of Kabul and Herat which essentially
provide counselling to individuals suffering from mental health.

He then states that individuals will be considered by the Afghan health
service for mental health care assistance if they present themselves to a
clinic or hospital of their own will or are brought there by their
relatives. It is only then a doctor will assess them and decide whether
they are entitled to assistance. It will not be the case therefore of the
healthcare service to proactively reaching out to Mrs P and she will need
to actively seek medical health care. Her needs will be assessed against
those of the large number of people who suffer from mental health
conditions (approx. 2 million in Kabul but not all seeking medical
support). It is unlikely that she would then receive more than cursory
attention by the medical staff at the country's only mental health
hospital.

Dr Guistozzi then goes onto state that the real problem for the first
appellant would be access because she will have to reside in a city with
only Kabul offering a relatively wide range of treatment opportunities in
the only mental health hospital in the country and even then she would have
to compete with the large portion of the residence for the attention of a
handful of mental health staff.

In summary, Dr Guistoozzi's evidence is that there is some treatment for
mental health conditions particularly in Kabul although resources are
scarce and there is competition for treatment. His evidence is also that it
is possible to obtain medication from abroad if you have sufficient income.
Reliable medication can be obtained at higher cost from Germany and the
Arab Gulf whilst the cheaper medication from Pakistan is often substandard
and frequently counterfeit. His evidence is that if you are from a poor
background, it will be extremely difficult to obtain reliable and good
quality medication.

It is important to note that Dr Guistozzi's conclusions appear to be
premised on the basis of the first appellant returning alone and not being
able to access accommodation due to the hight cost of living and her likely
inability to have sufficient financial resources. He points to her
difficulties in accessing accommodation and employment.

These factors are contrary to the findings of the judge that the family has
a substantial property portfolio and access to accommodation and
substantial financial means. These findings are not challenged by the
appellant.

The appellant does not particularise which aspect of Dr Guistozzi's
evidence the judge did not take into account.

At [44] the judge expressly lists Dr Guistozzi's report as a document
before him and states that he will return to the documents below. The judge
refers to Dr Guistozzi's report at [95] and at [104].

The judge has manifestly taken into account Dr Guistozzi's evidence in
relation to the availability of drugs which indicates that more wealthy
Afghans are able to import reliable medication from abroad. I find that
there is no error in the judge's conclusion that the first appellant will
have better access to medication because of her affluence. I do not agree
with Mr Lee that there is no support for this in the background evidence.

Dr Guistozzi's conclusion as to the availability of treatment does not
suggest that there is private treatment available, (although the report is
silent as to whether he was asked to address this) but does indicate that
in terms of "access" to treatment it is important to be able to live and
survive in Kabul and that treatment might affect studies or employment. His
report in this sense suggests that access to treatment will be for easier
for those with independent means. The judge's findings are not contrary to
the background evidence in this respect.

The judge's reference to "medical facilities" is less clear. In order to
consider if the judge has erred, the judge's findings in respect of the
ability of the appellant to access facilities must be put into the context
of what facilities she would need to access. The evidence before the judge
is that the first appellant has suffered from depression for a long time
and over the years the first appellant has received support from her family
and taken anti-depressants. She has not had counselling.  The judge's
finding that the first appellant will be living in Kabul with her husband
and daughter and that she has other family support is not challenged.

My view, after a careful consideration of the evidence before the judge and
a careful reading of the decision as a whole is that the judge did take
into account the contents of Dr Guistozzi's report with respect to the
availability of treatment and his conclusion that the appellants' relative
affluent would assist her to obtain medical services is not contrary to the
background material. The judge's conclusion that the first appellant's
affluence will assist her to obtain medical facilities is neither
irrational nor perverse. I am satisfied that this ground is not made out.

The judge's finding that the appellant would be able to continue to manage
her depression in much the same way as she had over the last 20 years is
adequately reasoned. On the evidence before the judge the first appellant
will be able to access antidepressants, and her family can provide
emotional support. There is some other mental health provision that she can
attempt to access such as counselling although the judge acknowledges that
resources are limited, and mediation may be substandard.  She will return
with her husband and daughter, and she has extended family members in
Kabul.

In his submissions Mr Lee referred to DH (Particular Social Group; Mental
Health) [2020] UKUT 223 which he acknowledges was handed down on 5 July
2020 after the judge's decision. Other than submit that there is no
suggestion in the authority that relative affluence affects access to
effective medical care he did not particularise this any further and I have
dealt with the judge's findings on the availability of medication and
treatment in the paragraphs above.

Looking at the decision as a whole I am not satisfied that there is an
error in the judge's findings on the availability of treatment.

    D - the judge failed to take into account the UNHCR guidelines

It is submitted that the UNHCR guidelines include "individuals with
disabilities, including in particular mental disabilities and persons
suffering from mental illnesses in the category of those potentially at
risk on return. It is said that all of the medical evidence went to the
elevated risk of Article 15 (c) applying the sliding scale approach in
Elfaji and Diakite (C-285/12); [2014] 1 WLR 2477.

At [46] the judge notes that the UNHCR guidelines are reproduced in the
bundle from pages 150 to 275. The judge refers to the UNHCR report at
[102]. He notes that particular reliance is placed on the UNHCR Guidelines
to the effect that given the current security, human rights and
humanitarian situation in Kabul, IFA/IFA is generally not available in the
city. The judge notes that Kabul would not be a place of internal
relocation to for the appellants  but "a return to their home city".

The judge states that the difficulties of poor access to livelihood, food
and shelter do not apply to the appellants and that they have a family to
rely on.

I am satisfied that the judge has taken into account these guidelines. At
[108] the judge refers to Mr Lee's submission in his skeleton argument that
there is an elevated threat because of the first appellant and her
husband's health conditions. The judge was manifestly aware of the
submission. The judge points to the fact that their medical conditions have
been exaggerated and that some treatment was available. The judge gives
consideration to the medical reports and the treatment available. I am
satisfied that it was open to the judge to find that the appellants have
not shown that their medical conditions cannot be managed. I am satisfied
that the judge properly considered the contents of the UNCHR report and
rationally concluded that there was no elevated risk to the appellants on
the basis of their individual health problems and personal circumstances.

There is no challenge to the remainder of the judge's findings in respect
of Article 15(c) at [102] to [107]. The judge properly considers that the
generalised risk of violence in Kabul does not meet the criteria for
humanitarian protection and considers the various reports on the current
situation.  There is no challenge to the judge's finding that the
appellants would not face treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR because
their health would deteriorate to the required extent.

I am not satisfied that any of the grounds are made out.

    Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

I am mindful of Guidance Note 2013, No 1. concerned with anonymity orders
and I observe that the starting point for consideration of anonymity orders
in this Chamber of the Upper Tribunal is open justice. However, I note
paragraph 13 of the Guidance Note where it is confirmed that it is the
present practice of both the First tier Tribunal and this Tribunal that an
anonymity direction is made in all appeals raising asylum or other
international protection claims. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the 2008 Procedure
rules I make an anonymity direction.


       'Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  FP  and  MP
       are granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly
       or indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.   This
       direction applies both to  the  appellants  and  to  the  respondent.
       Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
       proceedings'.



Signed                 R J Owens                         Date 7 July 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens

