

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08113/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 3 January 2020                            |on 30 January 2020            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs Sood instructed by Goodfellows Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Ms Bassi Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge C J Woolley ('the Judge') promulgated on  7  October
        2019 in  which  the  Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
        protection and human rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a male citizen of Albania  born  on  13  September
        2001 who claimed international protection in the United Kingdom.
     3. Having considered the  documentary  evidence  and  having  had  the
        benefit of seeing and hearing oral evidence being given by both the
        appellant and his witness the Judge sets out findings of fact  from
        [26] of the decision under challenge.
     4. The Judge accepts the appellant should be classed as  a  vulnerable
        person and treated him accordingly in  accordance  with  the  Joint
        Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010.
     5. The  appellants  nationality  was  not  in  dispute  [38]  and  the
        appellant has been found to be a victim of modern  slavery  in  the
        Conclusive Grounds decision.  The  credibility  of  the  appellants
        account was not challenged before the  Judge  which  was  that  the
        appellant was forced to beg by his father from the age of 5  or  6,
        was able to go to school for 8 years although only for  one  day  a
        week, that his father forced his mother  and  sister  to  beg,  his
        father was then pressurised for  repayment  of  his  debts  by  his
        creditors in March 2017,  and  that  the  appellant  was  taken  to
        Belgium to beg by his father. The appellant claimed they  slept  on
        the streets or with other refugees, but that he managed  to  escape
        and came to the UK as he knew his father could not follow him here.
        The appellant claimed to have no contact with his family, except  a
        sister in the UK, since leaving Albania and Belgium.
     6. The Judge took proper note  of  the  report  into  the  appellant's
        mental health [40].
     7. At [43] the Judge notes that as the appellant's  account  has  been
        accepted in its essential points and so the question to be asked is
        whether he will  face  a  real  risk  on  return  to  Albania.  The
        appellant claimed to face such a risk from his father and  that  he
        would not be able to access support from the Albanian  authorities.
        The Judge notes there was no evidence the  appellant  would  be  at
        risk from anyone else in Albania, such as a gang [43].
     8. The Judge notes the non-exclusive factors identified in TD  and  AD
        (Albania) [2016] UKUT 92 which may assist in determining whether  a
        victim of modern slavery will be at risk of persecution and whether
        they will be able to access  sufficiency  of  protection  from  the
        authorities in Albania [44]. The Judge sets out findings upon these
        matters between [45 - 50].
     9. Having assessed the evidence the Judge concludes the appellant last
        saw his father in Belgium and cannot give evidence as to where  his
        father now is. The Judge specifically finds the appellant  had  not
        established that his father is back in  Albania  and  as  such  the
        appellant will not face any risk of persecution from this  nonstate
        actor especially since he had not described any  other  risk  apart
        from his father if in Albania [51]. Although that  is  the  Judge's
        primary finding the Judge considers the matter in  the  alternative
        is if the appellant's father is back in Albania concluding, for the
        reasons set out in [52], that the Albanian police will be  able  to
        offer protection against any attempts by his father  to  re-traffic
        the appellant.
    10. In relation to the appellant's medical condition  the  Judge  finds
        there will be  sufficient  mental  health  treatment  available  in
        Albania [53].
    11. The Judge also finds the appellant does not meet many of  the  risk
        factors identified in TD and AD.
    12. The Judge also considered the issue of internal relocation at [55 -
        58] noting that whether internal relocation is  reasonable  depends
        upon the particular characteristics of the victim in relation to  a
        person who has been found to be a  former  victim  of  trafficking,
        such characteristics to include the  fact  they  may  be  suffering
        trauma. The Judge concludes that having considered the  appellant's
        characteristics it will be possible for him to reintegrate into any
        part of Albania, that  his  father  has  not  been  shown  to  have
        particular influence within  Albanian  society  and  there  was  no
        evidence he could use any contacts  to  trace  the  appellant.  The
        Judge finds the appellant will be  able  to  access  mental  health
        treatment wherever he goes in Albania and to  support  himself  and
        make a life of his own independent from his family such as to  make
        internal relocation reasonable if he was at risk in his home area.
    13. The Judge dismisses the appeal on protection  grounds  pursuant  to
        Articles 2 and 3 ECHR, in line, at [60], the Article 3 health claim
        between [61 - 67], the claim for  Humanitarian  Protection  between
        [68 - 69], the human rights claim pursuant to paragraph 276ADE  [71
        - 73], and Article 8 ECHR outside the  Rules  between  [74  -  86],
        resulting  in  the  conclusion   the   respondent's   decision   is
        proportionate.
    14. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  alleging  a  number  of
        concerns as set out in the grounds seeking permission to appeal.
    15. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-Tier
        Tribunal the operative part of the grant  being  in  the  following
        terms:


             "The appellant had been accepted as a victim of trafficking as
             he had been made to beg by his father in Albania and  Belgium.
             The Judge found at [50] that there will be an adequate support
             network available to the  appellant  on  return  but  arguably
             failed to give adequate reasoning for this finding, especially
             as the appellant had been diagnosed with PTSD  and  associated
             conditions as accepted by the Judge at [47] and which had been
             found  to  be  severe.  Arguably  within  the  body   of   the
             determination there is a failure to engage with  the  totality
             of the evidence in consideration of the issue  of  return  and
             arguably insufficient weight was given to  the  evidence  that
             the appellant had only turned 18.



Error of law


The submissions

    16. Mrs  Sood,  in  her  skeleton  argument,  submitted  there  was  no
        consideration by the  Judge  of  the  fact  the  appellant  was  an
        unaccompanied minor on arrival or of the fact that such individuals
        are more susceptible to mental health problems. It is  also  argued
        the Judge in rejecting prospective risk in Albania and  the  impact
        on the appellant's mental health fails  to  analyse  the  level  to
        which the appellant's  current  stability  is  dependent  upon  the
        support of the family and other bonded networks. The Judge is  also
        criticised for focusing upon generic country information  and  case
        law with no reference to KA (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for
        the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1014 or KA (Afghanistan) [2019]
        EWCA Civ 914.
    17. It is further submitted there is no reference to the  relevant  age
        that an  adolescent  ceases  to  be  a  state's  responsibility  by
        reference to KA decided in 2012. The central issue to be determined
        in that appeal was whether on the evidence  it  could  properly  be
        concluded that the children  had  family  in  Afghanistan  who  are
        willing and able to receive and protect them. There  is  also  said
        the  failure  to  discharge  an  obligation  to  trace  family   or
        investigate support was relevant.
    18. The Judge is also criticised for  although  he  accepts  there  was
        evidence of mutual familial relationship between the appellant  and
        his  foster  family  the  Judge  failed  to  analyse  its   seminal
        significance. The appellant asserts he has family  life  recognised
        by article 8 with the foster family which should have been properly
        factored into the  proportionality  balancing  exercise.  Mrs  Sood
        asserts there was  clear  evidence  of  a  continuing  relationship
        between the appellant and the host family and that the host  family
        had asked for a 'Staying Put' program to be put in place to  enable
        the appellant to remain in their home past the age  of  18.  It  is
        also argued the appellant has local connections with the local  gym
        and youth groups and is viewed as a valid member of that  community
        to the extent that he is settled in the wider community  with  ties
        and friends which are relevant to his article 8 claim.
    19. Mrs Sood submitted the current case is based upon  the  appellant's
        mental health, his stability and his strong sense of  family  life,
        which deserves significant weight when set against  the  legitimate
        public interest.
    20. It was submitted it was not clear whether extended family  will  go
        to assist the appellant and that the fact the appellant's father is
        either inside or out of Albania is not relevant. The father is  the
        head of the family in Albania and the decision broke the  appellant
        up from his family network. It is argued in that respect Judge  did
        not do enough.
    21. It was submitted the appellant requires further treatment to assist
        with his mental health issues.
    22. It was submitted the Judge failed to undertake a proper analysis of
        the claim pursuant to paragraph 276 ADE and that the  Judge  needed
        to do more by reference to KA.  Mrs  Sood  submitted  there  is  no
        certainty in the availability of treatment in Albania.
    23. When asked on what  basis  it  was  suggested  the  decision  falls
        outside the range of those available to the Judge on the  evidence,
        Mrs Sood submitted this was as  a  result  of  the  decision  being
        irrational.
    24. On behalf of the Secretary of State Ms Bassi  submitted  the  Judge
        had assessed availability of  return,  found  the  appellant  would
        receive treatment, and made findings regarding the  status  of  the
        family. It was submitted the key issues in the appeal were properly
        considered by the Judge and that it was open to him to  find  there
        are proper facilities and treatment available to the  appellant  on
        return to Albania.
    25. Ms Bassi submitted clear findings were made concerning the  Article
        8 aspects and that it was necessary to read the decision as a whole
        which demonstrates the friendships were taken into account.  It  is
        submitted the Judge properly considered availability  of  treatment
        and the appellant's health issues.
    26. Ms Bassi submitted  the  Judge  properly  approached  the  decision
        making in accordance with Razgar and deals with 276ADE at [71 - 72]
        and that the decision should stand.
    27. In response Mrs Sood submitted the Judge needed to look at  matters
        more closely especially regarding the nature and  concentration  of
        family life and integration of the appellant in the United Kingdom.
    28. Ms Sood confirmed availability of treatment was not  challenged  by
        asserted the nature of the treatment was not properly considered by
        the Judge. It was not clear  from  the  findings  whether  extended
        family can assist which should have been taken into account.
    29. Mrs Sood submitted the fact the appellant's father may be in or out
        of Albania was not relevant as he is head of the family in  Albania
        which raises much deeper questions.  It  was  again  submitted  the
        Judge did not do enough.


   Discussion


    30. I agree it is important in this case to read the determination as a
        whole. It is a very detailed document  in  which  the  Judge  makes
        clear findings in relation to the facts having  recorded  both  the
        nature of the appellant's claim, submissions, and findings of  fact
        from [26].  Those  findings  are  broken  down  into  subparagraphs
        dealing with relevant issues.
    31. The Judge clearly considered the evidence with the required  degree
        of anxious scrutiny and adopted a fair  and  balanced  approach  to
        assessing the merits of the case. The appellant's claim  was  found
        to be credible meaning  the  challenge  can  only  be  the  Judge's
        assessment of any risk the appellant will  face  on  return  or  in
        relation to whether the decision to  remove  him  from  the  United
        Kingdom is proportionate.
    32. The Judge specifically considers whether any support  network  will
        be available to the appellant on return at [50] finding that  there
        would be an adequate support network available on return and at any
        time thereafter. This has not been shown to be  a  finding  outside
        the range of those available to the Judge on the evidence.
    33. The Judge gives adequate reasons in  support  of  the  finding  the
        appellant is not entitled to succeed under the  Immigration  Rules.
        The rejection of the claim pursuant to paragraph 276  ADE  is  also
        adequately reasoned [71 - 73].
    34. The Judge adopts a  structured  approach  to  assessing  the  human
        rights aspects of the appeal.
    35. Contrary to submissions  made  the  Judge  clearly  considered  the
        relationship between  the  appellant,  his  sister  in  the  United
        Kingdom, and his foster carers.  At [77], in which  the  Judge  was
        considering whether the proposed removal will be an interference by
        a public authority with the exercise of the  appellant's  right  to
        respect for his private and family life, the Judge writes:


             "the appellant has been in the UK  since  2017.  He  has  been
             cared for by his foster parent find that they have built up  a
             very strong bonds. He has a sister in the UK who is  close  to
             him, even though they live a distance apart and there  are  no
             current plans for them to live together (she  lives  in  South
             London and the appellant in Bristol). Both  his  foster  carer
             and his sister attended  court  to  give  evidence  about  the
             family ties they have with him, and I  was  also  referred  to
             correspondence from other people to that effect. The appellant
             has been studying in the UK. I accept that the appellant  does
             have a private and family life in the UK.


             I find  that  the  proposed  removal  of  the  appellant  will
             interfere with the family and private life he enjoys in the UK
             as this will remove him from his foster carer and sister,  and
             also from his studies in the UK."


    36. It is not made Judge was required to do more.  The  Judge  was  not
        required to set out findings in relation to each and  every  aspect
        of the evidence provided the  same  has  been  taken  into  account
        which, I find, it clearly was in this  appeal.  The  conclusion  of
        that analysis is that article 8 is engaged making the issue in  the
        appeal that of the proportionality of the respondent's decision.
    37. The Judge sets out his conclusions on the proportionality  exercise
        at [84 - 85] in the following terms:


             Overall conclusion on the proportionality exercise


             84.  Answering the questions put in Agyarko and Hesham  Ali  I
                  find that the objective of the measure (namely the refusal
                  of further leave to the  appellant  in  the  interests  of
                  legitimate immigration control), is sufficiently important
                  to justify the limitation of any private and  family  life
                  rights of the appellant, and that the measure of  refusing
                  his application is rationally connected to  the  objective
                  of  legitimate  immigration  control   in   the   economic
                  interests of the UK. I find that a  lesser  measure  could
                  not have been employed. I  find  that  the  importance  of
                  legitimate immigration control outweighs the rights of the
                  appellant which I  have  summarised  above.  Applying  the
                  balance sheet approach it is clear that the countervailing
                  factors do not outweigh the  importance  attached  to  the
                  principle of legitimate immigration control. The appellant
                  may face some difficulties  on  return  to  Albania  after
                  having been in the UK for two years,  but  the  fact  that
                  this is so does not mean that his  article  8  rights  are
                  thereby being breached. The appellant has not  produced  a
                  "a very strong or compelling" case (as per Agyarko) so  as
                  to outweigh the public interest in removal.


             Overall conclusion on article 8


             85.  Putting all the factors into the balance, I find that the
                  interests of the appellant in the UK do not  outweigh  the
                  interests of immigration control. I find that the  balance
                  does not come down in favour of those  rights  as  against
                  the principle of legitimate immigration  control.  I  find
                  that the hardship consequent on refusal of leave to remain
                  does not go far enough beyond the baseline to make removal
                  a disproportionate use of lawful immigration controls. The
                  appellant can reasonably be expected to return to  Albania
                  where he could continue his life.  The  appellant  can  be
                  expected to reintegrate into that country.  Any  obstacles
                  or difficulties in removal do not  go  beyond  matters  of
                  choice or inconvenience. I find that the interference with
                  the appellant's right to a private and family life is  not
                  of such a level as to breach those  rights  and  that  the
                  decision  to  refuse  leave   to   remain   is   therefore
                  proportionate under article 8 of the European  Convention.
                  It follows from this that the appellant  cannot  meet  the
                  test in GEN 3.2 either, namely  that  unjustifiably  harsh
                  consequences  would  result  to  the  applicant  from  the
                  refusal.


    38. It is  settled  that  with  a  properly  conducted  proportionality
        exercise such as this a challenger and needs  to  establish  public
        law error in the Judge's decision. Although Mrs Sood submitted  the
        Judge's decision is irrational such claim is not made  out  on  the
        facts of this appeal. No legal error is established in  the  Judges
        findings or conclusions.
    39. Article 3 health issues have been adequately considered as have the
        rights of others in the UK.
    40. The appellant has made friends in the  UK  and  benefitted  from  a
        loving and supportive foster placement and he and others clearly do
        not want him to have to return to  Albania.  Whilst  understandable
        that is not the legal test.
    41. It is only if the Judge was found to have made an error of law  and
        his decision set aside that the Upper Tribunal could  substitute  a
        decision of its own to either allow or dismiss the  appeal.  As  no
        such error has been found in this carefully considered decision the
        Upper Tribunal cannot interfere any further.


Decision

    42. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    43. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 23 January 2020












