
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/08242/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heart at: Field House                        |Decision & Reasons          |
|                                             |Promulgated                 |
|on    14 May 2019                            |On 04 June 2019             |

                                   Before:
                       The Hon Mrs Justice Whipple DBE
                                     and
                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN

                                  Between:
                         DEJ (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:  Ms Nazimi, counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co.
For the respondent: Ms Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Widdup), sitting
    at Hatton Cross on 30 January 2019, to allow the appeal by a citizen of
    Jamaica, born on 19 January  1981.   Permission  was  granted  by  FtTJ
    Saffer on 25 February 2019.   The  anonymity  order  made  by  the  FtT
    remains in place and the Appellant will be referred to by  the  intials
    DEJ.

Background

 2. The Appellant, as we shall continue to refer  to  him  even  though  he
    responds to this appeal, is the father of two children who are  British
    citizens, namely his son, T, who was born on 17 November 2002  and  was
    16 at the time of the hearing and his daughter K, who was born on 2 May
    2008 and was 10 at the time  of  the  hearing.  T  and  K  each  has  a
    different mother.  Each child lives with their mother.   The  Appellant
    is not in a relationship  at  present  with  either  mother  and  lives
    separately from both of them.

 3. The Appellant first entered the UK in June 1993 as a visitor with leave
    to remain for 6 months.  In February 1994, the Home Office granted  him
    an extension of his leave to remain.  He later applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain, but that  application  was  refused,  and  the  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed on 24 January 1997.  He appears  to
    have been given indefinite leave to remain in November 1997.

 4. On 29 July 2015, the Appellant was convicted of possession of a class B
    drug  with  intent  to  supply.   He  was  sentenced   to   11   months
    imprisonment, on the basis  that  he  was  a  commercial  drug  dealer,
    according to the judge's sentencing remarks.  On 17 November 2015,  the
    Appellant was served with a notice of intention to make  a  deportation
    order under s 3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act.  Representations  were  made  by
    solicitors who then represented him.  On 17 May 2016, the Appellant was
    served with a deportation order on the grounds that  his  removal  from
    the UK would  be  conducive  to  the  public  good  because  he  was  a
    persistent offender: he had 10 convictions for 21 offences while living
    in the UK.

 5. In March 2017, the Appellant claimed asylum, arguing that he  would  be
    at risk in Jamaica from gun violence.  That application was  considered
    on human rights and asylum grounds and refused on 11 August  2017.   He
    appealed the human rights aspect  of  the  decision.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed by FtT Rowlands on 5 October 2017, but a material  error  was
    identified in the decision and the Upper Tribunal directed  that  there
    should be a fresh hearing.

The FtT's determination

 6. The matter thus came before FtTJ Widdup.  Judge Widdup determined  that
    the Appellant was a  persistent  offender  [68].  There  is  no  appeal
    against that finding.  It meant that the Appellant's case  fell  within
    Rule 398(c) of the Immigration Rules, where deportation is  ordered  as
    conducive to the public good.

 7. Judge Widdup considered the  Appellant's  human  rights  appeal,  first
    applying the family life exception in para 399(a)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules which protects family  life  with  children,  which  provides  as
    follows:

         "399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
             the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the  immigration
             decision; and in either case

                  (a)      it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)      it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported; ..."

 8. Judge Widdup also considered the private life exception in para 399A of
    the Immigration Rules, which provides as follows:

         "399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
         if -

         (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of
         his life; and

         (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."

 9. On the family life exception, the Judge found that  the  Appellant  had
    contact with T in school half terms and holidays only because  T  lives
    with his mother, some distance away from  where  the  Appellant  lives.
    Judge Widdup concluded that the Appellant was taking an active role  in
    T's upbringing and that he had a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with T.  In relation to K, Judge Widdup noted  that  K  had  particular
    needs due to a medical condition  and  that  in  the  past,  while  the
    Appellant was with K's mother who worked as a nurse, the Appellant  had
    been K's primary carer; however,  the  Appellant  and  K's  mother  had
    separated in July 2018 and  K's  mother  was  now  K's  primary  carer;
    moreover, the mother was not co-operating  with  the  Appellant;  Judge
    Widdup found that the Appellant still had some contact with  K  and  he
    had a continuing active role in her upbringing.  (It is to be  inferred
    that Judge Widdup  concluded  that  this  amounted  to  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with K, although this was not stated in terms.)



10. Given that neither child had visited Jamaica except for one holiday  in
    2008, and neither  had  any  links  with  Jamaica,  combined  with  the
    "considerable difficulties" their father would face if he went back  to
    Jamaica having left that country when he was  12,  Judge  Widdup  found
    that it would be unduly harsh for the children to be expected  to  live
    in Jamaica.  There is no appeal against those parts of the decision.

11. Judge Widdup next turned to whether it would be unduly harsh for T  and
    K to remain in the UK without their father, if he was  deported.   Here
    the judge noted that the Appellant had  always  been  involved  in  the
    lives of T and K.  The judge referred to the reports of Ms Julie  Meek,
    an independent social worker, who had authored one report in July  2016
    (before the Appellant and K's mother separated) and an addendum  report
    dated January 2019 (after the separation).  From these  reports,  Judge
    Widdup concluded that the Appellant played a "very important  role"  in
    the lives of both children.

12. Judge Widdup then said this:

         "[87]       Ms Meeks' conclusion ... was that  the  deportation  of
         the Appellant would have a  detrimental  impact  on  the  children.
         With all due respect to her, that is not the  question  before  me.
         The question under 399 (a) (ii) (b) is whether it would  be  unduly
         harsh for them to remain in the UK without him.

         [88] I find that the hurdle is overcome in  this  case  bearing  in
         mind the ages of the children, the extent of the  Appellant's  role
         in their lives now and throughout their lives and their  attachment
         to him.

         [89] I find therefore that the Appellant does meet the family  life
         exception in paragraph 399."

13. Judge Widdup  went  on  to  consider  the  private  life  exception  in
    paragraph  399A.   The  decision  records,  at  this  point,  that  the
    Appellant had entered the UK as a visitor when he was 12 years old.  By
    the time the deportation order was made the Appellant  had  lived  here
    lawfully for 18 years.  His immediate and extended family live  in  the
    UK and have done so since 1993.  The judge concluded that the Appellant
    had made the UK his home, and notwithstanding his convictions,  he  was
    socially and culturally integrated in the UK.  Judge  Widdup  took  the
    view that, if the Appellant had applied for British citizenship  before
    he acquired a criminal record, then his  application  would  have  been
    granted.

14. The judge continued:

         "[94]       I also accept  Ms  Nizami's  submissions  on  the  very
         significant obstacles he would face in integrating in Jamaica.

         [95] I find therefore that the Appellant meets both the family  and
         private life exceptions ..."

15. The reference in para 94 to Ms Nizami's submissions would appear to  be
    a reference back to an earlier  passage  of  Judge  Widdup's  decision,
    under the heading "submissions", were those submissions were summarised
    in the following way:

         "[53]       So far as the Appellant's private life was concerned he
         had the support of friends, he had been educated in the UK.  He was
         not now allowed to work in the UK but previously he  had  done  so.
         He had committed no further offences. ..."

Submissions

16. The Secretary of State submits  that  Judge  Widdup  erred  in  law  in
    deciding that the Appellant met the requirements of paragraphs 399  and
    399A  and  thus  that  his  article  8  rights  would  be  breached  by
    deportation.  In relation to the family life exception (paragraph 399),
    in the grounds  of  appeal,  the  Secretary  of  State  challenged  the
    conclusion that to remove the Appellant, but leave  his  children  here
    would be "unduly harsh" citing KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC  53,  in
    particular [23] where Lord  Carnwath  emphasised  that  "unduly  harsh"
    introduces a higher hurdle than mere  unreasonableness;  and  that  the
    word "unduly" assumes that there is an acceptable level of harshness in
    any given context but that the harshness must go beyond  that  to  meet
    the word "unduly": "one is looking for  a  degree  of  harshness  going
    beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced with  the
    deportation of a parent".

17. At the hearing, Ms Isherwood took us to SSHD v RA [2019] UKUT 123 (IAC)
    where it was held that:

         "[17]       ... the test of "unduly harsh" has a dual  aspect.   It
         is not enough for the outcome to be "severe"  or  "bleak".   Proper
         effect must be given  to  the  word  "unduly".   The  position  is,
         therefore,   significantly   far   removed   from   the   test   of
         reasonableness ..."

18. The Secretary of State  argues  that  responsibility  for  meeting  the
    children's emotional and physical needs will be met by their mothers in
    the UK, and that there is no evidence that the  children's  lives  will
    become chaotic or that their development will  be  irreparably  harmed.
    There is no evidence, in short, that the Appellant's removal  would  be
    unduly harsh in its effect on them.

19. In relation to the private life  exception  (paragraph  399A),  in  the
    grounds of appeal, the Secretary of  State  challenged  the  conclusion
    that the Appellant would  face  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  his
    integration into Jamaican society and culture if he was deported.   The
    Secretary of State argued that no clear reasons had been  provided  for
    this conclusion which was, in any event, irrational in the  absence  of
    any  medical  condition,  language  barriers  or   other   impairments.
    Further, the judge had wrongly  left  out  of  account  some  important
    factors, for example, the fact that the Appellant had spent  his  first
    12 years in Jamaica, the fact that he had gone back to Jamaica to visit
    in 2008; and had taken into account some irrelevant  matters,  such  as
    the fact that the Appellant would have been granted citizenship  if  he
    had applied before  taking  to  crime  -  he  did  not  apply,  and  in
    consequence he is not a British citizen, in fact and law.

20. In a skeleton  argument  submitted  in  advance  of  the  hearing,  the
    Secretary of State reminded us of the guidance published on 31  January
    2019 titled "Criminality: Article 8 ECHR cases" version 7.0 at pages 33-
    34 which stated:

         "A very significant obstacle to integration means  something  which
         would  prevent  or  severely  inhibit  the  foreign  criminal  from
         integrating into the country to which they are to be deported.  You
         are looking for more than obstacles ... the fact that  the  foreign
         criminal may find life difficult or challenging in  the  county  to
         which they are  to  be  deported  does  not  mean  that  they  have
         established very significant obstacles to integration there."

21.  The  Secretary  of  State  goes  further.   He  challenges  the  FtT's
    conclusions of the FtT on the additional basis that the public interest
    factors outweigh any family or private life factors in this case.   The
    Appellant's offending history is serious and there  is  a  high  public
    interest in deportation of persistent offenders such as the  Appellant,
    citing SC (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 2112.

22. For the Appellant, Ms Nizami  raises  a  preliminary  issue  about  the
    adequacy of the reasons for the grant of permission.   In  relation  to
    the grounds of  appeal,  Ms  Nizami  seeks  to  uphold  Judge  Widdup's
    decision, on the basis that it discloses no material error of law.  The
    reasons given are sufficient and in line with  the  requirement  in  MK
    (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641  (IAC).   Further,  the
    fact that this tribunal may consider the outcome to be generous is  not
    a basis for allowing the appeal: see Mukarkar v SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1045 at [40].  On the family life exception, Ms Nizami submits that the
    Secretary of State is applying the  wrong  test  in  law:  whether  the
    children's lives will become chaotic,  or  their  development  will  be
    irreparably harmed, if their  father  is  removed,  is  not  the  test;
    rather, the test is whether that will  unduly  harsh,  to  which  Judge
    Widdup referred in terms at [87] of the decision.  On the private  life
    exception, again, Judge Widdup was entitled  to  reach  the  conclusion
    that he did, noting that Judge Widdup referred to the "very significant
    obstacles" test in terms at [94].  On the public interest  factors,  Ms
    Nizami argues that SC Jamaica is  distinguishable  because  it  was  an
    automatic deportation case, which this is not.

Conclusion

23. On the preliminary issue raised by Ms Nazimi,  we  are  satisfied  that
    Judge Saffer gave adequate reasons for the grant of permission.   There
    was nothing wrong in simply saying that the  grounds  advanced  by  the
    Secretary of State were arguable.  There is no basis  for  Ms  Nizami's
    preliminary challenge which we dismiss.

24. Turning to the substantive appeal,  we  have  examined  Judge  Widdup's
    decision in some detail.  We deal first with the conclusion  on  family
    life.  We note the absence of any reference in the decision to the case
    law on the "unduly harsh" test in paragraph 399 (see the  cases  relied
    on by the Secretary of State noted above; there are other  cases  which
    have similarly emphasised the high threshold set by  that  test).   The
    failure  to  refer  to  those  cases  would  not,  in  and  of  itself,
    necessarily be fatal if the decision contained an analysis of the facts
    and evidence which  demonstrated  that  the  test  had  been  correctly
    understood and applied.  That is not the case here.

25. The factors which are cited at [88] are rather ordinary: the children's
    ages were, at the time of the decision, 16 and 10 and would not without
    some further explanation militate  towards  removal  of  the  Appellant
    being unduly harsh; the extent of the Appellant's involvement in  their
    lives now and throughout their lives, as described, would seem entirely
    normal for a non-resident parent; and the children's attachment to  him
    would similarly be as expected.  The judge's  given  reasons  might  be
    sufficient to support a conclusion that his removal would be difficult,
    even harsh; but the unanswered question is why  his  removal  would  be
    "unduly harsh" on the children.

26. We cannot be confident that the judge appreciated  the  nature  of  the
    test being applied under paragraph 399; certainly, the reasons given do
    not justify the conclusion reached under paragraph 399.   We  conclude,
    with regret, that that conclusion cannot stand.

27. We turn next to the private life exception.  There is  no  analysis  in
    the decision of the meaning of "very  significant  obstacles"  for  the
    purposes of paragraph 399A(c).  Again, that would not be fatal, in  and
    of itself, if it was clear from the decision that the  nature  of  that
    test had been understood and correctly applied.  The point is that  the
    existence of obstacles, even significant obstacles, is not enough; only
    "very significant obstacles" will be sufficient to meet the test.   The
    judge referred to the fact that the Appellant has been in the UK  since
    he was 12 years old, that he appears to have no connections to  Jamaica
    and that his family are all here: those points may demonstrate that the
    Appellant would not find it easy to leave the UK,  but  none  of  them,
    taken singly or collectively, logically support the conclusion that  he
    would face "very significant obstacles" if he returned to Jamaica.  The
    Secretary of State is right to assert that the facts  that  he  had  in
    fact spent his first 12 years in Jamaica, so that that country was  not
    wholly unknown to him, and that he would face no language  difficulties
    if he was to be returned, were relevant points which were wrongly  left
    out of account.  Further, the points made by  Ms  Nazimi  as  they  are
    recorded at [53] could have little if any bearing on the prospects  for
    the Appellant's reintegration in Jamaica, and we  are  unsure  why  the
    Judge accepted them as supporting the conclusion under paragraph  399A.



28. Thus, we cannot be confident here either that the judge appreciated the
    nature of the test or applied it correctly.  The reasons given  do  not
    support the conclusion reached.  With  regret,  we  conclude  that  the
    decision under paragraph 399A cannot stand.

29. It is not necessary for us to deal with the remaining challenge by  the
    Secretary of State, relating to the public interest  factors.   On  the
    basis of our conclusions thus far, the decision must be set aside.

Disposal

30. The issue which next arises as to how we should dispose of this appeal:
    should we re-take the decision ourselves based on the facts as found by
    Judge Widdup, or remit the matter  to  a  different  FtT  for  a  fresh
    hearing?  We invited brief submissions on that matter at the hearing.

31. Ms Isherwood did not express a view either way.

32. Ms Nizami invited us to remit  the  appeal  to  a  different  tribunal,
    preserving Judge Widdup's findings of fact.  She noted that  there  had
    been some recent developments which may yet bear on the outcome of this
    appeal.

33. It is, in our judgment, appropriate to remit this appeal to a different
    FtT for a fresh hearing.  We decline the invitation to direct that  any
    of the facts as found  should  be  preserved:  that  would  not  be  an
    appropriate course in circumstances where  we  have  set  the  decision
    aside for lack of reasons.  It remains possible  that  there  might  be
    reasons in existence, beyond those found by Judge Widdup,  which  would
    be capable of supporting a conclusion that this Appellant should not be
    deported.  In fairness, the Appellant should have a further opportunity
    to put his full case before the FtT.

Conclusion

The Home Office appeal is allowed.

The appeal is remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal  at  Hatton  Cross  for  a
fresh hearing, not before Judge Widdup



(drafted by Whipple J and signed on behalf of both of us by)

[pic]

 (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)

Date: 28.05.2019

