
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/08141/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Determination & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 November 2018                 |On 21 December 2018                   |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    I U S
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Basharat Ali, Aman Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For convenience I retain the designations as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal thus IUS is the appellant and the Secretary of State, the
    respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  His age  is  disputed.   He
    appealed against a decision of the respondent made on 14 June  2018  to
    refuse his claim for asylum.

 3. His claim, in summary, was that the Afghan authorities detained him for
    a week.  They had come to his home asking  about  his  father  as  they
    suspected he might have been involved with the Taliban.  His father had
    been forcibly taken by the Taliban and some months later  killed  while
    engaged with them.  The Taliban had then wanted the appellant  to  join
    them.  To avoid this his mother sent him away and he was later able  to
    leave Afghanistan.  Soon after his mother died of a heart attack.

 4. The respondent did not believe the appellant had been targeted  by  the
    Taliban or had problems from  the  authorities.   The  respondent  also
    considered that he was not a minor as claimed.

 5. He appealed.

First-tier Hearing

 6. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 26 July 2018 Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Farrelly allowed the appeal on asylum grounds  and  under
    Articles 2 and 3 (ECHR).

 7. His findings are at paragraph [10]ff.  He accepted that  the  appellant
    was from Baghlan province.  He found that the  appellant  was  born  in
    2000 and was, thus, a minor at date of application in October 2015.

 8. He went on to note medical evidence which the author found to be highly
    consistent with his claim to have been assaulted by the authorities and
    that he has post-traumatic stress disorder  also  consistent  with  his
    account, as well as moderate depression.

 9. The judge [20] concluded that the appellant would be  at  risk  in  his
    home area.  Moving on to consider relocation the judge dealt with  this
    at [21]ff.  He noted the recent country guidance AS (Safety  of  Kabul)
    Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118 and its comment that  it  would  not  in
    general be unreasonable for a single  adult  male  in  good  health  to
    relocate  to  Kabul  even  without  specific  connections  or   support
    networks.  However, that it is necessary  to  consider  the  particular
    circumstances of the individual [21].

10. He continued by noting a Medical Foundation report and a  report  by  a
    psychologist referred to therein.  It was noted that the appellant  had
    undergone a six month programme of psychotherapy.   It  was  considered
    that, as such, he had not been fabricating his  symptoms  of  PTSD  and
    depression.  The judge appeared to accept that evidence [22].

11. At [23] the judge turned his attention to the availability  of  medical
    treatment in Kabul.  He noted a document  in  the  respondent's  bundle
    which suggested that inpatient treatment and  various  medications  are
    available in the hospital there, also  cognitive  behavioural  therapy.
    Another document stated that Kabul Psychiatric  Hospital  is  the  only
    clinic of its kind in the capital.  There is a mental health crisis  in
    Afghanistan.  Mental handicap is seen as a major deficit.

12. The judge concluded on this matter, at [25], that the  appellant  is  a
    young man who came here as a  minor,  he  has  "mental  vulnerability."
    Although he is "de facto" married [26] to a British  citizen  [24],  he
    has not been living with his wife [25] and it is not known whether  she
    would go with him or stay [25]. He then found that there is no evidence
    of any family support albeit family here may be able  to  provide  some
    help and there would be a resettlement package.  Bearing  in  mind  his
    "age, personal circumstances, his mental vulnerability and the  absence
    of any particular skills" it would be unduly harsh for him to  relocate
    to Kabul.

13. The respondent sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted  on  21
    September 2018.

Error of Law Hearing

14. At the error of law hearing before me Ms Everett sought only to  pursue
    the second of the  two  grounds  of  appeal.   In  brief,  the  judge's
    analysis of internal relocation was inadequate particularly in  respect
    of his mental health.  There was a lack of findings on  what  treatment
    the appellant may need on return and if there is  sufficient  treatment
    available for such.  It appears that he is not currently receiving  any
    treatment for his mental health problems in the UK.

15. Mr Ali's reply was that the judge's analysis had been  sufficient.   He
    had directed himself appropriately.  This is not per se a mental health
    case.  The appellant clearly has difficulties.  The fact that he is not
    getting treatment does not mean that he  is  not  currently  suffering.
    Looked at in the round the decision was sustainable.

Consideration

16. I agree with Ms Everett.   The  judge's  consideration  of  the  mental
    health evidence is inadequate in  supporting  the  conclusion  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate to  Kabul.   Whilst
    his "mental vulnerability" was not the only factor it was the principal
    factor.

17. However, he failed (at [23]) to resolve the conflict of fact or opinion
    on the availability of mental health provision in Kabul.   On  the  one
    hand he noted the evidence that there is  a  mental  health  crisis  in
    Afghanistan and that mental handicap is seen as a  major  deficit.   On
    the other hand he noted that the psychiatric hospital there  does  free
    check-ups,  that  inpatient  treatment  is  available  as  are  various
    medications as well as cognitive behavioural therapy.

18. He failed  to  make  clear,  reasoned  findings  on  whether  there  is
    sufficient treatment for the appellant in Kabul. He simply recorded the
    evidence. As a result it is unclear whether there is sufficient  mental
    health provision for the appellant on return and any treatment  he  may
    require on return. As Ms Everett noted the  judge  failed  to  consider
    that the appellant does not appear to be receiving  any  treatment  for
    his mental health problems in the UK.

19. In failing to make adequate findings the judge materially erred.

20. In considering the appropriate way to proceed, no  challenge  has  been
    made by  the  respondent  to  the  findings  and  conclusion  that  the
    appellant would be at real risk on return to his home area.   The  only
    issue is internal relocation.  I consider that the  appropriate  course
    is for the case to be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  make
    proper, reasoned, findings on internal relocation to Kabul.

Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside but  only  to  the
    extent that the issue of internal relocation  is  to  be  reconsidered.
    The findings in respect of risk elsewhere in  Afghanistan  stand.   The
    case is remitted to a judge other than Judge Farrelly to make  a  fresh
    decision on internal relocation.



An anonymity order is made. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs
otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. This order applies both to
the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this order
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
  Date: 19 December 2018






