
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08836/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff CJC                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 June 2019                      |On 23 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    ms dd
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Georget, Counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereinafter the claimant)  is  a  national  of  Albania
    born in 1982.  She has two children born in 2004 and 2006.  She arrived
    in the UK in November 2015 and claimed asylum.  The basis of her  claim
    was that she suffered domestic violence at the hands of her husband who
    was a person who had connections with the  police.   In  addition,  her
    children had suffered violence at his hands and she  and  her  daughter
    had mental health problems.  Her claim  was  initially  refused  on  26
    February 2016 and was refused again on 27 June 2018.  She appealed.  On
    27 September  2018  Judge  Havard  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
    dismissed her  appeal.   The  judge  found  her  account  credible  and
    concluded that due to the best interests of her children  the  claimant
    would be unable to avail herself of the protection of  the  authorities
    in Albania.  Since the judge did not accept that  the  claimant  was  a
    member of a particular social group, he dismissed her asylum claim  but
    allowed it on humanitarian  protection  and  Article  8  grounds.   The
    appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State or SSHD) appealed and in  a
    decision dated 6 March 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Allen  set  aside  the
    judge's decision for material error  of  law  essentially  because  the
    judge had failed to square his protection findings with his finding  on
    the best interests of the child  and  there  was  a  lack  of  material
    reasons.  UTJ  Allen,  also  found  error  in  the  judge's  Article  8
    findings, considering them to evince a failure  to  take  into  account
    public interest considerations weighing against the claimant. UTJ Allen
    concluded at paragraph 21:

         "Accordingly, I find material errors of law in the judge's decision
         such that it falls to be set aside.  I see no reason why the matter
         needs to go back to the First-tier Tribunal in light of the judge's
         clear and unchallenged findings of fact.  I may be that  up-to-date
         evidence will need to be provided, and therefore there will need to
         be a further hearing.  Bearing in mind that  the  original  hearing
         took place in Newport and the family live in Cardiff, I direct that
         the matter be listed for a rehearing on the basis  of  the  judge's
         unchallenged findings of fact, to take place at the  Cardiff  Civil
         Justice Centre."

2.   At the hearing I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives,  for
    which I express my gratitude.

3.   Mr Howells submitted that the latest CIPIN Albania: Domestic abuse  and
    violence against women, V3.O December 2018 indicated that a person such
    as the claimant would be able to receive  adequate  protection.   There
    were well run shelters in Tirana and other places  and  they  would  be
    able to provide sufficient anonymity and security for the claimant  and
    her two children.  It was important to  note  that  there  had  been  a
    recent change in the law with effect from September 2018, strengthening
    measures to protect women against  domestic  violence.   There  was  no
    longer delay on  the  part  of  the  authorities  whilst  women  sought
    protection  orders.   The  latest  CIPIN  also  demonstrated  that  the
    Albanian authorities would be able to secure the  long-term  future  of
    the appellant and her  children.   There  was  adequate  mental  health
    provision.  On the claimant's own evidence, she had been able  to  work
    in Albania in a bakery and train as a hairdresser even whilst  enduring
    domestic violence and suffering from depression.  The  claim  would  be
    able to obtain sufficient protection,  even  if  she  had  to  relocate
    outside her home area and Tirana.

4.   As regards Article 8, Mr Howells submitted that the claimant  had  only
    been outside Albania for four  years  and  would  clearly  be  able  to
    reintegrate without very significant obstacles, which was, an  elevated
    test.  The best interest of her two children, aged 15 and 12  would  be
    to remain with the claimant wherever she was.   The  oldest  child  was
    said to be missing in the UK which underlined the benefit to the family
    of returning to the conservative society she had grown up in.   Neither
    child was a qualifying child.   In  the  claimant's  case,  there  were
    strong public interest considerations weighing against her claim.

5.   Mr Georget, with reference to his skeleton argument, said  he  accepted
    that there was in general a sufficiency of protection  in  Albania  but
    that  it  would  not  extend  to  the  claimant  given  her  particular
    circumstances.  It was particularly  important  to  bear  in  mind  the
    special circumstances of the claimant's children.  The oldest  had  run
    away in the UK and, on the premise adopted  by  Mr  Howells  (that  the
    family would be returned together), there would  be  a  risk  that  the
    eldest child would be exploited.  The fact that there was  evidence  of
    safeguards against rogue police accessing  databases  was  not  to  the
    point, as the claimant would have to access the registration system, to
    which the police would have access.  It was unrealistic to expect  that
    claimant to go to the police for protection, as there was  evidence  of
    widespread corruption.  There was  a  real  risk  that  the  claimant's
    husband's police connections would learn that she and her children were
    back.  If she took any court action to secure custody of her  children,
    her husband would have a right of contact.  If he had intention to harm
    the claimant, he could use the law  to  his  advantage.   It  was  also
    important to bear in mind that it was accepted that shelters were not a
    long-term solution and, post- shelter, the claimant  and  her  children
    would be vulnerable.  Albania is a small country.

6.   Given that the claimant would not be safe in her home area  or  Tirana,
    it was important to consider, he added, the issue of reasonableness  of
    relocation, bearing in mind the claimant and her  children  would  have
    his family support.

7.   As regards Article 8, Mr Georget submitted that on the  evidence  there
    would  clearly  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   the   claimant's
    integration.

8.   Asked by me to clarify what relevance  the  parties  saw  the  Tribunal
    country guidance case of TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 92
    to this case, Mr Howells said he accepted that although it was  a  case
    about  trafficking  it  gave  guidance  on  the  situation  of  women's
    shelters.  Read together with the latest CIPIN, he  believed  that  its
    conclusions supported  the  SSHD's  position.   Mr  Georget  said  that
    paragraphs 171 of TD was particularly relevant to the claimant's case.

My Decision

9.   As noted  earlier,  UTJ  Allen  made  a  specific  direction  that  the
    unchallenged finding  of  fact  made  by  the  FtT  Judge  were  to  be
    preserved.  It is important therefore to first of all to identify  what
    those findings of fact were.  Two key paragraphs setting them  out  are
    145 and 146:

         "145.    I also note that, within the Appellant's bundle, there are
             references to the Appellant having sought treatment  from  her
             doctor  for  anxiety  and  has  been  prescribed   appropriate
             medication.   Whilst  the  Appellant  states  as  recently  as
             February 2018  that  she  has  frequent  thoughts  of  killing
             herself, the notes state  "no  specific  plans,  children  are
             protecting  factors".   No  psychiatric  evidence   has   been
             presented but the medical  records  are  consistent  with  the
             Appellant suffering from anxiety and low mood.  Taking account
             of all the  evidence  relating  to  the  Appellant's  personal
             circumstances, were she a single woman and no  dependants,  on
             the basis of the findings of the  FFM  report,  the  Appellant
             would receive adequate support and protection if she  were  to
             return to Tirana.  She could reside within one of the shelters
             that are available which can also provide her with support for
             her mental health condition.


         146. However, I take into consideration the fact that, at the  time
             the Appellant left Albania, she was residing with her children
             and her husband in  Tirana.   It  is  not  known  whether  her
             husband continues to reside there but  there  is  no  evidence
             that he has moved.  Further, I have accepted  the  Appellant's
             evidence that relatives of  her  husband  are  in  the  police
             force.   Whilst  the  FFM  concludes  that  the  shelters  are
             professionally run and have effective safeguards against being
             detected, the particular circumstances of this Appellant  give
             rise to a risk of her  return  to  Tirana  being  discovered."
             (emphasis added).

10.  In addition, the judge noted at paragraph  137  that  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer had confirmed that if the claimant and her  children
    were required to return to Albania  "they  would  be  returned  to  the
    capital, Tirana.  The  [claimant]  was  living  with  her  husband  and
    children when they left."  The SSHD's grounds did not  seek  to  resile
    from this position.

11.  Accordingly, there are unchallenged findings that  the  claimant  would
    be at risk on return to Tirana, even if in a professionally run shelter
    with effective  safeguards  against  being  detected,  because  in  the
    particular circumstance the fact that her husband had relatives in  the
    police force would put her at real risk  of  being  discovered.   Given
    that unchallenged finding of fact, I consider the claimant is  entitled
    to succeed.  Whether or not her home area is treated as Hus in Northern
    Albania (where she grew  up  and  where  her  family  forced  her  into
    marriage with her husband and where they lived between March  2003  and
    2009) or Tirana (where she lived with her husband from 2009  until  she
    left in July 2015 with her two children), the SSHD's position  is  that
    she will be returned to Tirana.  It is reasonable to assume that having
    been returned to Tirana and having lived in Tirana prior to  departure,
    the  claimant  and  her  children  would  be  processed  by  the   city
    authorities in Tirana.  On the judge's unchallenged findings, in Tirana
    there would be a real risk of her husband discovering her  presence  in
    Tirana, even if she is placed in a women's centre.

12.  I find it troublesome that  despite  recent  legislative  reforms,  the
    procedure described in the CIPIN still  envisages  that  upon  a  woman
    making herself known to the local authorities as a victim  of  domestic
    violence, this continues to involve  the  Police  Department  and  they
    lodge Protection Orders on behalf of the victim which then leads to the
    perpetrator being interviewed by the  police;  see  paragraph  5.3.5  -
    5.3.6.  Sometimes the police take the role of the male (5.3.7).   Given
    that there was unchallenged evidence that the  claimant's  husband  had
    police connections throughout Albania, I am  not  persuaded  that  this
    procedure would not lead to identification.

13.  It will be apparent  from  the  above  that  I  consider  much  of  the
    discussion  between  the  parties  as  to  the  viability  of  internal
    relocation misplaced.  Mr Howells has submitted that there are  centres
    outside Tirana where the claimant would be  able  to  relocate  without
    risk of discovery from her husband in Tirana.  But his  submissions  do
    not explain how the claimant would be  able  to  access  those  centres
    given that the SSHD  would  return  her  to  Tirana.   Nothing  in  the
    background evidence suggests these centres can  be  accessed  directly;
    rather women must apply through the civil registration system.  In  any
    event, even if I was to accept that the claimant would somehow be  able
    to gain access to one of the centres outside  Tirana  (there  are  only
    three of them, in Elbason,  Vlora  and  Shkodra  (see  CIPIN  paragraph
    2.4.8)), I would still have concluded that she would not have a  viable
    internal relocation alternative.  On the basis of the  judge's  finding
    as stated in paragraph 136, the risk of discovery by  her  husband  was
    not confined to Tirana.  It was also an unchallenged  finding  of  fact
    made by the judge on the basis of  the  claimant's  evidence  that  the
    husband's relatives had connections across Albania.  If on the  judge's
    unchallenged finding the husband would be able to discover her  present
    in Tirana (by virtue of her police connection), then it is difficult to
    infer otherwise than that such police connections would operate to  the
    same effect wherever the claimant went in Albania.

14.  A further consideration I would have applied had I considered there  to
    be a live issue regarding safety in one of the  three  centres  outside
    Tirana, was that the claimant would be returning with two children.  On
    the judge's unchallenged finding of  fact  the  claimant  suffers  from
    depression and low mood and both children were subjected to violence at
    the hands of their father, both endured a traumatic journey to  the  UK
    (one of the camps they were staying at in Germany  was  attacked  by  a
    racist group), the daughter G has been receiving medical treatment  but
    as recently as February 2014 attempted to self-harm and  in  July  2018
    she took an overdose.  On the basis of the  background  evidence,  both
    the claimant and her daughter would have access to psychiatric help  in
    the centres, but given that her daughter G has run away in the  UK,  it
    is likely that when in a centre in Albanian she will have  (or  cause)_
    more than usual difficulties.  I agree with Mr Georget that as a result
    G may well be at risk of harm as a vulnerable young woman and that,  if
    she gets into difficulties outside the centre, that is also  likely  to
    increase the risk of her being identified by her father via his  police
    connections.

15.  I understand the force of some of Mr Howells, submission and if  I  had
    been deciding the facts for myself I may have taken  a  different  view
    about the degree of  risk  the  claimant  and  her  children  faced  of
    discovery from her violent husband.  But I am not considering the facts
    de novo, but strictly on the basis of the unchallenged finding of  fact
    made by the FtT judge.  For the reasons I have given, I  consider  that
    on the basis of those findings the claimant would face a real  risk  on
    return to Albania.

16.  In light of my finding that the claimant is  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection, it is unnecessary for me to make a decision on the  Article
    8 circumstances of the claimant except to say that ipso facto,  on  the
    basis of my conclusions regarding risk on return,  the  claimant  would
    plainly face also a disproportionate breach of her Article 8 right.

17.  To conclude:

    The decision of the FtT judge has already been set aside by  UTJ  Allen
    for material error of law.


    The  decision  I  re-make  is  to  allow  the  claimant's   appeal   on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 9 July 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
