
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08588/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2019                            |On 6 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  akbar [v]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
     Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iran.  In a decision sent on  14  August
    2018 Judge Row of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  dismissed  his  appeal
    against the decision made by the respondent on 28 June 2018  to  refuse
    his protection claim.  The judge did not find the appellant had given a
    credible account of having been targeted by the authorities in Iran  by
    virtue of his involvement with Christian  house  churches  or  to  have
    genuinely converted to Christianity in the UK.

2.   The appellant was successful in obtaining permission to appeal  on  two
    grounds (9 and 10) only, both of which  took  issue  with  the  judge's
    reliance on significant discrepancies in the appellant's account as  to
    the dates  and  circumstances  of  the  raid  he  claimed  the  Iranian
    authorities had made of his House Church, as well as in regard  to  his
    date of departure.  As regards the other grounds, Judge Chalkley of the
    Upper Tribunal gave reasons for considering  them  inadequate  and  the
    appellant's representatives did not seek prior to the  hearing  to  re-
    ventilate them, although Mr Hodson did  state  he  still  thought  them
    arguable.  In such circumstances I consider  that  the  grounds  should
    remain restricted to 9 and 10.

3.   The principal basis for  the  appellant  contending  that  the  judge's
    treatment of the above discrepancies was erroneous was stated as  being
    that the appellant had made it clear during his asylum  interview  that
    there had been mistakes in his screening interview.  It was  said  that
    at both  the  screening  and  asylum  interview  the  interpreter  made
    numerous mistakes.  The grounds cited the appellant's appeal  statement
    that:


         "At my screening interview, the interpreter incorrectly  summarised
         my evidence.  At Q2 of my asylum interview, I tried to correct  the
         mistakes.  The officer curtailed my  correction.   The  interpreter
         was from Afghanistan".


    It was alleged that the judge "inexplicably states that  the  appellant
    provided no explanation for the discrepancies".

4.   This objection founders on a number of rocks.  To clarify  why  I  have
    reached this view it is pertinent to set out what  the  judge  said  at
    paragraphs 32-33:

         "32. There are aspects of the appellant's account which however are
             inconsistent.  In the screening interview he said that he  had
             left Iran on 15 January 2018, question 3.3.  He said that  the
             raid on the church took place on the same day that he left, 15
             January 2018, 4.1.  The account given in the asylum  interview
             was that the raid on the church occurred on  12  January  2018
             not 15 January 2015.


         33.  In the screening interview he said that he and the rest of the
             congregation were in a domestic church.  A guard  had  shouted
             midway through the service that the authorities had  come  and
             they fled, 4.1.  The account given in the asylum interview  is
             different.  He said that he did not go to the  church  service
             on that day.  He had taken his mother to the doctor and by the
             time he got to the church he was late.  He was about  to  turn
             into the street where the church  was  when  he  saw  a  black
             vehicle with a flashing light and people in plain clothes were
             handcuffing Mikael and Murtaz, getting them into the  vehicle.
             He spent the night at his brother's house."

5.    From  the  above  several  things  are  clear.   First  of  all,   the
    discrepancies highlighted by  the  judge  included  ones  that  on  any
    reading was highly material.  On one account he had said he had been in
    the House Church when it was raided and escaped half-way  through  (4.1
    of his screening interview).  On the other hand, the raid had  happened
    (just) before he arrived at the House Church  (Q111-16  of  his  asylum
    interview).  The materiality of this discrepancy is  important  because
    earlier the judge had identified a  number  of  respects  in  which  he
    disagreed with some of the respondent's  reservations.   Secondly,  the
    judge addressed the appellant's explanation  that  these  discrepancies
    arose through "mistakes which he had pointed  out  to  his  solicitor".
    Given that the appellant's solicitors have never  made  any  submission
    regarding these discrepancies,  the  judge  cannot  be  criticised  for
    rejecting that explanation.  Mr Hodson's submission relies then on  the
    appellant's explanation as recorded in his appeal statement.  But  this
    explanation  nowhere  identifies  any  mistake  in   respect   of   the
    appellant's recorded accounts of the police raid on the  House  Church.
    The appellant signed his screening interview to say he had  received  a
    copy of the screening interview (which had recorded him saying  at  4.1
    that "we were in a domestic church.  The Guard shouted midway through a
    service that the authorities had  come.   We  fled").   At  his  asylum
    interview all he mentioned regarding this was:

         "I did mention a couple  of  errors  to  my  solicitor  which  were
         rectified.  It did not take me 2 to 3 days to get  to  the  UK  and
         also my wife's name was written  incorrectly.   They  said  in  the
         interview I fled, from the back door but it  did  not  happen  that
         way."

6.   In regard to this statement, the appellant is first  of  all  referring
    to rectified mistakes  which  must  mean  ones   rectified  during  the
    screening interview or prior to the asylum interview.  If they were the
    former, the record would have already reflected them.  If they were the
    latter, the appellant's solicitors did not inform  anyone  about  them.
    The first two "errors" mentioned did not  concern  the  raid  incident.
    The final "error" does appear to refer to the raid, but  only  concerns
    the location of his exit  point  (back  door  or  otherwise)  and  says
    nothing to otherwise correct or retract what he said in  his  screening
    interview in 4.1.  Even if the remark "it did not happen this  way"  is
    read as referring to the general circumstances of the police raid, that
    statement is so  generalised  that  it  simply  cannot  be  read  as  a
    correction of anything other than perhaps the  precise  route  of  exit
    from the House Church.  The discrepancy on which  the  judge  primarily
    relied concerned the difference between being in the House  Church  and
    never having entered it at all.

7.   Thirdly, given what has  already  been  said,  the  judge  plainly  did
    address the appellant's only proffered  explanations  for  the  primary
    discrepancy.  Further, the appellant had been  put  on  notice  by  the
    terms of the respondent's refusal decision that this was  considered  a
    serious discrepancy (see paragraph 47 of that decision)  and  hence  it
    was incumbent on the appellant to offer any specific explanation he had
    regarding it at the hearing.  Yet all he did  was  recount  his  asylum
    interview account.

8.   Mr Hodson sought to argue that in view of case  law  authority  it  was
    unsafe to rely on discrepancies between a screening  interview  and  an
    asylum interview.  However, none of the authorities he  cited  go  that
    far and in the circumstances of this case the  judge  was  entitled  to
    treat as adverse to the claimant a highly material discrepancy  between
    the two interviews which was not given an adequate explanation  by  the
    appellant.

9.   For the above reasons I conclude that the grounds fail  to  disclose  a
    material error of law and that accordingly  the  decision  of  the  FtT
    judge to dismiss the appeal must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 2 January 2019
[pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


