
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/08356/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields (Kings Court)    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 April 2019                        |On 8 May 2019                       |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:                Ms E Mendoza, instructed by Halliday
Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:          Ms R Peterson, senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity Order

I make an anonymity order in relation to the appellant pursuant to  Rule  14
of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008   whereby   the
disclosure of any material or matter leading to the  identification  of  the
appellant, who will be referred to as MS,  is  prohibited.   Any  breach  of
this order may result in contempt proceedings.

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran where he was born in 1976.  He  left
    his country of origin in December 2017 and reached the  United  Kingdom
    on 26 December 2017, where he claimed asylum  the  same  day.   He  had
    entered clandestinely with the assistance of an agent.  His  claim  was
    based on a fear of harm as a Christian.  He had been born a Shia Muslim
    which he only practised occasionally for the sake  of  his  family  and
    parents  who  were  dedicated  to  this  faith.   His  introduction  to
    Christianity had been through a friend who had given him a  Bible,  and
    after two weeks, he began attending a House Church  in  Tehran.   On  6
    December 2017 three security officers raided the House and arrested two
    members.  The appellant avoided  capture  and  escaped.   He  has  been
    attending the Church and Bible studies in the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant was questioned about his claim on 14 June 2018 and  in  a
    decision dated 21 June 2018 the Secretary of State  refused  the  claim
    and gave his reasons for doing so.  He did not accept  the  appellant's
    conversion to Christianity in Iran or his claim that he had come to the
    adverse attention of the authorities due to inconsistencies and a  lack
    of coherency in his account.  Furthermore, it was not accepted that  he
    had left illegally.  The Secretary of State did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant would be at real risk of serious harm on return.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Monaghan heard evidence  from  the  appellant
    and Mr Norman Shave, a vicar of Stranton Church, Hartlepool.  The judge
    rejected  the  appellant's  account  of  his  conversion  in  Iran  and
    subsequent events that occurred and furthermore concluded the appellant
    was neither a credible witness nor a consistent one in respect  of  his
    claim to be a genuine Christian convert in the United Kingdom.

 4. The judge's reasoning for his findings in relation to  events  in  Iran
    was based on inconsistencies and implausible evidence by the appellant.
     In respect of matters in the United Kingdom, the  judge  gave  limited
    weight to the evidence of Mr Shave as explained in [79]:

         "79. Whilst there  is  no  doubt  therefore  that  Revd  Shave  has
             genuinely held views that the Appellant is a genuine Christian
             convert with an ongoing desire to follow Christ as set out  in
             his letters and confirmed in his oral evidence, I find that he
             has known the Appellant for only a relatively short period  of
             time and that during that same period, his  direct  experience
             and interaction with the Appellant, by the very nature of  his
             overall responsibilities for a large Parish, has been somewhat
             limited.  No criticism is levelled at Revd Shave who has shown
             the nature of his genuinely held beliefs by being prepared  to
             attend  the  Hearing  to  give  evidence  on  behalf  of   the
             Appellant, but I am able to place less weight on his  evidence
             for the reasons I have outlined herein."

 5. The judge continued at [80] to [82] with further reasons  for  doubting
    the appellant's credibility as follows:

         "80. Further, and of greater  concern  in  assessing  Revd  Shave's
             evidence and the weight I can attach to it, are the statements
             that  the  Appellant  has  made  to   him   in   their   early
             conversations together, which naturally will  have  been  when
             Revd  Shave  started  to  make  his  own  assessment  of   the
             Appellant's  beliefs  and  whether  they  were  genuine.    In
             particular,  the  Appellant  described  to  Revd   Shave   his
             conversion to Christianity whilst in his home city of  Tehran.
             He said that he  was  drawn  to  Christianity  because  of  an
             emphasis on love and kindness, he described his attendance  at
             Oasis Church (although no confirmation of this was  provided),
             and  started  attending  Stranton  Church.   In   his   asylum
             interview  when  asked  about   the   circumstances   of   his
             introduction to  Christianity,  the  Appellant  describes  the
             influence of his childhood friend  R  and  in  particular,  at
             length at Q77 he describes how he was in a  bad  situation  at
             the time as his father was ill in hospital and how his  friend
             seeing his situation said that he would take him somewhere  to
             introduce him to a faith and also provided him with a Bible.

         81.  Although Revd Shave later refers  to  the  Appellant's  father
             being sick in hospital, this was not in  connection  with  the
             Appellant's initial conversion  to  Christianity  but  in  the
             context of the Appellant's belief  specifically  in  the  Holy
             Spirit  and  the  influence  of  Christian  prayer  which  the
             Appellant believed caused his father to get better.

         82.  Therefore the Appellant did not make any mention to Revd Shave
             of the influence of his childhood friend  R,  not  the  direct
             connection  to  his  father's  illness,  which  lead  to   his
             conversion   to   Christianity   when   talking   about    the
             circumstances  of  his  conversion,   and   instead   referred
             generically to "an emphasis on love and kindness."  Given that
             these were significant events, it  is  not  credible  that  he
             failed to mention them to Revd Shave in  the  context  of  his
             claimed conversion.  I conclude therefore  that  Revd  Shave's
             appreciation of the Appellant's position must  necessarily  be
             limited as it appears that  the  Appellant  did  not  disclose
             fully to him the facts leading up to his  claimed  conversion.
             Further the Appellant has been inconsistent in his account, by
             giving one version of events in his  asylum  interview  and  a
             different one to Revd Shave."

    By way of conclusion, the judge explained at [83] and [84]:

         "83. I find therefore that the Appellant is not a credible witness,
             nor a consistent one in respects of his claim to be a  genuine
             Christian convert and that he has failed to establish his case
             even to the lower standard required.

         84.  I accordingly place  little  if  any  weight  on  his  regular
             attendance at Church and Bible  study,  his  baptism  and  his
             confirmation in that Church and find  that  these  are  simply
             devices to seek to remain in the United  Kingdom.   I  further
             find that if the Appellant is returned to Iran, he  is  highly
             unlikely to continue any form of Christian  observance.   Once
             back in Iran, the appellant would have no reason whatsoever to
             attend church."

 6. In a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal, it was argued at  [2.4]
    that the judge erred by failing to apply:

          "... close and anxious scrutiny to the supportive evidence  of  UK
         based church activity  ...;  discounting  this  important  evidence
         based upon earlier findings in relation to MS's account  of  events
         in Iran."

 7. This is followed in [2.4] with the sentence:

         "The activities of  MS  whilst  in  the  UK  cannot  rationally  be
         discounted based upon  the  expert  report  was  material  evidence
         [sic], which supported key aspects of GA's case;  if  the  FTT  was
         going to reject the expert report, it should have explained why."

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman.   He
    observed that debate has been  raised  whether  the  structure  of  the
    judge's decision was consistent with the approach explained in  TF  and
    MA [2018] CSIH 58 but he questioned the meaning of [2.4]

 9. On the last point neither Ms Mendoza nor Ms Petterson was able to throw
    any light on the reference to GA's case.

10. Ms Mendoza argued that the judge had  disregarded  Mr  Shave's  report.
    Although she accepted that it was correct that the appellant had  given
    a different account of the Iran based conversion to Mr Shave from  that
    in interview by the Home Office, this  aspect  needed  to  be  balanced
    against the other evidence  which  included  the  observations  of  the
    appellant by Mr Shave. She also argued that there had been a failure to
    consider the evidence of the genuineness of the appellant's conversion.

11. By way of response, Ms Petterson argued that the judge had given proper
    consideration to Mr Shave's evidence and he had taken account  of  more
    than just the inconsistencies between the interview and account  relied
    to Mr Shave. Adequate reasons had been given for finding that Mr  Shade
    had been misled.

12. In her brief reply, Ms Mendoza referred to the approach enjoined in  TF
    and MA v SSHD [2018] CSIH 58 and clarified that it was a reasons  based
    challenge and not one of rationality.

13. In  my  judgment  the  judge  gave  adequate  sustainable  reasons  for
    disbelieving the claimant as set out in the parts of his decision cited
    above. The judge had rejected the account of events in Iran and  it  is
    significant that there is no challenge to this aspect. He was  entitled
    to note that absence of evidence from previous places  of  worship  for
    which he did not give undue weight (at [75]) and it cannot be said that
    he overlooked any of the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  church  based
    activities and that of Mr Shave as will be  seen  from  paras  [76]  to
    [78]. There is no basis for Ms Mendoza's  submission  that  Mr  Shave's
    evidence was disregarded; it was considered in some detail as  will  be
    seen in the paragraphs (cited above and later in this decision).

14. Lord Glennie in TF and MA explains at para [3]  that  the  appeals  had
    been heard together because:

         "they  appeared  to  raise  similar  questions  relating   to   the
         appropriate treatment of certain types of evidence in  cases  where
         the genuineness of the sur place conversion is challenged. They  do
         in fact raise a number of overlapping questions,  viz:  as  to  the
         status of evidence from church leaders (or others holding positions
         of responsibility within a church) about the conduct  of  a  person
         who has begun the process of admission into the church  and  as  to
         the sincerity of his conversion to Christianity; as to  the  weight
         to be given to such evidence; and whether the  usefulness  of  such
         evidence as a guide to the genuineness of the sur place  conversion
         is undermined by findings that, in relation to other  matters,  the
         appellant, the applicant for asylum, has given  evidence  which  is
         untrue or unreliable and/or may be  said  to  undermine  his  basic
         credibility".

15. At [60] Lord Glennie observed:

         "[60]    In a case where the tribunal has  formed  a  view,  albeit
                only  a  provisional  view,  that  the  appellant  has  been
                dishonest in certain aspects of his claim for asylum  or  in
                other material respects, it is legitimate for  the  tribunal
                to regard with  suspicion  evidence  from  church  witnesses
                which is based entirely upon what  the  appellant  has  told
                them. But save  in  a  clear  case,  that  exercise  is  not
                legitimate when the evidence from the  church  witnesses  is
                based in substantial  part  on  their  observations  of  the
                appellant when he has been engaging with the  activities  of
                the church."



16. It cannot be said that the judge rejected the appellant's claim to  his
    conversion because he had not told the truth about events in Iran.  The
    fact  of  the  appellant  having  given  a  different  account  of  his
    conversion in Iran was not the only basis on which he  did  not  accept
    the evidence of Mr Shave.  Instead, it was a factor that the judge took
    into account in deciding the weight to be given to Mr Shave's evidence.
     It is pertinent to record the judge's observations in  paras  [76]  to
    [78]:

         "76. I also take account that the Appellant has been attending  his
             present Church, All Saints Church, Stranton since  05/02/2018,
             a period of only five months.  During that time,  it  is  Revd
             Shave's  evidence  that  the  Appellant  has  attended  church
             regularly and been a regular member of  a  study  group  which
             meets weekly.  Therefore Revd Shave has been in the company of
             the Appellant twice weekly or so for only around twenty weeks.
              Whilst the study group is relatively small, being five or six
             in number, it is  Revd  Shave's  evidence  that  around  50-60
             adults  attend  the  main  Sunday  service  at   the   Church.
             Therefore it is  reasonable  to  conclude  that  Revd  Shave's
             interaction with and observance of the Appellant at the Sunday
             service will have been  somewhat  limited  by  virtue  of  the
             number of people he is administering to at that  time.   I  do
             accept that Revd Shave did  have  more  extensive  interaction
             with the Appellant at the much smaller Bible study group on  a
             weekly basis.


         77.  Revd Shave has also confirmed in his letters that  his  Church
             has a total membership of around  140  people.   In  his  oral
             evidence before the Tribunal he said that he was not  able  to
             sustain any regular ongoing contact with those people who  had
             successfully claimed asylum  and  since  relocated  elsewhere,
             pointing out that understandably he  has  to  concentrate  his
             Ministry on those who remain in his Parish.


         78.  Revd Shave was also a little uncertain  about  the  number  of
             people the Appellant had brought to the  Church  when  he  was
             asked about this in evidence.  He initially said two or  three
             and when pressed a little further  said  'more  than  one;  at
             least two; may have been three."


17.  By way of conclusion I am satisfied that the judge did not err in  his
    decision on the basis of the grounds of challenge as argued before  me.
     The judge gave adequate reasons without legal error  in  finding  that
    the appellant was not a genuine convert to Christianity on the evidence
    and that he would not be at risk on return to Iran.

 DECISION

18. This appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                  Date 2 May 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
