
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08001/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|Via Skype for Business               |                                     |
|On 28 September 2020                 |On 5 October 2020                    |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     IA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, instructed by Ansari solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1997 and is a male citizen of Afghanistan. He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in July 2015 claimed  asylum.  His  claim
    for  asylum  was  refused  by  decision  dated  31  December   2015.His
    subsequent appeal was dismissed and the appellant became appeal  rights
    exhausted on 5 September 2017. The appellant made  further  submissions
    to the Secretary of State which resulted in a  refusal  of  that  fresh
    claim by a decision dated 26 July  2019.  The  appellant  appealed  the
    First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on 14 April  2020,
    dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  renewed  grounds
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  are  essentially  identical  (the  renewed
    grounds have dispensed with the lengthy statement of the relevant law).
    The renewed grounds are set out in four paragraphs. Paragraphs 1, 3 and
    4 argue the same point, namely that the judge,  despite  having  stated
    that he would apply the appropriate lower standard of  proof  had  held
    the appellant's evidence to a higher standard; at paragraph  4  of  the
    grounds, it is even asserted that the judge had required the  appellant
    to prove his case on a criminal standard. I can find no basis  whatever
    for arguing that the judge has applied  an  inappropriate  standard  of
    proof. The judge  stated  correctly  that  he  would  apply  the  lower
    standard throughout at [11]. The grounds provide no  specific  examples
    from  the  decision  to  support   the   argument   advanced.   Perhaps
    understandably, Mr Brown, who appeared at the initial hearing  on  half
    of the appellant made no reference to  this  part  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal. Instead, he sought to rely upon the grant permission  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Finch. This grant  addresses  the  remaining  ground  of
    appeal (that the judge had  failed  to  make  a  determination  of  the
    appellant's appeal on Article 8  ECHR  grounds)  and  the  judge's  own
    opinion (which has no basis in the grounds  as drafted) that the First-
    tier Tribunal had 'failed to treat  [the  appellant]  as  a  vulnerable
    witness  on  account  of  his  accepted  diagnosis  of  depression  and
    anxiety.'

 3. Considering first the Article 8 ECHR ground,  I  note  what  the  judge
    writes at [7]:

         "Mr Sobawale [counsel  for  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal] confirmed that no claim was  made  that  the  appellant's
         removal from the UK would be a breach of the U.K.'s obligations  in
         relation to persons eligible for grant of  humanitarian  protection
         and no claim was made that his removal  from  the  UK  would  be  a
         breach of the U.K.'s obligations under the Human  Rights  Act  with
         reference to article 8 of the ECHR. Mr Sobawale confirmed  that  no
         claim was made with reference to article 15(c) of the Qualification
         Directive."

 4. Mr Brown submitted that the judge had  fallen  into  error  by  failing
    specifically to address Paragraph 276ADE of HC 395  (as  amended).  The
    appellant had established a private life was in the United Kingdom  and
    the judge should have considered what difficulties would be proposed to
    his  reintegration  into  Afghan  society  as  a  consequence  of   the
    appellant's mental health problems. Mr McVeety, who  appeared  for  the
    Secretary of State at the initial  hearing,  submitted  that  Paragraph
    276ADE is effectively a statement of the  current  law  as  regards  an
    individual's right to a private life under Article 8. There had been no
    need for the judge to embark upon examination of Paras  276ADE  in  the
    light of counsel's unequivocal statement that there was  no  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.

 5. I agree with Mr McVeety. Had counsel sought to rely upon Article 8 then
    the judge would have considered Paragraph 276ADE first in  relation  to
    the appellant's private life and, had she found that the appellant  did
    not meet the requirements of the rule, would then  analysed  the  claim
    outside the Immigration Rules.  I  consider  that  there  was  no  need
    whatever for the judge to initiate that analysis of her own  motion  in
    the light of counsel's unequivocal statement that Article 8 ECHR  would
    not be pursued and which the judge records at  [11].  I  consulted  the
    typed record of proceedings on the Tribunal file and  summarised  parts
    of this for the advocates. This record contains no  specific  reference
    to the Immigration Rules. At [230], the judge has recorded Mr  Sobawale
    submitting to her that he was, 'not asserting article 15(c)  risk,  and
    saying that because I suppose trying to say whether the  appellant  was
    in Kabul or home area his own personal profile including mental  health
    would make integration difficult or impossible.(sic)' I have no  reason
    to believe that the judge did not have regard to  all  the  submissions
    made by both representatives in reaching a decision. I  find  that  the
    judge has considered what counsel said regarding the appellant's mental
    health and his possible difficulties in reintegrating in  her  analysis
    of risk on return which was the only context in which the  question  of
    integration was advanced to her at the hearing. I was told by Mr  Brown
    that an attempt had been made by those instructing him  to  contact  Mr
    Sobawale but I was not given details of any response he may have  made.
    I consider that the judge's record the proceedings is accurate (indeed,
    neither representative submitted that it was  not).  I  find  that  the
    judge has not erred in law in respect of her treatment of the Paragraph
    276ADE/ Article 8 ECHR.

 6. I shall now consider the question of the appellant's vulnerability as a
    witness. The sequence of events in this appeal  was  somewhat  unusual.
    The judge was concerned to learn that the appellant had  mental  health
    problems and she considered adjourning the appeal for a report  or  the
    medical notes to be provided [23]. No application  for  an  adjournment
    was made by either representative and the judge expressly records  that
    Mr Sobawale 'confirmed  that  no  adjustments  were  requested  at  the
    hearing [on account of the appellant's mental health]' [23].  At  [24],
    the judge records that she  made  a  direction  for  the  appellant  to
    provide copies of his medical records after the hearing. Those  records
    were provided to the judge as she records at [33].  The  judge  made  a
    finding that the judge had not been  treated  in  hospital  as  he  had
    claimed. I can identify no legal error in  the  judge's  reasoning  for
    that finding. Equally clear is the judge's finding at [39] that, having
    been concerned that the appellant's evidence at the  hearing  may  have
    been affected by his mental health condition, she concluded  that  such
    an explanation was 'not  the  case  and  I  find  the  only  reasonable
    explanation is that he fabricated this evidence also. The appellant has
    a mental health condition but I find  that  it  does  not  explain  the
    inconsistencies in  his  evidence.'  At  [40],  the  judge  provides  a
    thorough analysis and summary of the medical records.  She  noted  that
    incidents of  self-harm  had  not  occurred  since  the  appellant  had
    commenced medication.  She  noted  that  the  appellant  suffered  from
    diagnosed mental health conditions 'which are well managed  by  the  GP
    with medication. The appellant is able to function  in  his  day-to-day
    life despite his mental health conditions.'  Whilst  I  am  aware  that
    those observations followed the hearing they clearly  justify  ex  post
    facto the judge's conduct of the hearing  as  regards  the  appellant's
    mental health. In addition it  is  significant  that  counsel  for  the
    appellant had been asked whether any adjustments were required  at  the
    hearing and had unequivocally stated  that  none  were  needed.  It  is
    difficult to see what else the judge could have done to take account of
    the appellant's mental health issues. I am wholly  satisfied  that  the
    appellant was given a fair hearing; indeed, the  judge's  diligence  in
    obtaining the medical records and analysing them so  carefully  in  the
    context of all the other  evidence  in  this  appeal  before  make  her
    determination is to be commended. I reject Mr  Brown  submission  that,
    having received the medical records, the judge should  have  reconvened
    the hearing. She was not asked to do so by the appellant's counsel  and
    nothing she read in the appellant's medical records should have  caused
    her to doubt the fairness of the hearing over which she had presided.

 7. In the light of what I say above, I find that  this  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    Appeal dismissed.


Signed                              Date 2 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

