
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/08252/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 25 January 2019                            |On 14 February 2019          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 SARKAWT [S]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr J Chaudry, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the  decision  of  Designated  FtT  Judge
    Murray, promulgated on 7 February 2018.

 2. The grounds of appeal,  revised  in  light  of  the  FtT's  refusal  of
    permission, are set out as:

    (1)    errors when assessing credibility, (i) - (vii);

    (2)    errors in relation to medical evidence, (i) -(iii);

    (3)    risk on return, (i) - (v); and

    (4)    starting with section 8 issues.

 3. The UT granted permission on21 August 2018, in these terms:

         "There is nothing in the section 8 point and it  may  be  that,  on
         further analysis, the  grounds  amount  to  disagreement  with  the
         decision.  However, the appellant did display some knowledge of the
         KDPI at interview, and has apparently  attended  demonstrations  in
         the UK, and there is material on his Facebook page. It is  accepted
         that if his account is true, he could be at risk on return.

         Arguably, the judge's findings are not adequately reasoned."

 4. Mrs O'Brien conceded that the grounds succeeded  in  showing  that  the
    reasons given for  the  generally  adverse  credibility  findings  were
    legally insufficient, and that the decision should be set  aside.   She
    said that the outcome should be a remit to the FtT.

 5. Mr Chaudry sought to show that there  were  positive  findings  in  the
    decision which ought to be retained and that  those,  applying  country
    guidance, enabled the appeal to be allowed by the UT.  He advanced  the
    following matters.

      i) The appellant was  identifiable  in  Facebook  posts  of  an  anti-
         government nature, which had been before the  FtT.   (Clear  copies
         were produced to the UT, without objection.)

     ii) The Facebook posts were not only on the appellant's Facebook  page,
         but on the page of the KDPI's Scottish branch.

    iii) HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC) is authority  that  such
         posts are enough to demonstrate a risk.

     iv) If not in the headnote  at  (3)  and  (10),  that  proposition  was
         vouched by the body of the decision.

      v) The FtT made a positive finding at [34, 36, 37] that the  appellant
         had been an alcohol smuggler.

     vi) The respondent's guidance dated  6  April  2016,  produced  in  the
         appellant's 2nd FtT  bundle,  item  2,  at  5.3.2,  confirmed  that
         represented a risk in terms of article 3 of the ECHR,  or  even  of
         article 2.

    vii) Alternatively, the circumstances which were proved, in combination,
         in light of the "hair trigger"  approach  of  the  authorities  and
         their low threshold for suspicion, BA headnote (10),  were  enough.



 6. Having considered also the submission for the  respondent,  I  was  not
    persuaded that there were positive findings,  or  uncontentious  facts,
    which entitled the appellant to protection, after excision of  negative
    findings.

 7. The FtT accepted at [38] that the appellant  "had  a  Facebook  account
    with anti-government notices therein"; but it declined to find that  on
    return he  would  have  to  "give  up  these  details  and  incriminate
    himself".  Mr Chaudry said that the appellant could not be expected  to
    lie, but he was unable to show that on the finding that  the  appellant
    was not genuine but only bolstering his claim, there was any reason  to
    think that he could not be expected  to  delete  his  Facebook  account
    whenever that was  likely  to  be  in  his  interest,  or  why  it  was
    reasonably likely he would ever be asked about it.  Nor was Mr  Chaudry
    able to point to evidence  that  it  is  the  practice  or  within  the
    abilities of the Iranian authorities  to  scan  the  internet  for  any
    traces of suspicion of nationals arriving back in the country.

 8. Mr Chaudry submitted that because the appellant  has  been  an  alcohol
    smuggler, he was at  risk  of  prosecution  and  of  consequent  prison
    conditions  which  amounted  to  persecution;  and  that  suspicion  of
    criminality opened him up to scrutiny on political  matters.   However,
    the FtT's findings at highest might be tentative support for him having
    been a smuggler.  They contain no support for that being known  to  the
    authorities, or likely to be prosecuted, so there is nothing to trigger
    such a chain of events.

 9. Mr Chaudry  sought  to  equiparate  this  appellant  to  HB,  but  that
    appellant was found credible in the core of his account.

10. Mrs O'Brien drew attention to paragraph 39  of  page  64  of  HB,  "The
    authorities in Iran are capable of distinguishing between returnees who
    are politically active  and  those  who  claim  to  be  so  for  purely
    opportunistic purposes"; however, I note that is part of an annex and a
    record of the SSHD's submissions, not a finding of the UT.

11. In short, the appellant is unable to show by reference to uncontentious
    facts, positive findings, background  evidence,  and  country  guidance
    that as matters stand on  setting  aside  the  FtT's  decision,  he  is
    entitled to protection.  His case is contingent on securing  favourable
    findings.  He  is  entitled  to  another  opportunity  to  seek  those.



12. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.  The nature of the case is such  that  it
    is appropriate under section 12 of the 2007  Act,  and  under  Practice
    Statement 7.2, to remit to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.   The
    member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case  are  not  to  include
    Judge Murray.

13. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      25 January 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
