
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08479/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 January 2020                   |On 5 February 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     OQ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Hodson, Counsel, Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born on  5  May  1984.  He  appeals
    against  a  decision  of   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Lloyd-Lawrie
    promulgated on 1  November  2019  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision dated 22 August 2019 to  refuse  his  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection claim.

Factual background

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom by  plane  on  24  February
    2019, claiming asylum the same day.  He  is  a  Sunni  Muslim  of  Arab
    ethnicity from the city of Mosul.

 3. The basis of the appellant's claim  relates  to  his  occupation  as  a
    baker, working with his father, at their bakery  in  Mosul.  He  claims
    that the bakery was a major supplier of bread to a nearby US and  anti-
    ISIS military base. Although ISIS had largely been defeated in Mosul at
    the time, he claims that a sleeper cell approached him and  his  father
    in February 2019 and asked them to poison the bread that they  supplied
    to the military base. The judge below found  there  were  a  number  of
    different  accounts  of  what  happened  next.   I  will   record   the
    appellant's central account as follows.  Having initially purported  to
    "go along" with the demand, the appellant and his father later  refused
    to do so. A struggle ensued, the appellant was shot but not "hurt", but
    his father was kidnapped by ISIS. The appellant attempted to report the
    incident to the police, in order to secure their protection,  but  they
    laughed at him and refused to assist. He claims they did so because the
    police in Mosul are mainly Shia Muslims affiliated  with  al-Hashd  al-
    Shaabi. Arrangements were made for him to flee the country in order  to
    seek protection here.

 4. The judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on the basis that the threat
    purportedly faced by the appellant originated from non-state actors and
    was therefore outside the scope of the  Refugee  Convention.  Secondly,
    the judge did not find the account provided  by  the  appellant  to  be
    credible. She considered the appellant had been internally inconsistent
    and had been unable to state with the specificity one would expect of a
    person involved in such an incident key features that took place,  with
    the expected consistency.

Permission to appeal

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison on the basis that the judge arguably erred  by  finding  that
    the claimed threat from ISIS was not within the scope  of  the  Refugee
    Convention, and that the judge  did  not  sufficiently  engage  in  the
    appellant's "actual evidence" concerning key features of his claim.

 6. The respondent did not submit a rule 24 response.  Mr Hodson relied  on
    his detailed and clear grounds of appeal.

Discussion

ISIS threat - Convention ground?

 7. The judge's  analysis  of  the  appellant's  claim  under  the  Refugee
    Convention may be dealt with swiftly. The judge was, of course, correct
    to characterise the threat from ISIS as being from a  non-state  actor,
    and thus ordinarily outside the ambit of the Convention.  However,  the
    basis upon  which  the  appellant  claimed  he  was  unable  to  secure
    effective state protection from the  authorities  in  response  was  on
    account of his Sunni ethnicity, in the face of  the  majority  Shia-led
    law enforcement authorities and the Shia anti-ISIS militia  who  worked
    to counter ISIS occupation of Iraq (see the respondent's Country Policy
    and Information Note - Iraq: Sunni (Arab)  Muslims,  version  2.0  June
    2017 at, for example, [6.1.4]). Accordingly, as  Judge  Grant-Hutchison
    identified when granting permission to appeal,  there  is  a  potential
    nexus to the Refugee  Convention  on  religion  and  imputed  political
    grounds. The nature of the  nexus  depends  on  the  findings  of  fact
    reached by the judge, but, in principle, the appellant's  narrative  is
    capable of falling within the Refugee Convention.

 8. The judge made an error of law on this point.  The non-availability  of
    state protection on religious, ethnic and political opinion grounds is,
    in principle, able to engage the Convention. As was  common  ground  at
    the hearing, the materiality of this error depends on  the  credibility
    findings reached by the  judge.  If  those  findings  were  sound,  the
    erroneous approach of the judge to the Refugee Convention  issue  falls
    away. The materiality of the judge's error  on  this  point  stands  or
    falls with her approach to the credibility of the appellant's account.

Sufficiency of reasons

 9. Turning to the appellant's submissions concerning the  judge's  primary
    findings  of  fact,  Mr  Hodson  characterises  his  complaint   as   a
    sufficiency of reasons challenge. He stressed that he did not  seek  to
    challenge the decision on rationality grounds, accepting that it would,
    in  principle,  be  possible  for  an  adequately   reasoned   decision
    legitimately to dismiss this appeal. As Mr Lindsay submits, a facet  of
    a  sufficiency  of  reasons  challenge  is  that  the   judge   reached
    conclusions which, in light of  the  (allegedly  insufficient)  reasons
    given, are irrational, as the basis upon which the decision was reached
    will not be clear from the reasoning given.  Accordingly, where a judge
    has not given sufficient reasons, the reader of the  decision  will  be
    presented with  findings  and  conclusions  which  bear  no  or  little
    relationship to the analysis (if any) conducted by the judge, and which
    are,  therefore,  unsupported  by  any   rational   explanation.    The
    rationality of the link between the judge's conclusions and the reasons
    given for the judge is, therefore, a primary consideration.

10. The duty to give reasons  is  well  established.   There  is  authority
    specific to the issue from this Tribunal: see, for example, MK (duty to
    give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC).   There  is  also  higher
    authority from elsewhere covering the point.   In  Flannery  v  Halifax
    Estate Agencies Ltd [1999] EWCA Civ 811, [2000] 1 WLR 377 at 381  Henry
    LJ set out the underlying rationale behind the duty to give reasons:

         "...a requirement to give reasons concentrates the mind; if  it  is
         fulfilled, the resulting decision is much more likely to be soundly
         based on the evidence than if it is not..."

11. In English v Emery Reimbold & Strick Ltd. (Practice Note)  [2002]  EWCA
    Civ 605, the Court of  Appeal  surveyed  the  domestic  and  Strasbourg
    authorities on the issue.  I will highlight just two extracts from  the
    judgment.  Lord Phillips MR (as he then was) held:

         "19. [The duty to give reasons] does not  mean  that  every  factor
         which weighed with the Judge in his appraisal of the  evidence  has
         to be identified and explained. But the issues  the  resolution  of
         which were vital to the Judge's conclusion should be identified and
         the manner in which he resolved them explained. It is not  possible
         to provide a template for this  process.  It  need  not  involve  a
         lengthy judgment. It does require the Judge to identify and  record
         those matters which were critical to his decision. If the  critical
         issue was one of fact, in may be enough to say that one witness was
         preferred to another because  the  one  manifestly  had  a  clearer
         recollection of the material facts or the other gave answers  which
         demonstrated that his recollection could not be relied upon."

    Lord Phillips made two concluding observations about the duty  to  give
    reasons,  in  light  of  his  discussion  of  the  principle,  and  its
    application to the individual cases that were before  the  Court.   The
    observations were as follows:

         "118.    The first is that, while it is  perfectly  acceptable  for
         reasons to be set out briefly in a judgment, it is the duty of  the
         Judge to produce a judgment that gives a clear explanation for  his
         or her order. The second is that an unsuccessful party  should  not
         seek to upset a judgment on the ground  of  inadequacy  of  reasons
         unless, despite the advantage  of  considering  the  judgment  with
         knowledge of the evidence given and submissions made at the  trial,
         that party is unable to understand why it is  that  the  Judge  has
         reached an adverse decision."

12. These principles were endorsed by  the  Court  of  Appeal  recently  in
    Simetra Global Assets Limited v Ikon Finance Ltd & Others  [2019]  EWCA
    Civ 141 at, for example [46].  Lord Justice Males observed that:

         "it is not necessary to deal expressly  with  every  point,  but  a
         judge must say enough to show that care has been taken and that the
         evidence as a whole has been properly considered."

13. Against that background, I turn to the central reasoning of the judge's
    decision. The judge explained (see [27]) that she  had  considered  all
    the evidence in the case.  She noted at [33] that it was  necessary  to
    consider the appellant's credibility  from  an  internal  and  external
    perspective, pursuant to the well-known authorities on credibility.

14. The judge summarised the appellant's case in more depth at  [21].   She
    noted that there were different versions of the  account  that  he  had
    provided.  The respondent had made similar observations:  see  [11]  of
    the refusal decision dated 22 August 2019.  The judge said:

         "[The appellant] claimed that he and his father had  a  bakery  and
         that they made and delivered bread to a US airbase. He claims  that
         ISIS came and told them I had to poison the bread and that  either,
         his father outright refused, pretended to  go  along  with  it  and
         poison the bread or poison the bread  and  was  then  kidnapped  by
         ISIS. He claims that he either he was shot out, shot in  the  elbow
         always just grazed by the bullet but did get away. He  claims  that
         after ISIS came to the bakery for the first time, they went to  the
         local police station to ask for help. He claims that they said that
         as they were Sunni, they would not help them,  he  said  that  they
         were from the group Hash d Shabbi. He said that he fears both  them
         and ISIS."  (Emphasis added)

15. In setting matters out in this way, the judge was providing the context
    for the analysis she was subsequently to conduct.   The  appellant  had
    advanced a number of different theories; it would be for the  judge  to
    reach findings of fact in light of that approach.

16. The judge proceeded to set out the background evidence  concerning  in-
    country  conditions  in  Iraq  from  the  relevant   country   guidance
    authorities then in  force,  before  reaching  her  operative  findings
    concerning the central claim of the  appellant.   At  [32],  the  judge
    cited what she considered to be different versions of the account given
    by the appellant on a number of different occasions, having  introduced
    those differing theories at [21].  She opened [32] in these terms:

         "I find that it [sic] wholly incredible that the appellant would be
         confused as to whether he and his  father  refused  to  poison  the
         bread, actually poisoned the  bread  or  pretended  to  poison  the
         bread. The appellant has been inconsistent on this issue.

17. Mr Hodson submits that the appellant had not given as many  conflicting
    accounts as the judge found him to have given. The judge had mis-read a
    crucial sentence in the  appellant's  screening  interview,  which  she
    should have read as though it featured the words "do not", he  submits.
    The missing words must have  been  omitted  through  a  combination  of
    interpreter difficulties and human error by the  transcriber,  contends
    Mr Hodson.

18. At paragraph 4.1 of his screening interview, the appellant was asked to
    explain, briefly, the reasons why he could  not  return  to  Iraq.  The
    appellant is recorded as having said the following:

         "Because of ISIS - every morning we  provided  bread  to  USA  army
         soldiers in Mosul - ISIS told us to put poison in the bread to kill
         the USA soldiers this happened in QADA QIARA. Because my dad listen
         to ISIS and poison the  bread  they  took  him  away  -  when  this
         happened I entered the bakery - ISIS saw - I was  shot  at  in  the
         right arm elbow but got away." (Emphasis added)

    Mr Hodson submits that the words in  the  emboldened  sentence,  above,
    should have been  read  by  the  judge  as  though  they  featured  the
    following words in square brackets:

         "Because my dad [did not] listen to ISIS and poison the bread  they
         took him away"

19. In Mr Hodson's submission, the only coherent construction that  may  be
    given to the sentence above involves the implied insertion of the words
    "did not". The sentence does not make sense otherwise, he submits. Why,
    he questions, would ISIS take the appellant's father  away  if  he  did
    listen to them and poison the bread as requested? The  appellant  would
    not have said in his screening interview, submits Mr Hodson, that  ISIS
    took his father away when they asked him to do what they  wanted.  They
    would only have taken had he not done as requested.  It simply did  not
    make sense, he submitted.  Pursuant to this submission, any analysis by
    the judge which  fails  to  read  the  sentence  in  that  way  is,  by
    definition, flawed and any reasons purportedly given by the judge  will
    be inadequate.

20. The difficulty with this  submission  is  that,  while  there  is  some
    superficial force in the contention that, on one reading, it  may  seem
    odd for the appellant's father to be kidnapped for doing  what  he  was
    ordered to do by ISIS, the judge had not considered the contents of the
    appellant's screening interview in isolation. Her concerns  about  what
    she perceived to be the inconsistencies in the appellant's account were
    not limited to that single issue.  In addition, the judge was  live  to
    the issue of the alleged inaccurate record of the appellant's answer to
    that question, and dealt with it, albeit in brief terms.

21. Turning to the judge's treatment of the poison inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's account as a whole, the judge noted that the appellant said
    in his substantive asylum interview that  his  father  had  refused  to
    poison the bread. That must have been a reference to question 63, where
    the appellant was asked, "did your father refuse to put poison  in  the
    bread?", and the appellant replied, "yes he refused..."  The judge then
    noted in response to question 64 ("When he refused what did they  do?")
    The appellant answered, "on the same day the 9th February we  pretended
    to put the poison inside the dough..."

22. Accordingly, in the space of answering  two  questions,  the  appellant
    said that his father both refused to poison the dough, and  went  along
    with the suggestion,  pretending  to  poison  it.  Plainly,  these  two
    answers are inconsistent. Even putting to one side the answer that  the
    appellant was  recorded  as  having  given  at  paragraph  4.1  of  his
    screening interview, there is  a  difference  between  the  appellant's
    answers to these two questions: pretending to do something  implies  an
    act of deceit, a positive act designed to give a misleading  impression
    of reality. By contrast, refusing to do something implies the  presence
    of an objection to the requested or demanded task.  It was open to  the
    judge to find that the appellant's father could not have  both  refused
    to plant poison in the bread, on the  one  hand,  while  simultaneously
    pretending to do so on the other.

23. At question 74, the appellant was asked to explain why he said  in  his
    screening interview that his father had  poisoned  the  bread.  In  his
    answer to this question, the appellant introduced a new strand  to  his
    narrative, namely that there had been two visits from ISIS; he  claimed
    that they visited the day before his father was kidnapped, and on  that
    occasion initially asked his father to plant poison in  the  bread.  It
    was the next day that they returned to enforce the order and, when  the
    appellant's father refused to poison the bread, it was then that he was
    kidnapped,  he  said.  The  judge  recorded  the   appellant's   cross-
    examination on this issue at the hearing. Mr Hodson has  not  suggested
    that  the  judge's  record  of  this  aspect  of  the  proceedings  was
    inaccurate, so I proceed on the basis that it accurately  records  what
    took place. The appellant was  asked  to  clarify  why  he  had  stated
    previously that his father had pretended to poison  the  bread,  rather
    than having refused to do so. The appellant "said he did not say that",
    recorded the judge. The question was put to him again and:

         "he said that the day they came the [sic] pretended to  'go  along'
         with the idea to quieten ISIS down. He said  that  after  that  his
         father refused."

24. The appellant did not say in response to question 74 that the answer he
    gave to question 4.1 in the screening interview had  been  inaccurately
    recorded. He had every opportunity to do  so  at  that  stage.  He  had
    already been  asked  -  see  question  10  of  the  substantive  asylum
    interview - whether his screening interview was accurate, and  he  said
    that it was.

25. Accordingly, in relation to the alleged  missing  "did  not"  from  the
    record of the appellant's answer  to  question  4.1  in  his  screening
    interview, it is plain that the judge was live to the  issue,  and  the
    appellant had been given the opportunity to clarify his seemingly self-
    contradictory answer in his substantive asylum interview, and  did  not
    do so.  The judge noted later in [32] that the appellant had sought  to
    clarify what  he  said  in  his  screening  interview  in  his  witness
    statement prepared for the First-tier  Tribunal  proceedings:  "in  the
    appellant's witness statement, he clarified at paragraph 10 that he had
    been hit on the elbow and said  that  he  had  been  misquoted  in  the
    screening interview as his father would not have been taken away if  he
    had poison the bread."

26. Mr Hodson sought to imply further contextual  clarifications  into  the
    appellant's account. He  submits  that  the  judge  should  have  taken
    judicial notice that a bakery in Iraq would not have been baking  bread
    in the evening and factored that into her assessment of the appellant's
    account of being visited by  ISIS  the  night  before  his  father  was
    kidnapped. The grounds of appeal are expressed as follows:

         "[11] As for the allegation that the appellant said that the father
         (or he and his father) 'pretended' to put  the  poison  inside  the
         dough, this derives from one recorded  answer  in  the  appellant's
         main asylum interview (Q 64). This answer is part of an explanation
         as to what happened when members of ISIS came to the bakery at 5 PM
         on 9 February 2019 and threatened the appellant's  father,  telling
         him to poison the bread which was to be taken to the [airbase]. The
         sentence in issue, in the asylum interview record, is as follows:

             "on the same day the 9th February we pretended to  put  poison
             inside the dough" (Q64 of AIR).

         [12] When interpreting this statement, again a modicum (but only  a
         modicum) of common sense is required. Thus, it is common  knowledge
         - and is in any event an integral part of the appellant's account -
         that bread is baked first thing in the morning to be  delivered  to
         recipients, and otherwise  made  available  to  customers,  in  the
         morning. It is not baked at 5pm  in  the  evening.  Therefore,  the
         appellant cannot possibly have been  saying  that  at  5pm  on  the
         evening of 9th February 2019 he and his  father  pretended  to  put
         poison inside the 'dough' - there would not have been any dough  at
         that time to put the poison into!" (emphasis original)

27. Mr Hodson, who drafted the grounds of appeal, appears to be  attempting
    to give evidence on the likely shift patterns  of  a  bakery  in  Mosul
    allegedly supplying bread to a US military base. There  was  simply  no
    evidence before the judge that has been brought to my  attention  which
    would admit of  only  one  conclusion  concerning  the  alleged  baking
    patterns of the appellant's father's bakery. It is not possible to  say
    that a "modicum" of common sense demands an alternative answer.  It  is
    also not clear why Mr Hodson structured his submissions  in  this  way,
    given he was at pains to  stress  his  was  a  sufficiency  of  reasons
    challenge, rather than a challenge on the basis of rationality.  Either
    way, the judge did not fall into error on account of her  treatment  of
    this issue. It was a matter that was not in evidence before  the  judge
    and something that is not within the gift of  Mr  Hodson  to  speculate
    about, still less contend that the judge fell into error for failing to
    adopt his assumptions about how a baker  in  Iraq  would  organise  his
    business.  In any event, this submission takes the appellant's case  no
    further, as it is not clear  how  the  appellant's  father  could  have
    pretended to poison the bread during the initial visit of ISIS  if,  as
    Mr Hodson contends, their initial visit was once all the bread for  the
    day would have been baked and no baking was taking place.

28. The remainder  of  Mr  Hodson's  submissions  focused  on  the  judge's
    treatment of the account the appellant gave of fleeing ISIS  when  they
    allegedly returned to kidnap his father. The judge noted at  [32]  that
    on this issue also the appellant had given  conflicting  accounts.  The
    central issue is whether the appellant was shot in  his  elbow.  He  is
    recorded in his screening interview as having demonstrated the presence
    of a scar on his elbow, although no medical evidence has been provided.
    In  his  substantive  asylum  interview,  again  at  question  64,  the
    appellant said that when ISIS attempted to apprehend him, he managed to
    get in his car:

         "put the engine on and swerved to redirect myself. They fired at me
         a few time [sic] but luckily nothing hurt me" (emphasis added)

29. The judge's analysis of this aspect of the appellant's case is at [33].
    Recalling that she had already noted at [21]  that  the  appellant  had
    given conflicting accounts as to whether he had been shot, grazed by  a
    bullet, or just shot at without being hit, she said:

         "I also find that a person would know if they got shot or  did  not
         get shocked and would not claim to have got away without being  hit
         if a bullet him [sic] them on the elbow in a way that left a  scar,
         as the appellant had claimed at a different  point  of  the  asylum
         process."

    Again, Mr Hodson relies on implying into the appellant's account  words
    that did not feature in his original narrative in order  to  make  good
    his submission. At [17] of the grounds of appeal, Mr Hodson writes:

         "The fact that a reflected bullet (a  ricochet  or  a  fragment  of
         metal) grazed his right elbow leaving a scar is consistent with the
         appellant saying that he was not (seriously)  hurt  when  shot  at.
         Scarring can result from relatively a minor wound if  not  treated,
         for instance by being stitched." (Emphasis added)

30. Putting aside for one moment the fact that Mr Hodson again  appears  to
    be straying into evidential territory with his  submissions,  in  order
    for the appellant's account to be reconciled as internally  consistent,
    it is necessary - as the grounds of appeal recognise  -  to  imply  the
    insertion of the word "seriously", as emboldened above.  The  appellant
    had claimed, simultaneously, that he had been shot, and  not  hurt.  It
    was not irrational for the judge to conclude that this  aspect  of  the
    appellant's  case  was  internally  inconsistent.  The  appellant   had
    provided  conflicting  accounts  of   what   had   happened,   claiming
    essentially that he had both been hit and not hit. I accept that it may
    have been open to the judge to imply  the  word  "seriously"  into  the
    account provided by the appellant, but it was by no means mandatory for
    her to do so. Again, although Mr Hodson attempted to  characterise  his
    submissions as sufficiency of reasons submissions, the substance of the
    grounds of appeal relates  to  the  rationality  or  otherwise  of  the
    judge's decisions.

Conclusion

31. In my judgment, the judge gave sufficient  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's  case.  The  appellant  had  given  different  answers   to
    questions about the same issue on a number of different  occasions.  He
    was specifically invited to address the apparent inconsistency  between
    question 4.1 of his screening interview and the narrative  he  provided
    in his substantive interview, and he did not say that it had been  mis-
    recorded, instead providing a yet  further  different  version  of  his
    account. It was not until the appellant prepared his witness  statement
    for the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal that he claimed  his
    answer to question  4.1  of  the  screening  interview  had  been  mis-
    recorded. It  was  open  to  the  judge  on  the  evidence  to  ascribe
    significance to the inconsistencies between the different  answers  the
    appellant gave to the same questions about the same issues.

32. As the Court of Appeal noted in English v Emery Reimbold at [118],  the
    unsuccessful party needs to be able to understand why a  judge  reached
    an adverse decision. The judge provided  sufficient  reasons.   It  was
    clear why the appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed.  The  appellant  had
    provided inconsistent answers on a number of issues that  were  central
    to the credibility of his narrative. The judge set  out  the  different
    accounts the appellant had provided  and  explained  why  she  did  not
    accept any of what the appellant had said. She identified  the  central
    reasoning upon which she relied, providing reasons for  doing  so  that
    were within the range of findings properly  open  to  her.   The  judge
    demonstrated that she took care with the evidence and that the evidence
    as a whole had been properly considered.

33.  Mr  Hodson's  attempts  to  characterise  the  judge's  reasoning   as
    insufficient rely on ignoring her  treatment  of  key  aspects  of  the
    evidence, assuming common knowledge of the likely practices of an Iraqi
    baker and implying words into the appellant's  account  that  were  not
    there.  In reality, the grounds of appeal are not sufficiency of reason-
    based or even  rationality-based  objections.  Properly  characterised,
    they  are  disagreements  of  fact  and  weight.   In  the  absence  of
    irrationality, no appeal lies to this Tribunal against such findings.

34. In light of the above findings, the judge's error in  relation  to  the
    Refugee Convention nexus was not material.

35. This appeal is dismissed.

36. In light of the contents of this  decision,  I  make  a  direction  for
    anonymity.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

The decision of Judge Lloyd-Lawrie did not involve the making  of  an  error
of law such that it must be set aside.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 3 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

