
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/08489/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 April 2019                               |On 24 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             mr mohammed khalil
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Uddin, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The claimant is a  citizen  of  Pakistan.   On  18  December  2014  the
    appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State or SSHD) decided to make  a
    deportation order against him and on 16 August 2017 to make a  decision
    refusing a protection and human rights claim.

2.   The claimant was granted entry clearance in  December  1990  and  first
    entered the UK in February 1991 for the purposes  of  settlement.   The
    decision to make a deportation order was  prompted  by  the  claimant's
    criminal offending.  He was  convicted  in  August  2005  of  "handling
    stolen goods (receiving)" and was sentenced to two years'  imprisonment
    wholly suspended for two years.  He received another  conviction  later
    in August of the same month for  "conspiring/theft  of  vehicle".   For
    this he was sentenced for two years' imprisonment wholly suspended  for
    two years concurrent to his other  conviction  on  the  same  day.   In
    December 2013 he was convicted of two counts of "possessing  controlled
    drug with intent to supply - Class A - other" and one count of "possess
    control drug - Class B - Cannabis/Cannabis resin".  He was sentenced on
    4 April 2014 to a total  of  30  months'  imprisonment.   The  claimant
    appealed against the decision of the SSHD.  In a decision  sent  on  17
    May 2018 Judge Dhaliwal of the First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  allowed  his
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.  The judge first of all concluded that the
    claimant had not made out his claim for international protection.  That
    is no longer the subject of challenge.

3.   The judge next turned to consider the  claimant's  position  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  At paragraph 33 to 38 the judge concluded:

         "33.     In  terms  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  when  I  consider
             Paragraph 399(a), the following is of relevance.


         34.  The Respondent does not  dispute  that  the  Appellant  has  a
             genuine and subsisting relationship with his British children.
              The very fact that the children are now 17, 16 and  15  years
             of age, have been born and raised in the United  Kingdom,  are
             at a  stage  where  they  have  established  their  own  solid
             friendships, are beginning to take steps towards  their  ideal
             careers, are only familiar with the United Kingdom means  that
             they would be expected to take on a  completely  new  culture,
             leave behind all their friends and aspirations.  I  also  note
             that they have never been to Pakistan and whilst their parents
             might be able to help them re-establish a  new  life,  I  find
             that it would be unduly harsh for the British children,  being
             the age that they are now, to live in Pakistan.  On the  other
             side of the coin, I take into account that the  children  were
             separated from their father for the 15 months whilst he was in
             prison and therefore I arrive at the conclusion that whilst it
             might be difficult, it would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
             children  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom   without   the
             Appellant, if he were to be deported.


         35.  In  terms  of  Paragraph  399(b),  I  am  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his
             British wife, it was formed at a time,  when  he  was  in  the
             United Kingdom lawfully and his status was not precarious, but
             due to his wife's health issues, it would be unduly  harsh  on
             her for her to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
             Appellant.  However, the  requirements  also  demand  that  it
             would be unduly harsh for the British wife to live in Pakistan
             because of the compelling circumstances over and  above  those
             described in EX 2 Appendix FM.  The evidence  before  me  does
             not support the fact that  there  would  be  very  significant
             difficulties which would be faced in continuing  their  family
             life together in Pakistan.


         36.  Paragraphs 399(a) and (b) are not satisfied.


         37.  Considering paragraph 399A, the  Appellant  has  been  in  the
             United Kingdom since  1991  and  he  has  thus  been  lawfully
             resident for a period of 27 years, this is a factor that is in
             the Appellant's favour.  What is not in the Appellant's favour
             is  that  the  Appellant  has  not  socially  and   culturally
             integrated  in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  began   committing
             criminal offences 2 years  after  he  arrived  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  Thereafter, he has continued to commit offences on a
             spasmodic  basis  and  those  offences   have   escalated   in
             seriousness.  This is indicative of the fact that he  has  not
             integrated into  society.   As  for  whether  there  would  be
             significant obstacles to his re-integration into Pakistan, the
             Appellant was born in Pakistan, spent the first  20  years  of
             his life in Pakistan, indeed, he still speaks Urdu.  Whilst he
             raises additional issues, namely the asylum application, I  do
             not find that to be a credible claim.  In any event, there  is
             no reason why he could not relocate  and  find  employment  in
             Pakistan.  There are no obstacles  to  his  return  let  alone
             significant obstacles.


         38.  The Appellant therefore does not succeed under the Immigration
             Rules."

4.   The judge then went  on  in  paragraphs  39  onwards  to  consider  the
    proportionality of the Secretary of State's decision.

5.   So far as concerns the  claimant's  history  of  offending,  the  judge
    stated that she took a serious view of it as had the sentencing judges.
     She noted the offending that occurred in 2009 involved  fifteen  wraps
    of heroin.  However she  attached  importance  to  the  fact  that  the
    probation officer deemed that the risk of reoffending was low and  that
    the claimant was very motivated to address his offending and  was  very
    capable of having the capacity to change and reduce his offending.   At
    paragraph 53 the judge stated:

         "53. As far as the index offences are concerned, the offences  that
             led to the deportation order are serious and  are  exacerbated
             by the fact that the Appellant failed to attend court when  he
             was required to do  so.   The  seriousness  of  the  offences,
             however, are balanced to the extent, that  the  offences  were
             committed as far back as 2009, some 9  years  ago,  there  has
             been no further offending and to all intents and purposes, the
             Appellant seems to have learnt his lesson and  presents  as  a
             changed man from the one who committed these offences in 2009.
              Also borne out by his further lack of offending  is  that  it
             adds credence to the Appellant's claim  in  that  since  being
             arrested for these  offences,  he  stopped  using  drugs.   No
             acquisitive offences which would ordinarily be consistent with
             a drug misuse problem have been committed."

6.   The judge then turned to consider  whether  the  deportation  would  be
    unduly harsh on either the claimant's British partner  or  the  British
    citizen children.

7.   As regards the children,  whilst  accepting  that  the  deportation  of
    their father would  have  a  devastating  effect  on  them,  the  judge
    concluded at paragraph 62 that they would still have  the  support  and
    guidance of one of their  primary  carers,  namely  their  mother,  and
    concluded that "it would not be unduly harsh for the children to remain
    in the United Kingdom without the claimant".  That conclusion was  said
    to be subject to the proviso as to whether the children would  continue
    to have the support and guidance  of  their  mother.   Turning  to  the
    position of the claimant's partner the judge  noted  that  the  medical
    evidence confirmed  that  she  suffers  from  severe  scleroderma  with
    progressive systemic sclerosis, pulmonary fibrosis, raynards phenomena,
    arthritis and ischaemic ulceration.   Her  doctor  was  noted  to  have
    confirmed that the skin on her face, arms and fingers is very tight and
    she gets  recurrent  chest  infections.   Furthermore  her  doctor  had
    stated:

         "Due to the severity of these auto immune multiple disorders she is
         quite incapacitated ... she requires the help of  an  adult  inside
         the house to carry on with her daily household jobs.  The  raynards
         on her hands and fingers is quite severe and  she  is  at  risk  of
         losing her fingers with the slightest trauma or provocation causing
         an infection.


         She is under the care of a consultant rheumatologist and  has  been
         for the last 10 years and on specialist medications which can  only
         be administered within a hospital setting".


8.   In light of the medical evidence that the claimant's partner's  medical
    condition was fragile and  likely  to  progressively  deteriorate,  the
    judge  concluded  that  she  was  unable  to  undertake  daily   living
    activities and required assistance to be able to live her life on a day-
    to-day basis and was not in a position to be able to provide  care  for
    her children or her home or her in-laws.  At paragraph  67  to  69  the
    judge stated:

         "67. The reality is that the Appellant's  wife  may  then  need  to
             resort to assistance from the state  for  her  own  daily  and
             nightly care, which will add to the burden on the state.  That
             is not in the public interest.  Further, one cannot completely
             rule out the fact that as she is unable  to  provide  for  the
             children on her own, that the state may need to also take  the
             burden on for caring for the children, whether, from the  home
             in which they live or to offer  residential  facilities  until
             those children turn 18.  Likewise, that is not in  the  public
             interest.  This, in my  view,  undermines  the  strong  public
             interest in deportation.


         68.  I reach the inevitable conclusion that if the  Appellant  were
             to be deported, that the children will not lose one parent but
             in all reality will lose both parents,  the  remaining  parent
             cannot physically or emotionally  support  the  children.   In
             such circumstances,  despite  my  preliminary  view  that  the
             effect on the children would not be  unduly  harsh,  when  one
             looks at the real consequences of deportation, the  effect  of
             the Appellant being deported means that the children lose both
             of their primary carers, this is inordinately and  excessively
             harsh, in other words  'unduly  harsh'  on  the  children  and
             unduly harsh on his wife.


         69.  I therefore conclude that the public interest in deporting the
             Appellant is outweighed on  this  exceptional  occasion.   The
             Appellant succeeds on the Human Rights grounds."

9.   The SSHD's grounds are not numbered.  They raise three main  points  of
    challenge.  First of all it is contended that the judge's  findings  in
    relation to the situation of the children were contradictory.   On  the
    one hand, the judge concluded that it would not be unduly harsh on  the
    children if the claimant was deported.  On the other  hand,  the  judge
    concluded otherwise at paragraphs 62 to 68.  Secondly it was  contended
    that the judge failed to give clear reasons as to  why  the  claimant's
    children could not  readapt  to  life  in  Pakistan.   Thirdly  it  was
    contended that the judge erred in treating as the decisive  factor  the
    medical circumstances of the claimant's  wife,  given  that  there  was
    evidence before the judge that his wife had previously had support from
    her sister-in-law and  in  addition  the  judge  had  failed  to  fully
    consider the alternative support arrangements that could  or  would  be
    available to the claimant's partner.   The  fact  that  the  claimant's
    partner was able to visit Pakistan in 2017 although her  condition  was
    serious, did not suggest that she was totally dependent on the claimant
    or that alternative arrangements could not be made.

10.  I heard targeted submissions from Mrs Aboni and Mr Uddin.

11.  In discussions Mr Uddin  abandoned  the  second  ground  of  challenge.
    Given that it was clearly the judge's view that the best  interests  of
    the children lay in remaining in the United Kingdom with their  mother,
    and that the Secretary of State did not challenge that finding, it  was
    clearly inconsistent to argue  that  the  judge  should  have  taken  a
    different view of the question of whether or  not  the  children  could
    readapt to life in Pakistan.  That leaves however the first  and  third
    grounds.

12.  As regards the first ground, I consider that there is  insufficient  to
    establish that the judge did make conflicting  findings  regarding  the
    circumstances of the children.  It is true that  at  paragraph  34  she
    stated that "whilst it might be difficult it would not be unduly  harsh
    for the children to remain in the United Kingdom without  the  claimant
    if he were to be deported", that was said to be subject to the  proviso
    as to whether the children would  continue  to  have  the  support  and
    guidance of their mother.  At paragraph 68 the judge stated that :

         "despite my preliminary view that the effect on the children  would
         not be unduly harsh when one looks  at  the  real  consequences  of
         deportation, the effects of the claimant being deported means  that
         the  children  lose  both  of  their  primary   carers,   that   is
         inordinately and excessively harsh in other words unduly  harsh  on
         the children and unduly harsh on his wife".

13.  In light of the above I accept that Mr Uddin was right  to  argue  that
    effectively the judge had revised her earlier assessment  in  paragraph
    68 as a result of the assessment made of the position of the mother, he
    properly pointing to  the  judge's  additional  observation  that  this
    conclusion was subject to the proviso as to whether the children  would
    continue to have the support and guidance of their  mother.  Whilst  if
    paragraph  68  were  the  judge's  final  view,  the  judge  should  in
    consistency have reformulated the earlier findings and altered them  to
    be in line with those made subsequently, I do not consider this  was  a
    material error,  since  it  had  bene  made  clear  that  there  was  a
    provisionality to the earlier formulation.

14.  More concerning are  the  principal  reason  given  hy  the  judge  for
    concluding that the claimant had established that there were compelling
    reasons outweighing the public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  the
    claimant.  In that proportionality assessment there are two significant
    failings.

15.  First of all, despite citing at paragraph 39 the  case  of  Hesham  Ali
    [2016] UKSC 60 and the need identified in that case to consider whether
    the Article 8 claim was sufficiently strong to outweigh the strength of
    the public interest in the  deportation  of  the  offender,  the  judge
    nowhere attached weight, as the majority in Hesham Ali  considered  was
    necessary,  to  the  fact  that  the  claimant  had  failed  under  the
    Immigration Rules: see paragraphs 38 and 53 of Hesham Ali.  The judge's
    findings in relation to the Immigration Rules included not only that it
    would not be unduly harsh for the children  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom without the claimant (paragraph 34 (this is the finding I would
    accept was perhaps effectively revised later)) but  also  that  despite
    his lawful residence of 27 years the claimant had not shown that he was
    socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom or that  there
    would be significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration  into  Pakistan
    (paragraphs 36 to 37).  As a result, the claimant's was a case in which
    the requirements of paragraph 399(a) and (b) were  not  satisfied.   In
    the remainder of the decision there is no reference by the judge to the
    lack of integration or in general terms to  the  significance  for  the
    weight to be attached to the public interests of  the  failure  of  the
    claimant to meet the Immigration Rules.  The second difficulty with the
    judge's proportionality assessment concerns the  judge's  treatment  of
    the circumstances of the claimant's partner.  That  brings  me  to  the
    SSHD's third ground.  The judge at paragraph 68 takes the view that  if
    the claimant were to be deported  the  children  would  "not  lose  one
    parent but in all reality will lose both parents, the remaining  parent
    cannot physically or emotionally support the children".

16.  In my judgment that finding went beyond the evidence  and  amounted  to
    the judge substituting a metaphorical for an actual conclusion.  On the
    evidence the deportation of the claimant would have the result that the
    children would lose one of their two primary carers,  but  clearly  the
    other carer, the mother, would continue to live with them  and  provide
    some caring functions.   Certainly  the  evidence  indicated  that  she
    herself required assistance to be able to live her life on a day-to-day
    basis, but it did not indicate that she would effectively have no  role
    as a primary carer in their lives.

17.  Further, whilst  the  judge  did  consider  the  evidence  relating  to
    whether the wife would be able to receive family support and/or  social
    services support, her treatment of it cannot be said to  have  amounted
    to a reasonable assessment of the proportionality of the decision.   In
    effect the  judge  concluded  that  there  was  a  public  interest  in
    preventing the children going into care that trumped the strong  public
    interest of the state in deporting  the  claimant.   Had  the  children
    involved being very young, that may  have  been  within  the  range  of
    reasonable responses, but they were 17, 16  and  15  and  the  evidence
    indicated that in the past when the claimant had  been  in  prison  and
    when the wife had visited Pakistan, family  in  the  UK  were  able  to
    assist.  The judge's findings that the family members would not, as  in
    the past, be able to provide some degree of help to the  wife  was  not
    based on any welfare report, but simply on the evidence of  the  family
    together with the medical  evidence.   In  order  to  warrant  such  an
    extreme conclusion - that the wife would in effect not be an  available
    primary carer in any shape or form - more was needed.

18.  My conclusion is that the judge did materially err in law and that  her
    decision must be set aside.

19.  Both parties agreed  that  if  I  decided  to  set  aside  the  judge's
    decision (as I have) the case should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Although many of the factors are not in dispute, it will  be
    apparent from my above analysis that the issue  of  what  circumstances
    would face the three British citizen children living in  the  UK  as  a
    result of the claimant's deportation need to be the  subject  of  fresh
    findings of fact.  Two key matters that will need to be resolved are:

    (1)  whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect  that  the  claimant's
         family members (whether the sister-in-law or others) would be  able
         to provide assistance to the wife with the care  of  the  children;
         and


    (2)  whether it would be reasonable to expect  that  any  shortfall  in
         family assistance could be met by assistance from social  services.
         In the context of social services support, there is  not  only  the
         question of possible care arrangements for the two  children  still
         under 18, but assistance to the wife with her own care needs (which
         might or might not obviate any need  to  consider  social  services
         care for the children)

20.  I direct that the claimant's representatives  use  best  endeavours  to
    obtain  an  independent  welfare  report  on  the   children's   family
    circumstances, past and  present,  and  on  the  likelihood  of  social
    services support with care for the wife, so that  the  judge  is  in  a
    better position to  consider  the  wife's  and  the  children's  likely
    circumstances in the future. (The issue of the effect of the claimant's
    deportation on the wife is also an issue under s.117C of the  2002  Act
    in itself). The claimant's representatives are directed to liaise  with
    the SSHD to ascertain whether they can agree  on  the  identity  of  an
    independent social worker.



21.  For the above reasons:

     The decision of the judge is set aside for material error of law.

     The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Dhaliwal).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 18 April 2019
[pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

