
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08396/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 March 2020                 |On 22 April 2020                 |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                     S K
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Smyth, of Keasar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is an Afghan national who was born on 1  September  1993.
    He appeals, with permission  granted  by  a  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, against a decision which was issued by FtT Judge Callow on 30
    December 2019.

Background
 2. The appellant arrived in the UK in 2009 and claimed asylum.  His  claim
    was refused and a subsequent appeal was dismissed by Immigration  Judge
    Prior in May 2011.  The appellant secured permission to appeal  against
    Judge Prior's decision but only in respect of Article 8. His Article  8
    ECHR claim was at that time based on  his  relationship  with  a  child
    called  H.   The  Upper  Tribunal  (Judge  Freeman)   held   that   the
    interference proposed with  that  relationship  was  proportionate  and
    dismissed the appeal.


 3. The appellant remained in the UK and, on 2 March 2014, his  son  K  was
    born.  The appellant duly made further submissions to the Secretary  of
    State, contending that he had  a  fresh  protection  and  human  rights
    claim.  The former was based essentially on the humanitarian  situation
    in Afghanistan, the latter on his relationship with K.  K, it should be
    noted, does not live with the appellant or with K's mother.  He is, and
    has at all material times, been the subject of a  Special  Guardianship
    Order, by which he is to be cared for by Michelle and Colin Smith,  who
    are the parents-in-law of K's aunt.  The appellant was  until  recently
    permitted to have supervised contact with K four times per year.

 4. Although the respondent accepted that the appellant's claim was a fresh
    claim as defined by paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules, she did not
    accept that his removal would cause the United Kingdom to be in  breach
    of its international obligations and she  refused  the  protection  and
    human rights claims on their merits.  The appellant appealed.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant maintained  that  he  was
    entitled  to  Humanitarian  Protection  under  Article  15(c)  of   the
    Qualification Directive and/or that that he was entitled  to  leave  to
    remain under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    judge dismissed both of those claims and permission to appeal  was  not
    sought in respect of those conclusions.

 6. The appellant also contended before the FtT that his removal  would  be
    contrary to Article 8 ECHR on account of his relationship with  K.   It
    was submitted that he had a family life with his son and that it  would
    be disproportionate to  interfere  with  the  same,  particularly  with
    reference to s117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  Notwithstanding the way in which the claim was put by Mr  Smyth,
    the judge confined his analysis to the appellant's private life.  There
    was no examination of the question of whether the appellant  enjoyed  a
    family life with his son, and  no  examination  of  the  way  in  which
    S117B(6) applied, if at all.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. It was in light of the omissions I  have  described  immediately  above
    that permission to appeal was sought and granted.  At the outset of the
    hearing, I asked Ms Cunha whether she was able to submit that the judge
    of the FtT had not erred materially in law.  Wisely,  she  declined  to
    make that submission, and accepted that the  failure  to  consider  the
    questions above amounted to an error of law which required the  judge's
    Article 8 ECHR assessment to be set aside to that extent.  That must be
    right; the appellant's case was squarely advanced as one of family life
    between father and son and  it  was  submitted  that  s117B(6)  was  of
    assistance  to  him.   The  failure  to   resolve   those   submissions
    necessarily amounted, in my judgment, to an error of law.

 8. Having indicated at the hearing  that  I  would  set  aside  the  FtT's
    decision to the extent set out above, I asked the advocates to  address
    me on the appropriate relief.  Both submitted that I should remake  the
    decision on the appeal myself, and they agreed that there was  no  need
    for a further hearing.  Mr Smyth indicated that  he  did  not  consider
    there to be any need for oral evidence from the  appellant.   Ms  Cunha
    agreed, accepting that the description of the relationship between  the
    appellant and his son K was not in dispute.  It  was  therefore  agreed
    between the advocates that the resolution of the appeal  depended  upon
    an assessment of that relationship in Article 8 ECHR terms.  I  invited
    the advocates to consider the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  AB
    (Jamaica) & AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 661; [2019] 1  WLR  4541.   Mr
    Smyth was aware of that decision, Ms Cunha was not.  I rose  to  enable
    her to consider  it  and  to  allow  the  advocates  to  prepare  their
    submissions on the remaking of the appeal.

 9. Upon the hearing resuming, Ms Cunha confirmed that  she  was  ready  to
    proceed.  She relied  on  the  refusal  letter,  which  considered  the
    application of s117B(6) to the appellant's case.  It also focused  upon
    ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4; [2011] 2 AC 166.  It was not submitted  by
    the respondent that it  would  be  reasonable  for  K  to  relocate  to
    Afghanistan, given his nationality and his particular circumstances and
    Ms Cunha recognised, in the circumstances, that the respondent  was  in
    what she  described  as  a  'precarious'  position.   She  nevertheless
    submitted that the appellant did not have parental  responsibility  for
    his son and that the limited contact he enjoyed did  not  amount  to  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship.  The  appellant  did  not
    enjoy sole responsibility for the child, as in TD (Yemen) [2006]  UKIAT
    49, as all  of  the  relevant  decisions  were  taken  by  the  special
    guardians.

10. Mr Smyth submitted that my focus should be on s117B(6).  There could be
    no  doubt  that  the  appellant  enjoyed  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with his son.  The real  question  for  the  Tribunal  was
    whether the relationship could properly be described as a parental one.
     All  depended  on  the  facts  in  that  regard,  he  submitted.   The
    appellant's son did not know the appellant in any  other  capacity  and
    was plainly aware of him as his father.  K's mother had been unable  to
    care for him for a variety of reasons and responsibility  for  him  had
    therefore passed to the special guardians.  It was relevant  to  recall
    that the appellant had been demonstrably committed to his son from  the
    outset and it was clearly the case - as shown by the special guardian's
    most recent statement - that it was hoped and  expected  on  all  sides
    that the appellant would continue to play  an  important  part  in  his
    son's life.  In the circumstances, there was a relationship between the
    appellant and his son which satisfied the test in s117B(6)(a)  and  the
    appeal fell to be allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds as  such.   In  the
    event that I was not to allow  the  appeal  on  that  basis,  Mr  Smyth
    invited me to consider the appellant's relationship  with  his  son  as
    part of a holistic analysis of Article 8 ECHR.


11. I reserved my decision.


Analysis

12. There is no disagreement between the appellant  and  the  Secretary  of
    State about the relevant facts.  It is accepted that the  appellant  is
    the biological father of a six year old  British  citizen,  K.   It  is
    accepted that K has not been raised by his mother, and that the  Family
    Court granted a Special Guardianship Order to his relatives so that his
    best interests would be safeguarded.


13. I have statements before me from Mrs  S,  who  is  K's  female  Special
    Guardian.  She explains the background to the order being made, and  to
    the appellant gaining contact  with  his  son.   She  and  her  husband
    received a call from K's mother some years ago.  She was in a state  of
    distress and was unable to care for herself and  her  first  child,  L.
    Mrs S and her husband agreed that she and her child should come to live
    with them.  Unfortunately, following an argument which prompted  police
    intervention, L's mother left and did not return.  L is now 9 years old
    and remains with Mrs S and her husband.

14. In 2014, Mrs S received a call from Birmingham Social Services, stating
    that they had a boy in their care who was L's half brother.  This child
    was K.  Mrs S and her husband agreed to care for K so that he could  be
    with his brother.  They subsequently agreed to take their  half-sister,
    R.  They  continue  to  have  parental  responsibility  for  all  three
    children.

15. Mrs S and her husband first encountered the appellant at a Family Court
    hearing in 2014.  An officer from CAFCASS had  made  contact  with  the
    appellant and he had attended the  hearing.   He  had  not  been  in  a
    relationship with K's  mother  and  she  had  lied  to  him  about  K's
    paternity but a DNA test subsequently showed that the appellant was the
    father.  Mrs S describes the appellant's subsequent  contact  with  his
    son as being 'very enthusiastic'.  She notes  in  her  first  statement
    (made in 2017) that K talked about his father and pretended to speak to
    him on a toy telephone.  She had agreed that the  appellant  would  see
    his son four times a  year  and  she  was  keen  to  ensure  that  this
    continued so that K would have one of his parents in his life.

16. This account is supported by an email from Birmingham Children's  Trust
    dated 5 April 2018.  It is confirmed in that email that  the  appellant
    was not considered to be a viable carer for K  because  (and  seemingly
    only because) he had no lawful status in the UK.  A  further  statement
    from Mrs S, dated 13 March 2020,   describes how  the  appellant  is  a
    'big part' of K's life and how they have increased his visits from four
    times a year to every other month.  Contact remains supervised but  Mrs
    S hopes that it will become unsupervised when K is a little bit  older.
    She also hopes that K can continue to thrive, knowing  his  father  and
    having him as part of his life.


17. It is not suggested by Mr Smyth that the appellant's relationship  with
    his son can generate a claim under the Immigration Rules.   He  has  no
    relationship with K's mother or with any other qualifying partner.   He
    obviously cannot submit that he either has sole responsibility for  his
    son, or that he is taking and intending to continue to take  an  active
    role in his son's upbringing, so as to satisfy E-LTRPT 2.4 of  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules.  As Ms Cunha noted in her submissions, the
    responsibility for raising K has been taken by Mrs S  and  her  husband
    for some years.   It  is  therefore  to  Article  8  ECHR  outside  the
    Immigration Rules that the appellant must turn.


18. It is common ground, as I understand it, that Article 8 ECHR is engaged
    by the relationship between the appellant and his son.  In light of the
    consistent line of authority of the ECtHR which includes  Ciliz  v  The
    Netherlands [2000] ECHR 365; [2000] 2 FLR 469, I conclude  that  it  is
    engaged in its family  life  aspect.   The  default  position,  on  the
    authorities, is that a family life for the purposes of Article  8  ECHR
    exists between a parent and their biological child.   It  is  obviously
    correct that the appellant was not initially in contact with his  child
    (having been told untruthfuly that he was not the father)  but  he  has
    been in increasing contact with K since he was located  by  CAFCASS  in
    2014.

19. It was not suggested by Ms Cunha that the  interference  proposed  with
    the relationship between the appellant  and  his  son  would  not  have
    consequences of sufficient gravity so as to engage  the  protection  of
    Article 8 ECHR, at the second stage of the enquiry required  by  Razgar
    [2004] 2 AC 368.  On the accepted facts of this case, and recalling the
    rather modest threshold to be crossed (AG  (Eritrea)  [2007]  EWCA  Civ
    801; [2008] All ER  28  refers,  she  was  correct  not  to  make  that
    submission.   The  focus  of  my  enquiry  must  therefore  be  on  the
    proportionality of the appellant's removal.

20. It is section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act which forms the  mainstay  of  Mr
    Smyth's proportionality argument on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   That
    provision is one of the public interest  considerations  inserted  into
    the 2002 Act by the Immigration Act 2014.   Where  it  is  answered  in
    favour of an appellant, it  is  determinative  of  the  proportionality
    assessment, such  that  it  has  been  described  variously  as  'self-
    contained'  and  'definitive'  in  the  authorities.  S117B(6)  in  the
    following terms:

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and


           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
           United Kingdom.

21. It is accepted by Ms Cunha that the question posed by  sub-section  (b)
    must be resolved in the appellant's favour.  It could  not  conceivably
    be reasonable to expect K to leave the country of his  nationality  for
    Afghanistan, not least because that would mean leaving the security  of
    his relationship with his special guardians and the relationships  with
    his half-siblings L and R.  The children are noted by  social  services
    to have flourished in this family environment and it would plainly  not
    be reasonable to separate them at this stage.


22. I consider Mr Smyth to be correct in his submission that the  appellant
    has a genuine relationship with his son.   It  is  established  by  DNA
    evidence (which was seen by the Family Court) that he is K's biological
    father.  It is established on the basis of the evidence to which I have
    referred above that the appellant was tracked down  by  CAFCASS  during
    the Family Court  proceedings  and  that  he  has,  since  that  point,
    featured in his son's life.  There is no suggestion by  the  respondent
    that this has simply been a ruse  designed  to  secure  an  immigration
    advantage.  Any such submission would have been surprising,  given  the
    evidence before me from Mrs S and Birmingham  Social  Services.   There
    can also be no doubt, as Mr Smyth submitted, that the appellant  has  a
    subsisting relationship with his son.   The  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his son continues and has,  as  shown  by  Mrs  S's  most
    recent statement, continued to deepen and develop as a result of  their
    ongoing contact.

23. I agree with Mr Smyth that the real issue is whether there is a genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship between the appellant and his son.
     It was for this reason that I required the  advocates  to  furnish  me
    with submissions about the application of AB (Jamaica) &  AO  (Nigeria)
    to the facts of this case.

24. I need say only a little about the facts of the two  cases  before  the
    Court of Appeal.  It suffices for present purposes to note as  follows.
    AB's relationship with his  child's  mother  had  broken  down  but  he
    continued to see the child three times a week: [2].  AO's  relationship
    with his child's mother had broken down as a result  of  AO's  domestic
    violence and he was only permitted by the Family Court to have indirect
    contact with the child: [3].  Much of the judgment given  by  Singh  LJ
    (with which King and Underhill  LJ  agreed)  concerned  the  submission
    which had been rejected by the Upper Tribunal in  JG  (Jamaica)  [2019]
    UKUT 72 (IAC), which was whether s117B(6) of the 2002  Act  applies  at
    all when there is no realistic prospect of the qualifying child leaving
    the UK: [48] refers.  Albeit for slightly different reasons than  those
    given in JG (Jamaica), the Court of Appeal also rejected the submission
    made by the Secretary of State in that  regard:  [60]-[75]  refers,  in
    particular.

25. What was said by Singh LJ and King LJ  about  the  respondent's  fourth
    ground of appeal in AO's case is highly relevant for present  purposes,
    however.  By this ground, it was submitted before the Court  of  Appeal
    that AO's relationship with his child could not  rationally  have  been
    held (by the FtT and the Upper Tribunal) to amount  to  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship  which  engaged  s117B(6).   Singh  LJ
    considered two decisions of the Upper Tribunal - SR  (Pakistan)  [2018]
    UKUT 334 (IAC) and R (RK) v SSHD [2016] Imm AR 527 -  and  one  of  the
    Court of Appeal: VC (Sri Lanka) [2018] Imm AR 517.

26. Singh LJ rejected the Secretary of State's  submission,  based  on  the
    first and last of those decisions, that some element of direct personal
    care was required to be shown in order to engage  s117B(6).   He  noted
    that what was said by MacFarlane LJ in VC (Sri Lanka)  was  said  in  a
    different statutory context and concluded that UTJ Plimmer had erred in
    SR (Pakistan) when she carried those dicta across  to  s117B(6):  [92]-
    [96].  Singh LJ did endorse what had been said  by  UTJ  Grubb  in  RK,
    however, and held that the test posited by s117B(6)(a) is expressed  in
    words of the ordinary English language which require no further  gloss:
    [98].  He considered that the exercise was a highly  fact-specific  one
    of mixed fact and law: [98]  and  [101].   At  the  conclusion  of  his
    judgment, he stated expressly that he wished to associate himself  with
    what was said by King LJ: [103].

27. King LJ agreed that the exercise was highly fact-specific: [106].   She
    recalled what had been said by the President of the Family Division  in
    re Q [2016] 2 FLR 287: [107].  She noted that the sub-section reflected
    the importance to a child of contact with a parent with whom he is  not
    living: [108].  And she noted that it was common ground that it was not
    necessary for the absent parent to have parental  responsibility.   She
    emphasised the importance of considering the type of contact  permitted
    with a child and the reasons for  any  limitation  on  contact:  [109]-
    [111].  Underhill LJ agreed with Singh LJ, and added a few words of his
    own about the decision in JG (Jamaica).

28. With those dicta  firmly  in  mind,  I  return  to  the  facts  of  the
    appellant's case.  I consider that there are matters which militate for
    and  against  a  conclusion  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with K.  He does not live with his son
    and their direct contact has only been four times per year.   He  plays
    no role in the day-to-day care of his son and he makes no decisions for
    K.  These roles are played entirely by Mrs S and her  husband.   Noting
    what was said by Judge Grubb in RK, as endorsed by Singh LJ in AB & AO,
    these matters must all militate against a conclusion  that  s117B(6)(a)
    is engaged.

29. On the other hand, K knows that the appellant is  his  father  and  the
    direct contact between them is mutually enjoyed, and encouraged by  Mrs
    S and her husband.  There is nothing to suggest that the limitation  to
    supervised contact reflects any concern about the appellant, whether on
    the part of the Special Guardians, the Family Court or Social Services.
     I consider Mr Smyth to have been correct when he  submitted  that  the
    context in which the appellant and K enjoy their relationship  must  be
    borne in mind.  He is a little boy who  does  not  know,  and  has  not
    known, his biological  mother.   It  is  therefore  the  appellant  who
    represents his only parent, properly so called.  He is at an age  where
    he will understand that, and at which  the  bond  with  his  father  is
    likely to be important to him, notwithstanding the care provided by Mrs
    S and her husband.

30. It is clear - and nobody has suggested otherwise - that Mrs S  and  her
    husband have not only showed incredible charity in raising these  three
    children; they have also enabled the children to flourish.   I  do  not
    intend in any way to downplay the importance of their role in the lives
    of K and his half siblings but the fact remains, as emphasised by  King
    LJ, that contact between parent and child is a fundamental  element  of
    family life.  As recognised by Mrs S and her husband, that  contact  is
    likely to become more important to K as he grows older, and they  fully
    intend to permit a further increase in contact, noting (as  they  have)
    that it is well-received by K.

31. On the unusual facts of this case, I come to the clear conclusion  that
    the appellant's relationship with his son is one which can properly  be
    categorised as a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship.   In
    light of K's unusual and  distressing  history,  the  absence  of  more
    regular contact  and  a  decision-making  role  are  not  determinative
    factors.  The matters to which I have referred  in  the  preceding  two
    paragraphs militate firmly in favour of a conclusion that the  test  in
    s117B(6)(a) is satisfied and that is the conclusion which I reach.

32. Since the appellant is not liable to deportation,  and  as  it  is  not
    suggested by Ms Cunha that K could reasonably be expected to leave  the
    UK, my conclusion regarding the relationship is  determinative  of  the
    proportionality exercise.  The appeal will accordingly  be  allowed  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision
The FtT's analysis of Article 8 ECHR was vitiated by legal  error  and  that
part of the decision is set aside.  I remake the decision on that ground  of
appeal, and allow the appellant's appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellant's
children and their half-siblings are granted anonymity.  No report of  these
proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  those  children.   This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                                21 April 2020

        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email





















