
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08812/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 July 2019                       |On 8 July 2019                       |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                    m a n
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Easton, Counsel instructed by Leonard Cannings
Solicitors
     LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born  on  2  January  1973.  Her
    application for asylum and ancillary  protection  was  refused  by  the
    Respondent on 24 August 2017.  Judge Skehan ("the Judge") dismissed the
    appeal at a hearing on  19  March  2019.   Judge  Hollingworth  granted
    permission to appeal on 17 May 2019 in essence on two points:  firstly,
    that inadequate weight was given to the ongoing threat RS said  through
    WhatsApp messages he was going to do to  the  Appellant  and  why;  and
    secondly, his interest in and ability to trace her as a result  of  his
    links to the authorities and her family relationships with her  brother
    MC.

 2. Having heard detailed submissions, I indicated at the hearing that I am
    satisfied that there is a material error of law and I  do  so  for  the
    following four reasons.

 3. Firstly, at the end of [22] the Judge said,

         "I conclude that the appellant's case at its  highest  relies  upon
         what she was told by a man who consistently  lied  to  her  through
         their relationship".

    The Judge had accepted that the Appellant had been  in  a  relationship
    with a man who perpetrated domestic violence towards  her  whilst  they
    had been in South Africa.  The Appellant's evidence recorded at [10 aa]
    states:-

         "The appellant told me that she had been told by her mother in law"
         two "people came looking for the appellant after she left Zimbabwe,
         a woman and a man.  The appellant's mother in  law  gave  them  the
         appellant's mother's number.  They phoned  the  appellant's  mother
         asking if she knew where the appellant was.  The appellant had told
         her mother not to  tell  anyone  where  she  was.   They  told  the
         appellant's mother they would find her through Interpol".

 4. That evidence is not evidence of the Appellant simply relying  on  what
    she was told by RS.  It is evidence that comes from somebody else.  The
    exclusion of that by  the  Judge  from  his/her  consideration  of  the
    evidence taking the  Appellant's  case  at  its  highest  is  factually
    incorrect because the Appellant's case at its highest is that not  only
    were there WhatsApp messages,  but  also  that  there  was  an  ongoing
    interest that she had been told by somebody else from RS towards her.

 5. Secondly, the Judge quoted some but not all of the  WhatsApp  messages.
    Whilst a Judge does not have to recite every piece  of  evidence,  some
    additional points had been made in  the  WhatsApp  messages  that  went
    beyond what had been identified and took it into a  different  category
    of threat. Those are, "You'll be my whore until I  am  tired  of  you",
    and, "As for me, I haven't even started".  Those  indicate  an  ongoing
    interest in her contrary to the finding at [23] of the decision that RS
    had no "ongoing interest in maintaining any relationship with her"  and
    the  rejection  of  that  evidence  requires   an   explanation.   That
    explanation was absent.

 6. Thirdly, the Judge was not satisfied the Appellant had established that
    RS had the relationship with the authorities claimed as it is stated at
    [22]:-

         "The appellant produced pictures that she says shows" RS "in  close
         proximity to the President.  I am unable to  make  any  independent
         verification in relation  to"  RS's  "identity  in  these  pictures
         provided by the appellant".

    That is not sufficient as the Appellant had given evidence as to who he
    was and the Judge gave no reason  as  to  why  her  oral  evidence  was
    disbelieved.

 7. Fourthly, there was evidence before the Judge of  MC  being  Secretary-
    General of Zunde which is an  organisation  opposed  to  Zanu  PF.  For
    example, there is an article written by him. The finding  that  it  had
    not been established that MC had links to those opposed to Zanu PF  was
    not one available to the Judge without an explanation and consideration
    of the article.




 8. Accordingly, for all these reasons,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge
    materially erred in law.

 9. Having heard submissions, I am satisfied that the fact-finding  defects
    were such that this is a matter that should be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In doing so I am going to preserve three findings  that
    have not been challenged by the Respondent and should not  have  to  be
    reproved.

10. The first preserved finding is that the Appellant  was  the  victim  of
    domestic violence perpetrated by RS in South Africa.  That  is  because
    it says specifically at [23],  "I  accept  that  the  appellant  had  a
    relationship with a violent man".  There is no evidence anywhere within
    the decision that that man was anybody other than RS.

11. The second preserved finding is that the Appellant is the  half-sibling
    of MC.

12. The third preserved finding is that MC has a political profile  adverse
    to Zanu PF being the Secretary-General of Zunde.

Notice of Decision

13. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross where
    such directions as are required will be made. It will not be  heard  by
    Judge Skehan.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
Dated 4 July 2019
