
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08504/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 5th October 2018                |On 16th October 2018               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                 MOHAMED [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, advocate, instructed by Peter G
                    Farrell, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Handley  promulgated  on  20/02/2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 10/10/1996 and is a national  of  Somalia.  The
appellant claimed asylum of 5 February 2013. That  application  was  refused
but because of the appellant's age, he was granted leave  to  remain  as  an
unaccompanied asylum seeking child until 9 April 2014. His  application  for
further leave to remain was refused on 5  March  2015.  His  appeal  against
that decision was dismissed on  2  October  2015;  his  appeal  rights  were
exhausted  on  18  April  2016.  The  appellant   then   submitted   further
representations on 11 July 2016 which the  respondent  refused  on  13  July
2016.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Handley ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 19 March 2018 Judge  Grimmett
gave permission to appeal stating

      1. The appellant seeks  permission  to  appeal,  in  time,  against  a
      decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Handley  promulgated  on  20
      February 2018 to dismiss  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent on 13 July 2016 to refuse his protection claim.


      2. It is arguable that the Judge erred in referring to  the  incorrect
      country guidance set out to paragraph 2 in light of  the  findings  of
      the first Immigration Judge that the appellant  could  not  return  to
      Mogadishu. It is also  arguable  that  the  Judge  erred  in  doubting
      matters in the  experts  report  which  were  not  challenged  by  the
      respondent.

The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellant, Mr Winter moved the grounds of appeal. He told  me
that the Judge makes two principal errors. The first  was  to  consider  the
wrong country guidance case. The second error related to  his  treatment  of
the expert reports.

(b) Mr Winter told me that the undisputed facts in this case  are  that  the
appellant comes from Afgoye and is a member of the Ashraf clan. He  told  me
that the correct country guidance to consider is AMM and  others  (conflict;
humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)  Somalia  CG   [2011]   UKUT   00445
(IAC) because the appellant would not be returning  to  Mogadishu.  Instead
the Judge took guidance from MOJ & Ors  (Return  to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG
[2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).  Relying  on  AMM,  Mr  Winter  told  me  that  the
appellant cannot return to an area controlled by Al  Shabaab  and  that  not
only is the appellant at risk in his home  area,  he  is  also  at  risk  if
travelling to his home area from Mogadishu.  Mr  Winter  told  me  that  the
Judge's findings at [35] and [37] are  unsafe  because  the  Judge  has  not
taken any guidance from AMM.

(c) Mr Winter told me that there are  three  reports  from  the  appellant's
expert, Dr  Joseph  Mullen.  Two  of  those  reports  appear  in  the  first
inventory of productions for  the  appellant.  The  third  report  has  been
prepared for this hearing. The Judge considered the two reports  which  were
before the First-tier Tribunal between [31] and [37]  of  the  decision.  At
[35] the Judge sets out  his  reasons  for  placing  little  weight  on  the
reports. Mr Winter told me the Judge's approach to the expert  evidence  was
flawed.

(d) Turning to the third ground of appeal, Mr Winter told  me  that  because
the Judge took guidance from the wrong country guidance case &  because  the
Judge has not  properly  engaged  with  the  expert  evidence,  the  Judge's
findings in relation to the press-gang recruitment  methods  of  Al  Shabaab
were not safe. He urged me to allow the appeal and set the decision aside.

6.(a) For the respondent, Mr Govan  told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain a material error of law. He accepted that the Judge has referred  to
the wrong country guidance case, but told  me  that  that  did  not  fatally
undermine the Judge's decision. He told me that the Judge had  come  to  the
correct conclusion so that any error could not be material.

(b) Mr Govan took me to [32] to [36] of the decision and told me that  there
is nothing wrong with the Judge's treatment of the expert reports.  He  told
me that the challenge amounts to a challenge to the  weight  the  Judge  has
given a source of evidence and told me that it is for the Judge  (alone)  to
apportion weight to evidence. He told  me  that  the  Judge  gives  adequate
reasons for the weight that he attributed to the expert's  report.  He  took
me through the CPIN report (2017) and told me that the Judge's findings  are
supported by background materials.

(c) Mr Govan asked me to dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow  the  decision  to
stand.

Error of Law

7. At [38] and [40] of the decision the Judge  clearly  relies  on  MOJ  and
others. It is common ground that the appellant is a  member  of  the  Ashraf
clan from Afgoye. The respondent accepts that the Judge  should  have  taken
guidance from AMM

8. In R and Others v SSHD (2005) EWCA civ 982 the Court of  Appeal  endorsed
Practice Direction 18.4 which states that any failure  to  follow  a  clear,
apparently applicable country guidance case or  to  show  why  it  does  not
apply to the case in question is likely to  be  regarded  as  a  ground  for
review or appeal on a point of law.   The  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  it
represented a failure to take a material matter into account.

9. It is now accepted that the Judge took guidance from  the  wrong  country
guidance case. That is a material error of law. I set the decision aside.

Analysis

10. The accepted facts in this case are that the appellant is  a  member  of
the Ashraf clan and comes from the Afgoye region. In January 2016 the  Upper
Tribunal found that the First-tier Tribunal determination  made  in  October
2015 dismissing the appellant's  appeal  should  be  upheld.  That  decision
found that the appellant had not come to the attention  of  Al  Shabaab  and
that the appellant's account of forced recruitment to Al  Shabaab  and  then
desertion from Al Shabaab is a fabrication.

11. In October 2015 the First-tier tribunal judge found that  the  appellant
could safely return to Afgoye.

12. In AMM  and  others  (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445  (IAC) the  Tribunal  held  that  (i)  Outside
Mogadishu, the fighting in southern and central  Somalia  is  both  sporadic
and localised and is not such as to place every civilian  in  that  part  of
the country at real risk of Article 15(c)  harm.  In  individual  cases,  it
will be necessary to establish where  a  person  comes  from  and  what  the
background information says is  the  present  position  in  that  place.  If
fighting is going on, that will have to be taken into  account  in  deciding
whether Article 15(c) is applicable.  There  is,  likewise,  no  generalised
current risk of Article 3 harm as  a  result  of  armed  conflict;  (ii)  In
general, a returnee with no recent experience of living in Somalia  will  be
at real risk of being subjected to treatment proscribed by Article 3  in  an
Al-Shabab controlled area. "No recent  experience"  means  that  the  person
concerned left Somalia before the rise of  Al-Shabab  in  2008.  Even  if  a
person has such experience, however, he or she will still be returning  from
the United Kingdom, with all that is likely to entail, so far  as  Al-Shabab
perceptions are concerned, but he or she will be less likely to  be  readily
identifiable as a returnee. Even if he or she were to be so identified,  the
evidence  may  point  to  the  person  having  struck  up   some   form   of
accommodation with Al-Shabab, whilst living under their rule. On  the  other
hand, although having family in the Al-Shabab area of return  may  alleviate
the risk, the rotating nature of Al-Shabab  leadership  and  the  fact  that
punishments are meted out in apparent disregard of local sensibilities  mean
that, in general, it cannot be said that the presence of  family  is  likely
to mean the risk ceases to be a real  one;  (iii)  Al-Shabab's  reasons  for
imposing its requirements and restrictions,  such  as  regarding  manner  of
dress and spending of leisure time, are religious and those  who  transgress
are  regarded  as  demonstrating  that  they  remain  in  a  state  of  kufr
(apostasy). The same is true  of  those  returnees  who  are  identified  as
coming from the West. Accordingly, those at real risk of such Article 3 ill-
treatment from Al-Shabab will in general be refugees, since the  persecutory
harm is likely to be inflicted on the basis of  imputed  religious  opinion;
(iv) Although those with recent experience of living under Al-Shabab may  be
able to "play the  game",  in  the  sense  of  conforming  with  Al-Shabab's
requirements and avoiding suspicion of apostasy, the extreme nature  of  the
consequences facing anyone who might wish to refuse to conform  (despite  an
ability to do so) is such as to attract the principle in RT (Zimbabwe).  The
result is that such  people  will  also  in  general  be  at  real  risk  of
persecution by Al-Shabab for a  Refugee  Convention  reason;  (v)  The  same
considerations apply to those who are reasonably  likely  to  have  to  pass
through Al-Shabab areas; (vi) on  the  assumption  that  Al-Shabab's  likely
behaviour towards those who  transgress  its  rules  is  as  found  in  this
determination, the position is as "extreme"  as  the  factual  basis  in  RT
(Zimbabwe) [2010] EWCA Civ 1285. In the light of RT, a person  from  an  Al-
Shabab area who can show they do not genuinely adhere to  Al-Shabab's  ethos
will have a good  claim  to  Refugee  Convention  protection,  once  outside
Somalia (subject  to  internal  relocation  and  exclusion  clause  issues),
regardless of whether the  person  could  and  would  "play  the  game",  by
adhering to Al-Shabab's rules. As can be seen from a comparison with Sufi  &
Elmi, the effect of RT is,  accordingly,  to  take  the  Refugee  Convention
beyond the comparable ambit of Article 3 ECHR protection. (vii)  or  someone
at real risk in a home area in southern  or  central  Somalia,  an  internal
relocation alternative to Mogadishu is in general unlikely to be  available,
given the risk of indiscriminate violence in the  city,  together  with  the
present humanitarian situation. Relocation to an  IDP  camp  in  the  Afgoye
Corridor will, as a general matter, likewise be unreasonable,  unless  there
is evidence  that  the  person  concerned  would  be  able  to  achieve  the
lifestyle  of  those  better-off  inhabitants   of   the   Afgoye   Corridor
settlements; (viii) Internal relocation to an area controlled  by  Al-Shabab
is not feasible for a person who has had no  history  of  living  under  Al-
Shabab in that  area  (and  is  in  general  unlikely  to  be  a  reasonable
proposition for someone who has had such a history -  see  above).  Internal
relocation to an area not controlled by Al-Shabab is in general unlikely  to
be an option, if the place of proposed relocation is stricken by  famine  or
near famine; (ix) Within the context of these findings, family  and/or  clan
connections  may  have  an  important  part  to  play  in  determining   the
reasonableness of a proposed place of relocation. The  importance  of  these
connections is likely to grow, as the nature  of  the  present  humanitarian
crisis diminishes and if Al-Shabab continues to lose territory;  (x)  Travel
by land across southern and central Somalia  to  a  home  area  or  proposed
place of relocation is an issue that falls to be addressed in the course  of
determining claims to international protection. Such  travel  may  well,  in
general,  pose  real  risks  of  serious  harm,  not  only  from   Al-Shabab
checkpoints but also as a result of the  present  famine  conditions.  Women
travelling without male friends or relatives are in general likely  to  face
a real risk of sexual violence.

13. The appellant falls within the risk categories identified in (ii)  (iii)
and (vii) of the headnote in AMM. He has been in the UK since 2013.  He  has
lived in the UK between the ages of 16 and 21. The findings  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge in October 2015 place the appellant in the  category  of
a person who has not come into contact with Al Shabaab before.

14. The expert report from Dr Mullen  is  now  updated  by  a  supplementary
report dated 21 September 2018. He finds there has been a  consolidation  of
Al Shabaab presence in the area  surrounding  Afgoye.  Recent  news  reports
indicate that Al Shabaab attacked Afgoye in mid-September  2018.  Dr  Mullen
says that the road from Afgoye to Merca is controlled by Al Shabaab.

15. The expert report and the guidance given in AMM indicate  that  a  young
man who has spent about 25% of his life in the UK cannot  safely  return  to
the Afgoye region.

16. MOJ provides guidance on whether or not the appellant  can  relocate  to
Mogadishu.

17. In MOJ& Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC)  it
was  held  that(i)  The  country   guidance   issues   addressed   in   this
determination are not identical to those engaged with  by  the  Tribunal  in
AMM and others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees;  FGM)  Somalia  CG
[2011] UKUT 445 (IAC). Therefore, where country guidance has been  given  by
the  Tribunal  in  AMM  in  respect  of  issues  not   addressed   in   this
determination then the guidance provided  by  AMM  shall  continue  to  have
effect; (ii) Generally, a person who is "an  ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.  not
associated with the security forces; any aspect of  government  or  official
administration or any NGO or international  organisation)  on  returning  to
Mogadishu after a period of absence will face no real  risk  of  persecution
or risk of harm such as to require protection under Article 3  of  the  ECHR
or Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive. In particular, he will  not
be at real risk simply on account of having lived  in  a  European  location
for a  period  of  time  of  being  viewed  with  suspicion  either  by  the
authorities as a possible supporter of Al Shabaab or by  Al  Shabaab  as  an
apostate or someone whose Islamic integrity has been compromised  by  living
in a Western country; (iii)  There has been  durable  change  in  the  sense
that the Al Shabaab withdrawal from Mogadishu is complete and  there  is  no
real prospect of a re-established presence within the  city.  That  was  not
the case at the time of the country guidance given by the Tribunal  in  AMM;
(iv) The level of civilian casualties,  excluding  non-military  casualties
that clearly fall within Al  Shabaab  target  groups  such  as  politicians,
police officers, government officials and those  associated  with  NGOs  and
international  organisations,  cannot  be  precisely  established   by   the
statistical evidence which is incomplete  and  unreliable.  However,  it  is
established by the evidence considered as a whole  that  there  has  been  a
reduction in the level of civilian casualties since  2011,  largely  due  to
the cessation of confrontational warfare within the city  and  Al  Shabaab's
resort to asymmetrical warfare on carefully selected targets.   The  present
level of casualties does  not  amount  to  a  sufficient  risk  to  ordinary
civilians such as to represent an Article 15(c) risk; (v)  It is open to  an
ordinary citizen of Mogadishu to reduce further still his personal  exposure
to the risk of "collateral damage" in being  caught  up  in  an  Al  Shabaab
attack that was not targeted at him by  avoiding  areas  and  establishments
that are clearly identifiable as likely Al Shabaab targets, and  it  is  not
unreasonable for him to do  so;  (vi)  There  is  no  real  risk  of  forced
recruitment to Al Shabaab for civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including  for
recent returnees from the West; (vii)    A  person  returning  to  Mogadishu
after a period of absence will look to his nuclear family,  if  he  has  one
living in the city, for assistance in re-establishing himself  and  securing
a livelihood. Although a returnee may also seek  assistance  from  his  clan
members who are not  close  relatives,  such  help  is  only  likely  to  be
forthcoming for majority clan members, as minority clans may have little  to
offer;  (viii)   The  significance  of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
changed. Clans now  provide,  potentially,  social  support  mechanisms  and
assist with access to livelihoods, performing less of a protection  function
than previously. There are no clan militias in Mogadishu, no clan  violence,
and no clan based discriminatory treatment, even for minority clan  members;
(ix) If it is accepted that a person facing a return to Mogadishu  after  a
period of absence has no nuclear family or close relatives in  the  city  to
assist him in re-establishing himself on return, there will  need  to  be  a
careful assessment of all of the circumstances.  These  considerations  will
include, but are not limited  to:  (a)  circumstances  in  Mogadishu  before
departure; (b)  length  of  absence  from  Mogadishu;  (c)  family  or  clan
associations to call upon in Mogadishu; (d) access to  financial  resources;
(e)  prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be employment or  self
employment; (f) availability  of  remittances  from  abroad;  (g)  means  of
support during the time spent in the United Kingdom; (h) why his ability  to
fund the journey to the West  no  longer  enables  an  appellant  to  secure
financial support on return; (x)  Put  another  way,  it  will  be  for  the
person facing return to explain why he would  not  be  able  to  access  the
economic opportunities  that  have  been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
especially as there is evidence to the  effect  that  returnees  are  taking
jobs at the expense of those who  have  never  been  away;  (xi)   It  will,
therefore, only be those with no clan or family support who will not  be  in
receipt of remittances  from  abroad  and  who  have  no  real  prospect  of
securing access to a livelihood on return who  will  face  the  prospect  of
living  in  circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is   acceptable   in
humanitarian protection terms; (xii)  The evidence  indicates  clearly  that
it is not simply those who originate from Mogadishu that may  now  generally
return to live in the city without being subjected to an Article 15(c)  risk
or facing a real risk of destitution.  On  the  other  hand,  relocation  in
Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan   with  no  former  links  to  the
city, no access to funds and  no  other  form  of  clan,  family  or  social
support is unlikely  to  be  realistic  as,  in  the  absence  of  means  to
establish a home and some form of ongoing financial support there will be  a
real risk of having no alternative but to live  in  makeshift  accommodation
within an IDP camp where there is a real possibility of having  to  live  in
conditions  that will fall below acceptable humanitarian standards.

18. (vii), (ix) and (xi) of the headnote to MOJ tell me  the  relocation  to
Mogadishu is not a viable option for  this  appellant.  The  appellant  says
that only his mother remains in Afgoye and that he has no  other  relatives.
The respondent's position, at its highest, is that both of  the  appellant's
parents are in Afgoye. It is a matter of  agreement that the appellant  does
not come from Mogadishu, that the appellant has no relatives  in  Mogadishu,
and the appellant has not experienced in Mogadishu. The appellant is from  a
minority clan, so that he has no clan support in Mogadishu.

19. If the appellant returns to Somalia would is  most  likely  is  that  he
will find himself in an IDP camp. The starting point in  this  case  is  the
findings of fact in the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  of  October
2015. One of those findings was that internal relocation to Mogadishu  would
be unreasonable. The undisputed facts of  this  case,  and  taking  guidance
from MOJ, indicate that internal relocation would be unduly harsh.

20. Given these conclusions, I find that the Appellant  has  discharged  the
burden of proof to establish that he is a refugee. I come to the  conclusion
that the Appellant's removal would cause the United Kingdom to be in  breach
of its obligations under the 2006 Regulations.

21. Therefore, I find that the appellant is a refugee.

Humanitarian protection

22. As I have found the appellant is a refugee I cannot consider whether  he
qualifies for humanitarian protection.

23. Therefore, I  find  the  appellant  is  not  eligible  for  humanitarian
protection.

Human rights

24. As I have found the appellant has established  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution, by analogy I find his claim engages  article  3  of  the  Human
Rights Convention because he would face a real risk of torture,  inhuman  or
degrading treatment if he were returned to his country of origin.

Article 8 ECHR

25.   There is no evidence placed before me to indicate that  the  appellant
meets the requirements of appendix FM or of paragraph  276ADE(1)(i)  to  (v)
of the immigration rules. I have found that the appellant is a  refugee  who
cannot return to Somalia. By analogy I find that  there  are  insurmountable
obstacles to his reintegration in Somalia.  The  appellant  therefore  meets
the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) of the rules.

26. The respondent's position is that all article 8 ECHR considerations are
embraced by the Immigration Rules. The respondent's decision must therefore
be a disproportionate breach of the right to respect for private life.  The
respondent's own rules indicate that the  decision  is  a  disproportionate
interference with the right to respect for private life.

27.  In Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC  60  it  was  made  clear  that
(even in a deport case) the Rules are not a  complete  code.  Lord  Reed  at
paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach to proportionality  (to
be found in Razgar) and said "what has now become the established method  of
analysis can therefore continue to be followed..."

28. Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that  immigration  control  is  in
the public interest.   In AM (S 117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a  grant  of
leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  his
fluency in English, or the strength of his financial  resources.  In  Forman
(ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by   the
consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at  no
time been a financial burden on  the  state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is
likely to remain so indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these  factors  is
that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.

29.   I therefore find that this appeal succeeds on article 3 & 8  (Private
life) ECHR grounds.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 20 February  2018  is
tainted by material errors of law. I set it aside.

I substitute my own decision.

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

The appellant is dismissed on Humanitarian Protection grounds.

The appeal is allowed on article 3 & 8 ECHR grounds.







Signed
               Date  10 October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle






