
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08645/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House without a hearing   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 December 2019                           |On 16 December 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     VW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Eldridge, promulgated on 4 September 2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson on 14 November 2019.







Anonymity

 2. An anonymity direction was made  previously  and  is  reiterated  below
    primarily because of  the  appellant's  vulnerability,  owing  to  poor
    mental health.

Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  during  2010  with  leave  to
    enter as a Tier 4 migrant, valid until 30 October 2011.  He applied for
    asylum on 2 November 2011. That claim  was  unsuccessful,  as  was  the
    appellant's appeal against that decision,  which  was  dismissed  by  a
    judge in a determination promulgated on 5 April 2012.  On 21 July 2014,
    the appellant made further submissions, which  led  to  a  decision  to
    refuse his  asylum  claim  in  a  letter  dated  25  August  2017.  The
    appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by a  First-tier
    Tribunal judge, following a hearing on 19 April 2018. That decision was
    set aside by the Upper Tribunal, with no preserved findings.

 4. The basis of the appellant's protection  claim  is  that  he  has  been
    detained and ill-treated in Sri Lanka, owing to  his  association  with
    the LTTE and that he fears further  maltreatment.  The  appellant  also
    raises mental health issues.  In the decision  letter,  the  respondent
    referred to a supplementary decision  letter  dated  23  January  2014,
    which in turn referred to the findings  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  which
    upheld Judge Grant who heard the appeal in 2012.  The  respondent  also
    concluded that the psychiatric report of Professor Katona dated 16 July
    2014 did not enhance his claim. The appellant's claim that the case  of
    SS, his brother-in-law was relevant  to  and  assisted  his  claim  was
    rejected, as were the conclusions of Professor Good in a country report
    dating March 2014 which did not counter Judge Grant's findings.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. Judge Eldridge accepted that the appellant was detained and ill-treated
    in Sri Lanka for a considerable period  following  his  visits  to  his
    sister and her family in  an  IDP  camp  during  2009.  The  respondent
    further accepted that the appellant's brother-in-law  was  working  for
    the LTTE between 2005 and 2009. It was also accepted that the appellant
    had mental health problems in Sri Lanka  and  continued  to  have  them
    thereafter, which included a  current  diagnosis  of  PTSD.  The  judge
    considered that the appellant did not come within any of the categories
    identified in GJ and others and was not liable to being of any  adverse
    interest to the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.  There  was  no  stand-alone
    Article 3 claim argued on the appellant's  behalf  and  no  submissions
    were made in respect of Article 8.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal made the core submission that the  appellant  had
    attracted the adverse attention of the Sri Lankan  authorities  over  a
    longer period of time including after the  May  2009  ceasefire.   This
    along with the fact that he had secured his release through the payment
    of bribes meant that he was at a current risk of persecution, following
    GJ and with reference to RS (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA  Civ  1796  and  ME
    (Sri Lanka) [2018] EWCA 1486.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 8. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 10 December 2019, states
    that the respondent considered that the grounds reveal a material error
    of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's  consideration  of  the
    appellant's protection appeal. The response further states  that  given
    the positive credibility findings and the authorities on  post-conflict
    risk, the respondent invites  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  to  remake  the  decision  by
    allowing the appellant's protection appeal outright, without  the  need
    for a hearing.

 9. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law for the reasons
    set out in the grounds and I set it aside. I  remake  the  decision  by
    allowing the appeal on protection grounds.

Summary of Conclusions


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
of law.

I set aside the decision to be re-made.

I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on protection grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 11 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara





