
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08711/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 December 2019                  |On 24 December 2019                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     MAI
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs C Lugman a solicitor with Batley Law
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. On 14 April 2018 a judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the
       appeal of this appellant, a citizen of Sudan, on all grounds.

    2. On 8 March 2019 a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal found  error  of
       law material to the decision to dismiss the appeal and set aside  the
       earlier decision.

    3. The relisting of the appeal was stayed pending  the  outcome  of  the
       latest country guidance concerning Sudan.

    4. Rather than there being country guidance a reported decision  of  the
       Upper Tribunal has been published, AAR  &  AA  (Non-Arab  Darfuris  -
       return (Sudan) [2019] UKUT 282, the head note of  which  reads:  "The
       situation in Sudan remains volatile after civil protests  started  in
       late 2018 and the future  is  unpredictable.  There  is  insufficient
       evidence currently available to show that the guidance  given  in  AA
       (non-Arab Darfuris - relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056  and  MM
       (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010 (IAC) requires revision.  Those
       cases should still be followed."

    5. The First-Tier Tribunal record at [3] of the earlier decision:

           "In summary, he claims fear of return to Sudan on account of his
           ethnicity and imputed political opinion. The Respondent  accepts
           that the Appellant is from a non-Arab Darfuri  tribe  and  could
           not safely return Darfur but  avers  that  he  could  reasonably
           relocate to Khartoum. His account of being arrested and detained
           is not accepted."

    6. The current country guidance cases establish that  in  light  of  the
       appellant's ethnicity he  will  face  a  real  risk  on  return.  The
       developments in 2018 significantly altered the  perception  that  the
       situation in Sudan had entered a period of stability where return  of
       those such as the appellant may have been warranted. It was  accepted
       before the Upper Tribunal that in light of the current situation  the
       appellant  was  entitled  to  succeed  with   his   application   for
       international protection at this time.

Decision

    7. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.



  Anonymity.

    8. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 12th December 2019

