
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08315/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26th April 2019                  |On 16th May 2019                 |
|                                    |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                               Mr Sangar Ahmed Muhilldin
                                            Appellant
                          (ANONYMITY NOT DIRECTED)

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms R Pickering (Counsel)
For the Respondent:      Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    On 19 June 2018 the Secretary of State decided to refuse the
claimant's application for international protection. He appealed to the
First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) but following a hearing of 20 August
2018 it dismissed his appeal. It then explained why in its written reasons
of 4 September 2018. The claimant obtained permission to appeal to the
Upper Tribunal and on 14 March 2019 I decided to set aside the tribunal's
decision because it contained an error of law. But I preserved its
comprehensive adverse credibility findings with respect to much of what the
claimant had said about the circumstances underpinning his claim. I decided
that I would remake the decision after a further hearing. The hearing took
place on 26 April 2019 and what follows is an explanation as to how I have
remade the decision and why I have done so in the terms which I have.

2.    By way of background the claimant is a national of Iraq. He is of
Kurdish ethnicity and is a Sunni Muslim. He was born 19 July 1993. Whilst
in Iraq he lived in Suleymaniah which is located within the part of Iraq
under Kurdish administrative control (the IKR). He left Iraq in December
2015 and travelled to the United Kingdom (UK) via Turkey, Greece,
Macedonia, Serbia, Croatia, Austria, Germany and France. He entered the UK
illegally on 9 August 2016. Unsuccessful attempts were made to return him
to Germany so that his asylum claim could be determined there. Eventually,
in the face of resistance from him, it was decided not to do that. So, his
claim was decided by the UK authorities.

3.    In pursuing his claim, the claimant asserted that he would be at risk
on return due to his claimed status as bisexual male. He also asserted he
would be at risk at the hands of certain of his family members who had
strongly disapproved of his tendency to consume alcohol. The Secretary of
State did not believe him about any of that and neither did the tribunal.
The tribunal provided very full reasons for its disbelief. It is not
necessary for me to set out the same material in this decision. I rejected
grounds of appeal directed towards the tribunal's adverse credibility
conclusions and consequent findings. My reasons for doing so may be found
in my decision of 14 March 2019. But in a nutshell, I concluded that all of
the Tribunal's factual findings rejecting the claimant's contention that he
is bisexual and rejecting his claims to be at risk from his family had been
soundly made.  That is why I chose to preserve those findings. But I did
find one ground of appeal to be made out. As to that, I concluded that the
tribunal had erred in proceeding on the basis that the claimant would be
returned from the UK direct to the IKR. I did so because it had been said
in the relevant the country guidance case of AAH (Iraqi Kurds-internal
relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC) that all returns of Iraqi nationals
from the UK would be to Baghdad. The error had been an important one in the
particular circumstances of this case because it had led to the tribunal
failing to consider a number of important questions including whether the
claimant might possess or be able to obtain a crucial identity document
known as CSID card; whether if he was not able to obtain one he would able
to safely reside in Baghdad in circumstances where it would not be unduly
harsh to expect him to do so; and whether either with or without a CSID
card he would able (if he so chose) to safely make his way from Baghdad to
his home in the IKR. So, those were the sorts of matters upon which I was
focussing at the hearing of 26 April 2019.

4.    At the hearing representation was stated as above. I am grateful to
each representative. At the commencement of the hearing I had before me the
documentation which had been before the First-tier Tribunal (which included
two bundles filed on the behalf of the claimant and one filed by the
Secretary of State). I also had a further bundle filed on behalf of the
claimant and which contained an updated witness statement of 16 April 2019
and a copy of Upper Tribunal's decision in AAH, cited above. Ms Pickering
invited me to adjourn the hearing because her instructing solicitors were,
she explained, in the process of obtaining an expert report regarding some
scarring injuries he had sustained in the past. I asked her how the content
of any such report might be relevant to the issues I was required to
address for the purposes of the remaking of the decision. She suggested
that such might be relevant to the claimant's physical ability to travel to
the IKR or his ability to obtain appropriate documentation in Iraq if he
had to. The application was opposed by Mr McVeety. I refused the
adjournment application because it was not clear to me that the content of
any such report would be of significant or any value with respect to either
of those two issues or any other issues which I was proposing to determine.
In any event, the application was made at a very late stage and there was
no explanation as to why such a report could not have been obtained prior
to the hearing. Fairness did not require me to adjourn in circumstances
where it was not clear how the report would potentially assist the
claimant.

5.    I heard oral evidence from the claimant though that evidence was
brief. He told me, aided by a Kurdish Sorani speaking interpreter whom he
appeared to understand throughout the proceedings, that his updated witness
statement of 16 April 2019 was truthful and accurate. He had he said made
no efforts to obtain his Iraqi passport which had been taken from him by
the German authorities. He does not know where his CSID document is.  He is
not in contact with any family members in Iraq. He had not tried to obtain
his passport from the German authorities because he does not want to return
to the IKR. After the evidence I heard submissions from the two
representatives. Mr McVeety, for the Secretary of State, reminded me that
the claimant had been found not to be credible. He invited me to find that
he does possess identity documents and that, even if he does not, his
family in Iraq would be able to assist him in obtaining new documents.
Return to Iraq would be via Baghdad but he would then be able to travel to
Suleymaniah by air. I was urged to dismiss his appeal. Ms Pickering urged
me to find that he does not possess any identity documentation. It would
have been difficult for him to have obtained his passport from the German
authorities. He would have significant problems in seeking to re-document
himself in the UK or upon return to Iraq. I should accept that he does not
have any contact with his family so that they would not be able to aid in
that process. Absent a CSID document and without an ability to get one, he
would not be able to relocate or survive in Iraq.

6.    In remaking the decision, I have taken full account all of the
documentary evidence which has been placed before me and all of the oral
evidence which I have heard. I have reminded myself of the lower standard
of proof applicable in cases such as this where international protection is
sought. That lower standard of proof is sometimes described as the "real
risk test". I have reminded myself of the findings of the tribunal which I
have preserved.

7.     The claimant, to state the obvious, is currently in the UK. To
recap, he has sought international protection on account of claimed
bisexuality and on the basis of the claimed antipathy towards him by his
family members in consequence of his drinking. He has been found, in
undisturbed findings, to have been dishonest about those matters. He has
been dishonest when pursuing his claim for international protection and
then when appearing before the tribunal at his initial appeal. So, I have
concluded that he is prepared to mislead in circumstances where he is able
to detect a potential advantage, with respect to his immigration status, in
doing so. That does not mean, of itself, I should disbelieve everything
else he says. But it does mean that what he says has to be treated with a
degree of caution whilst bearing mind the relatively low standard of proof
which he is required to meet.

8.    It is the claimant's position that he does not now possess any
identity documentation. He says, in his most recent witness statement, that
those documents did exist whilst he was in Iraq but that they were kept by
the uncles he lived with and he was not permitted to access those documents
without their permission. However, he accepts he did once have an Iraqi
passport. He would have required access to his CSID document and his Iraqi
nationality certificate in order to obtain a passport. That would seem to
run counter to his claim that he was not permitted access to his documents.

9.    The claimant says, again in his most recent witness statement, that
he lied to his uncles in order to secure access to his identity documents,
that they were given to him briefly, and that during the brief period he
had them, he secretly applied for and obtained a passport. I do not believe
him. I think if his uncles were as controlling as he claims then they would
not have allowed him free and unsupervised access to those documents even
for a brief period. Additionally, I see no reason why, since they were his
documents, his uncles would not permit him to have full access to them. Of
course, part of his asylum claim that was that certain of his family
members had significant antipathy towards to him but he was disbelieved
about all of that. I conclude, therefore, that he obtained a passport in
Iraq and was able to do so because he had unfettered access to his identity
documentation.

10.   The claimant asserts that his original CSID card and original Iraqi
nationality certificate were left in Iraq when he fled in order to come to
the UK. But he says he possessed copies of them at the time he left and
that those copies were seized by the authorities in Germany along with his
passport. I do not believe him. His having been disbelieved about his
uncles having antipathy towards him, there is no reason why he would not
have had free access to his documents and would not have brought the
originals with him.

11.   The claimant says that the German authorities took his passport from
him and also took the copies of his identity documents from him. I do not
believe him. It has not been persuasively explained why those documents
would be taken from him by the German authorities. He has been dishonest in
the past and he has a motive for asserting he does not possess a passport
or other identity documentation even if he does. In any event I believe
that if those documents had been taken from him he would have made some
effort to have them returned to him. Ms Pickering suggests that it would
have been difficult for him to have done that but he has had legal
representation and still has today.

12.   I find, in the above circumstances, that the claimant is in
possession of his Iraqi passport, his Iraqi nationality certificate and his
CSID card.

13.   The claimant will, it is accepted by all parties, be returned to
Baghdad. If he is to go to the IKR which is, of course, his original home
area, he must find a way to travel there. I did not understand Ms Pickering
to be arguing that if he does have a CSID card and his passport he will be
unable to travel by air from Baghdad to the IKR. In the relatively recent
country guidance case of AAH (Iraqi Kurds -internal relocation) CG UKUT
00212 (IAC) it was said that an Iraqi national without a CSID card or valid
passport would be unable to board a domestic flight from Baghdad to the
IKR. But I have found the claimant to be in possession of such
documentation. It was found in AAH that an Iraqi national returnee of
Kurdish origin in possession of a valid CSID card or Iraqi passport would
be able to travel by air or land to the IKR and that such travel would be
practical and affordable and could be undertaken without any real risk of
persecution, serious harm or article 3 ECHR ill treatment arising. I
conclude that the claimant would be able travel from Baghdad to Suleymaniah
without any undue difficulty.

14.   If the claimant does go to Suleymaniah this will not be a case of his
taking advantage of an internal flight alternative. He will be returning
home. It has not been argued on his behalf before me, and there is nothing
in the materials before me, to suggest, that as a former resident of the
IKR and as a Kurd he will not be admitted into the IKR. There is some
evidence he has suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder and he makes
mention of that in the most recent witness statement. He says that he has
been prescribed medication in connection with mental health problems but he
has chosen not to take it. But he was found to have mislead regarding the
antipathy directed towards him by members of his family. I do not accept
that he does not have family in IKR who will be able to afford him some
assistance should he need it as a consequence of any mental health
difficulties he may have.

15.   Nothing was said before me at the hearing and nothing was indicated
in claimant's most recent witness statement to suggest he would be able to
benefit from article 8 of the ECHR either within the Immigration Rules or
outside them. I find no basis in the material before me to conclude that he
could.

16.   In the above circumstances, in remaking the decision, I have decided
to dismiss the claimant's appeal from the Secretary of State's decision of
19 June 2018, refusing to grant him international protection.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside. In remaking the
decision, the Upper Tribunal dismisses the claimant's appeal from the
Secretary of State's decision of 19 June 2018.


MR Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Dated: 15 May 2019

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not grant the claimant anonymity. I was not
invited to do so and it is not apparent to me that I should. Accordingly,
anonymity is not directed.


MR Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Dated:  15 May 2019


To the Respondent
Fee Award

I make no fee award.


MR Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Dated:  15 May 2019


