
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08525/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th September 2017                        |On 2nd October 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    [S M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mohzan, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq.  He was born in 1989,  albeit  that
    there is some dispute as to the date within that year.   The  Appellant
    claims to have left Iraq on approximately 24th December 2016 travelling
    by various means of transport until he arrived in the  UK  in  a  lorry
    whereafter  he  claimed  asylum  on  9th  February  2016  having   been
    encountered by the UK authorities.  His claim for protection was  based
    thereafter on a claim  that  he  would  face  serious  harm  and/or  be
    unlawfully killed by non-state agents if he  were  to  be  returned  to
    Iraq.

 2. The Appellant's application for asylum was refused by the Secretary  of
    State on 2nd August 2016.  The Appellant appealed and the  appeal  came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Somal sitting at Stoke on  17th
    February 2017.  The Appellant did not appear  and  that  non-attendance
    forms the whole basis of  the  current  proceedings.   He  was  however
    legally represented at that hearing.  The Secretary of State  was  not.
    In a decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  27th  February  2017  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 6th March 2017 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal.
    Those grounds contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  failed
    to exercise her powers granted under the Tribunal Procedure Rules  2014
    to ensure that the  Appellant  had  a  fair  hearing.   The  judge  had
    acknowledged that an application for an adjournment  was  made  by  the
    Appellant's legal representative that the Appellant have  further  time
    to  attend  the  hearing  centre.   The   Appellant's   representatives
    requested an adjournment of around an hour, bearing in  mind  that  the
    Appellant was travelled via public transport and has a prosthetic  leg.
    The Grounds of Appeal contend  that  the  details  of  the  adjournment
    request were not accurately reflected in the determination.

 4. On 13th June 2017 Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Woodcraft
    granted permission  to  appeal.   Judge  Woodcraft  noted  the  judge's
    decision  to  proceed  in  the   Appellant's   absence   was   entirely
    understandable, particularly given the dubious nature of the case,  but
    that there was difficulty in  the  distinction  made  in  the  case  of
    Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 418 between  fairness  and  reasonableness.   Judge
    Woodcraft concluded that the judge's decision to proceed with the  case
    was undoubtedly reasonable but that it was arguable that it was  unfair
    in the light of the Appellant's circumstances.

 5. On 4th July 2017 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24, contending  that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had directed herself appropriately.

 6. The matter then came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup  sitting
    at Stoke on 1st August  2017.   Judge  Pickup  noted  that  whilst  the
    Appellant would have had to travel from his home in Nottingham  to  the
    hearing centre in Stoke, the Tribunal had not been  provided  with  any
    evidence to justify the assertions  made.   In  such  circumstances  he
    adjourned the hearing before the Upper  Tribunal  and  gave  directions
    including a direction that not later than ten days after the  issue  of
    these directions the Appellant's representatives  must  provide  cogent
    evidence  to  support  the  assertions  made  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether there is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears by his instructed solicitor
    Mr Mohzan.  Mr Mohzan is familiar with  this  matter,  having  appeared
    before Judge Pickup.  The Appellant is present.  The Secretary of State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Bates.

 8. I refer to a letter from  Burton  &  Burton  Solicitors  of  Nottingham
    attaching a witness statement dated 7th August 2017 from the Appellant.
     That witness statement purports to  address  the  issues  required  by
    Judge Pickup when granting the adjournment.   From  that  statement  it
    appears that the Appellant's train had broken down and was stopped  for
    nearly two hours between Nottingham and Derby on its way to Stoke.   He
    was then redirected via Birmingham before arriving at the Stoke  centre
    after 12 o'clock.  He stipulates that his late arrival was  through  no
    fault of his own and  that  it  was  outside  his  control  as  he  was
    travelling on public  transport.   He  emphasises  within  the  witness
    statement that he speaks no English and thus experienced difficulty  in
    communicating his position to the train staff.

Submissions/Discussion

 9. Mr Bates submits that whilst the events may well have taken place  they
    are not material to the outcome of the  decision  and  that  there  was
    nothing that the Appellant could have said that would  have  led  to  a
    different  finding  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  particularly
    bearing in mind that he was legally represented.  He submits  that  the
    only issues that could have been raised by the Appellant  went  to  any
    questions that the judge might have asked him  and  then  the  question
    arises as to why they were not covered by the witness statement.

10. Mr Mohzan points  out  that  the  judge  did  not  accept  the  written
    statement and that there may well have been extra questions put to  the
    Appellant and that he is entitled to a fair opportunity to put his case
    fully.  He submits that that cannot  be  the  case  in  this  instance,
    particularly bearing in mind that  there  are  also  questions  of  the
    Appellant's  mental  stability  which  the  judge  was  not  given  the
    opportunity to consider.

11. Mr Bates acknowledges the failing to be found in paragraph  26  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  Therein the judge concludes:

         "If he had attended the hearing he could have shed  some  light  on
         his contradictory responses".

    Mr Bates consequently accepts that oral evidence may possibly have made
    a difference and that consequently there may be an error but leaves  it
    for the court to make a ruling.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

14. I accept that the Appellant's non-attendance at the hearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, or rather his late attendance, was due to no fault
    of his own but to the failings of the rail network.  I acknowledge that
    he has produced no proof other than a witness statement of this but  it
    is difficult to expect documentary evidence to  be  provided  from  the
    rail company.  The Appellant was properly represented in  that  he  had
    legal representation, it was only his own personal non- attendance that
    may have caused some prejudice.  Indeed, the Secretary of State did not
    help herself by not having a Home Office Presenting Officer present.

15. However, it is clear from paragraph 26 of the judge's findings that she
    believed that had the Appellant attended the hearing he could have shed
    some light on contradictory responses to be found  within  his  witness
    statement.  It is a matter of fairness that  he  should  be  given  the
    opportunity to address these issues.  In such circumstances  procedural
    unfairness requires that I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and remit the matter back for rehearing before any other Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal than Judge Somal.  I would, however,  advise
    the  Appellant  that  a  remittal  in  these  circumstances  does   not
    necessarily mean that the outcome of any further hearing  will  not  be
    exactly the same as that that originally was  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  What is important is that the  Appellant  has  a  fair
    hearing and by finding an error of law, that is the  situation  that  I
    address.

Notice of Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  The following directions are made.
 1) On finding that there is a material error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal the decision is set aside with none of the findings
    of fact to stand.


 2) That the matter be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Nottingham or Stoke on the first available date 28 days hence  with  an
    ELH of three hours.  The Appellant's physical disability is  noted  and
    in  the  circumstances,  bearing  in   mind   where   he   lives,   the
    administration is requested, if possible,  to  relist  this  matter  at
    Nottingham centre rather than Stoke.


 3) That the rehearing of this matter be  before  any  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge other than Immigration Judge Somal.


 4) That a Kurdish Sorani interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 29 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

