
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08299/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 15th June 2021                    |On 24th June 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA
                                     and
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHEPHERD


                                   Between

                                    B M M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                           DIRECTIONS AND REASONS

UPON HEARING Mr E Nicholson of counsel on behalf of the appellant and  Mr  C
Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer on behalf of the respondent


AND UPON THE TRIBUNAL treating the hearing listed on the 15th June  2021  as
a Case Management Review Hearing


IT IS DIRECTED THAT:





     i) The conclusion and directions of Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley set
        out in her 'error of law' decision promulgated on 29th September
        2020 that:


           a. The findings at paragraphs 48, and 53 to 57 of the decision
              of the FtT regarding the appellant's contact with his family,
              the extent of any family support available to him, and the
              documentation available to the appellant are preserved; and


           b. the appeal will be re-heard in the Upper Tribunal; and


        are set aside.


    ii) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing de
        novo with no findings preserved save that "the appellant had a CSID
        card which is in Germany".


   iii) The appellant shall file and serve a consolidated bundle of the
        evidence upon which he relies (including background material and an
        updated witness statement) within 14 days.


    iv) The parties shall make enquiries of the German immigration
        authorities regarding the availability of the appellant's CSID, or
        a copy thereof.  If the appellant's solicitors are able to obtain
        the appellant's CSID, it shall be held by the appellant's
        solicitors pending the outcome of the appeal.


     v) The parties shall be notified of a hearing date before the First-
        tier Tribunal in due course.  The Tribunal shall arrange a Kurdish
        Sorani interpreter.


REASONS


   1. The appellant's appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Fowell promulgated on 11th November 2019 was determined by Upper
      Tribunal Judge Lindsay under Rule 34, without a hearing.  She noted
      that the respondent did not object to the matter being determined on
      the papers, and that the appellant had requested an oral hearing.
      She considered the representations made by the parties but concluded
      that the "error of law" stage of the appeal could be dealt with on the
      papers as all the necessary arguments had been put forward at length
      by the appellant's representatives in writing.  She went on to find
      that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fowell is vitiated by a
      material error of law.  She found that in determining the credibility
      of the claim, the First-tier Tribunal Judge had proceeded upon
      mistakes as to the appellant's evidence and made assumptions as to the
      plausibility of the appellant's account of events.  She found the
      errors to be material to the finding that the appellant is not a
      credible witness, and she set aside that finding.


   2. At paragraphs [15] to [16] of her decision, Upper Tribunal Judge
      Lindsley concluded that some of the findings made by the First-tier
      Tribunal Judge regarding the appellant's contact with his family and
      the availability of documentation can be preserved.  Having set aside
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
      adjourned the remaking of the appeal and made directions for the
      parties to provide written submissions dealing inter alia with the
      legal issues, propositions and areas of factual dispute which the
      Tribunal should resolve in remaking the appeal.  She expressed the
      view that the issue appears to be whether the appellant's protection
      claim is credible and continues to place him at real risk of serious
      harm with no sufficiency of protection or reasonable possibility of
      finding safety.  She directed that on receipt of the parties
      submissions, the Tribunal would consider whether a case management
      hearing is necessary or whether the appeal can simply be listed for a
      resumed hearing, either as a remote hearing or a face-to face-hearing
      so the decision can be remade.


   3. On behalf of the appellant, written submissions were settled by Mr
      Nicholson of counsel, and filed with the Tribunal.  The appellant
      submitted that Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsey had been wrong to suggest
      that the issues to be determined at the adjourned hearing are limited
      to the appellant's protection claim.  This morning, we were provided
      with a skeleton argument settled by Mr Nicholson in which the
      appellant submits that the findings preserved by Upper Tribunal Judge
      Lindsey cannot be seen in isolation from those which the Upper
      Tribunal set aside as being unsafe.  For his part, Mr Bates
      acknowledged and candidly accepted that on the whole, it is difficult
      to separate the preserved findings from the overall conclusion in the
      error of law decision that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in
      relation to the assessment of the appellant's credibility.


   4. Although it is unfortunate that these issues have come to the fore at
      this late stage, we are satisfied that the appropriate course is for
      us to treat the hearing before us as a Case Management Review Hearing,
      in the way that was perhaps anticipated by Upper Tribunal Judge
      Lindsley.  Having now also had the benefit of hearing the parties
      submissions regarding the extent to which any of the findings of the
      First Tier Tribunal Judge can properly be preserved, we accept that
      the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge regarding the
      appellant's contact with his family and the documents available to
      him, cannot be considered in isolation from the erroneous assessment
      of the appellant's credibility by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  We
      are therefore satisfied that in the circumstances, it is appropriate
      for us to take the exceptional course of setting aside the directions
      made by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsey.  We do so having had the benefit
      of hearing the oral submissions made by the parties as to the
      appropriate course for the disposal of the appeal, following the
      decision that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set
      aside.


   5. The assessment of a claim for asylum such as this is always a highly
      fact sensitive task.  We accept the submission made by both Mr
      Nicholson and Mr Bates that the most appropriate course is for the
      appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.
      It is common ground between the parties that there is one discrete
      finding that can be preserved.  That is, "the appellant had a CSID
      card which is in Germany".  We accept that save for that discrete
      finding no other findings can be preserved.  We have decided that it
      is appropriate to remit this appeal back to the FtT for hearing
      afresh, having considered paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's
      Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.  The nature and extent of
      any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive. The parties
      will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing in due
      course.


   6. The availability of the appellant's CSID is relevant to the issues
      that arise in this appeal.  It is therefore appropriate for us to
      direct that the parties shall make enquiries of the German immigration
      authorities regarding the availability of the appellant's CSID, or a
      copy thereof.  If the document is obtained by the appellant's
      representatives, it should be retained by them for safe-keeping
      pending the outcome of the appeal.





Signed   V. Mandalia                Date:        15th June 2021




      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




