


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08456/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated    |
|On: 28 September 2017                 |On: 29 September 2017                |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
first Appellant in this determination identified as AI.

 1. I have made an anonymity order because  this  decision  refers  to  the
    circumstances of the respondent's young child.  The respondent,  who  I
    shall refer to as AI in this decision.  AI is a citizen of Libya.


 2. AI was not represented but Mr Medley-Daley, a consultant solicitor  who
    had previously been instructed explained that difficulties  had  arisen
    as a result of  the  appellant's  solicitors  losing  their  legal  aid
    contract.  As it happened Mr McVeety conceded that AI's  appeal  should
    be allowed on humanitarian protection, and Article 3 and 8 of the  ECHR
    grounds, for the reasons set  out  below.   As  such,  Mr  Medley-Daley
    acknowledged that the absence of formal representation for AI  did  not
    matter.


  Background


 3. The appellant ('the SSHD') has appealed against a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dated 17 March 2017 in which it dismissed the  appeal  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds and allowed  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.  The First-tier Tribunal's  decision  on  Article  8
    turned upon a single issue, whether it would be unduly harsh  for  AI's
    son, L, to remain in the  United  Kingdom  without  his  father  -  see
    section 117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    The findings of fact reached by the First-tier Tribunal have  not  been
    challenged.  Rather the challenge focused upon the failure to take into
    account the wider considerations, such as AI's criminal offending, when
    addressed the issue of undue harshness.

 4. The SSHD was granted permission to appeal against the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal relevant to Article  8,  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Freeman in a decision dated 9 May 2017.

Hearing

 5. At the beginning of the hearing I indicated the  following  provisional
    views to Mr McVeety, with which he entirely agreed:

       i) In assessing the issue of undue harshness  for  the  purposes  of
          Article 8, no regard was paid to  AI's  immigration  history  and
          criminal offending in breach of the guidance  in  MM  (Uganda)  v
          SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 617, and as  such  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          decision should be set aside  and  remade  by  me  in  the  Upper
          Tribunal.  Although the First-tier Tribunal  was  aware  of  AI's
          criminal offending and referred to it at [36(f)],  this  was  not
          taken into account when the applying section 117C at [39-41].


      ii) Given that it is not  necessary  to  make  any  further  detailed
          factual findings the decision can be remade by me.


     iii) When remaking the decision I must do so by applying  the  factual
          matrix and relevant guidance as  at  the  date  of  hearing.   It
          follows that I must apply ZMM (Article  15(c))  Libya  CG  [2017]
          UKUT 263 (IAC).  There is  no  updated  evidence  available  that
          calls into question the conclusions  reached  in  ZMM.   For  the
          reasons outlined in ZMM AI is entitled to humanitarian protection
          because the violence in Libya has reached such a high level  that
          AI is at risk of being subject to a threat to his life or person.

      iv) It follows from this that it to remove AI to Libya  would  breach
          Article 3 of the ECHR.

       v)  It  also  follows  that  as  AI  is  at  risk  of  treatment  in
          contravention of Article 3 of the ECHR in  Libya,  it  cannot  be
          properly argued that his  removal,  even  when  section  117C  is
          applied and the wider  considerations  are  taken  into  account,
          would not constitute a disproportionate breach of  Article  8  of
          the ECHR.


 6. Mr McVeety made it very clear that if I found an error of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision that I should remake the  decision  myself
    and that the appeal fell to  be  allowed  on  humanitarian  protection,
    Article 3 and 8 of the ECHR grounds.  Given the concessions made it  is
    not necessary for me  to  provide  any  additional  reasoning  save  to
    indicate that for the reasons I have summarised above  the  appellant's
    appeal is allowed on humanitarian and human rights grounds.

Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.


 8.  I  remake  the  decision  by  allowing  AI's  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 28 September
2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
