
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08700/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 November 2017                            |On 18 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                   Ms C K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Waithe, Counsel, instructed by Albany
Solicitors (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Farrelly (FtJ), promulgated on 30 March  2017  in  which
    the FtJ dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse her protection and human rights claim.

2.   The grounds of appeal, which are lengthy, submit firstly that  the  FtJ
    failed to give anxious scrutiny to the appellant's  asylum  claim  that
    she was a lesbian and had entered into  gay  relationships  in  Uganda.
    Secondly, it was argued that the  FtJ  failed  to  cite  or  apply  the
    principles in HJ (Iran) v SSHD & HT (Cameroon) v SSHD UKSC.

3.   The third ground contended that the FtJ focused on what  was  described
    in the decision as "the index event" in reaching findings as to whether
    or not the appellant is gay. The FtJ specifically  made  findings  that
    the appellant's actions or behaviour  was  implausible  and  found  her
    lacking in credibility without reference to the evidence in  the  round
    and  failed  to  consider  background  material.    Grounds  6,   7   8
    essentially repeat the same grounds.

Permission to appeal

4.   Permission was granted on 12 September 2017  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan, who stated:

         "Although the  judge's  introductory  directions  relating  to  the
         general  principles  to  be  applied  in  assessing  a  claim  were
         unarguably correct, it is at least arguable that he might not  have
         applied those principles when he came to  assess  the  evidence  in
         this case.  It is at least arguable that the judge may have  placed
         undue emphasis on his view of the plausibility of  the  appellant's
         account of the 'index event', which, on the  face  of  it,  is  not
         inherently implausible.  The fact that she might have  been  beaten
         as a result is also not implausible  in  light  of  the  background
         evidence relating to the treatment of LGBT people in Uganda.  It is
         at  least  arguable  that  the  judge's  finding  relating  to  the
         plausibility of the 'index event' might have coloured his  view  of
         the  other  evidence,  which  on  the  face  of  it  supported  the
         appellant's  claim.   The  grounds  are  sufficiently  arguable  to
         justify further consideration at a hearing."


5.   At the error of law hearing before  me  Mr  Waithe  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant relied on his detailed grounds of appeal.

6.   Mr Nath relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter,  which,  in  essence,
    contended that the FtJ had given  adequate  reasons  for  reaching  the
    findings that it had as regards the appellant's sexuality and  that  it
    had given sufficient scrutiny to the evidence relied on in  the  round.
    In summary, Mr Nath confirmed that the Secretary  of  State's  position
    was the same as that of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lambert,  who
    refused leave to appeal on 15 August 2017.

7.   I was satisfied that the FtJ erred in law by, in  essence,  failing  to
    look at all of the evidence in the round and by placing too much weight
    on what is described as "the index event", which the FtJ considered  to
    be improbable. There was no reasoning given by the FtJ as  to  why  the
    event or scenario was improbable. The further findings made by the  FtJ
    were similarly based on the Tribunal's view of  what  was  probable  or
    improbable. The grounds of appeal are made out.

Notice of Decision

There is an error of law in the decision and reasons  which  is  set  aside.
    None of the findings of fact can be preserved.

 The  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Taylor  House
    (excluding Judge Farrelly) for a hearing de novo.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date  17.1.2018

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


