
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08450/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th January 2020                 |On 4th March 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     AK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Harper, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. An anonymity direction was previously made.  As this  a  protection
         claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless and until
         a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, AK is granted anonymity.  No
         report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify
         him or any member of his family.  This  direction  applies  amongst
         others to all parties. Failure to comply with this direction  could
         lead to contempt of court proceedings.


      2. The appellant is a national of Iraq.   His  claim  for  asylum  was
         refused by the respondent for reasons set out in a  decision  dated
         21st June 2016.   The respondent accepted the appellant is national
         of Iraq, that he is of Kurdish ethnicity,  and  that  he  lived  in
         Hawija.  The respondent rejected the  claim  that  the  appellant's
         father was a  member  of  the  Ba'ath  party,  that  the  appellant
         encountered any problems on account of his father's work, and  that
         one of the appellant's maternal uncles was involved in the  Kurdish
         government.   The  respondent  concluded  that  in  any  event  the
         appellant could internally relocate in the IKR.


      3.  The appellant's appeal against  that  decision  was  dismissed  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham for reasons set out in a  decision
         promulgated on 31st December  2018.   The  appellant  advances  two
         grounds of appeal.  First, the judge failed to  take  into  account
         the totality of the evidence and to consider the claim  being  made
         by the appellant with anxious scrutiny.  Second, the  judge  failed
         to correctly apply the relevant country guidance in her  assessment
         of the Article 15(c) risk upon return and  in  determining  whether
         the appellant can internally relocate.  Permission  to  appeal  was
         granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keefe on 28th January 2019.


      4. I deal with each of the grounds of appeal in  turn.  The  appellant
         relied upon a report prepared by Dr Rebwar Fatah dated 16th  August
         2018 that was specific to this appeal.  The  appellant  claims  the
         report was directly relevant to  the  assessment  of  the  external
         credibility and plausibility of the claim made  by  the  appellant.
         The appellant claims that in reaching her decision the judge failed
         to have any regard to the expert evidence.  Dr Fatah had  concluded
         that it was plausible that the appellant's father had been abducted
         and killed by ISIS if  the  family  were  in  Hawija  when  it  was
         captured by ISIS  in  June  2014.   Furthermore,  in  reaching  her
         decision the judge failed to take account of  the  expert  evidence
         that there was a heightened risk to the appellant as the son  of  a
         member of the Ba'ath  party  in  Kurdish  or  Shia  areas  where  a
         significant  proportion  of  the  population  harbours   resentment
         against the Ba'ath party.


      5. Ms Harper submits Dr Fatah had commented upon the  plausibility  of
         the appellant's account and it  was  important  for  the  judge  to
         consider that evidence  because  the  events  relied  upon  by  the
         appellant occurred when the appellant was very  young  and  so  the
         expert evidence was particularly relevant to the assessment of  the
         account of events relied upon by the appellant.  The  expert  dealt
         with what had happened in Hawija at paragraphs 450 to  474  of  the
         report.  At paragraph [34], the judge rejected the  claim  made  by
         the appellant that he and his family would be  at  risk  in  Kirkuk
         without having any regard to paragraph 575 of the expert's  report.
         Ms Harper  submits  Dr  Fatah  had  expressly  commented  upon  the
         plausibility of the appellant's account of events at paragraphs 477
         and 478 of his report. She submits the failure to take into account
         the expert evidence at all, is a material error of law.


      6. In reply, Ms Abhoni accepts the judge does not make  any  reference
         to the report of Dr Fatah in her decision, but she submits, that is
         not material because the judge adequately assessed the claim.   She
         submits the judge accepted the appellant was a minor  and  accepted
         there are certain details the appellant  would  not  know.   Having
         considered the evidence relating to his  father's  activities,  the
         judge accepted the appellant would have very little recollection of
         his father's role or  activities  within  the  Ba'ath  Party.   She
         submits it was open to the  judge  to  find  that  the  appellant's
         father  aligned  himself  with  Iraqi's  rather  than  the  Kurdish
         community in Hawija, for the reasons set out at paragraph  [32]  of
         the decision.  She  submits  that  at  paragraph  [33],  the  judge
         referred to the oral evidence of the appellant that  following  the
         fall of Saddam Hussein,  his  father  was  not  questioned  by  the
         authorities regarding his political opinion and his family did  not
         suffer any retribution from members of the community.  She  submits
         it was open to the judge to  conclude  that  the  evidence  of  the
         appellant taken together with  the  background  material  indicates
         that if the appellant's father was a member of the Ba'ath Party, he
         did not hold a high or prominent position.  Ms Abhoni  accepts  the
         judge does not refer to any internal inconsistencies in the account
         of the appellant.


      7. I accept the judge erred in her assessment of the claim by  failing
         to have any regard whatsoever to the expert evidence of  Dr  Fatah,
         that was specific to this appeal and the account of  events  relied
         upon by the appellant.  The judge refers at paragraph  [6]  of  her
         decision to the appellant's bundle and  supplementary  bundle,  but
         there is no reference whatsoever in the decision to the  report  of
         Dr Fatah.  The assessment  of  credibility  can  often  involve  an
         assessment of  the  plausibility,  or  apparent  reasonableness  or
         truthfulness of what is being said.  Here, the judge considered the
         likelihood  of  aspects  of  the  appellant's  account   based   on
         inferences drawn from the background material but did not  consider
         the expert's report that was at  least  capable  of  revealing  the
         likelihood of what was said by the appellant, having occurred.  The
         report of Dr Fatah was based on an understanding of events and life
         in Iraq.  It is now well  established  that  an  account  could  be
         implausible yet credible, or plausible yet properly  not  believed.
         An assessment of the inherent likelihood or apparent reasonableness
         of a claim is an aspect of its credibility and in my judgement,  in
         the absence of any inconsistencies in the account advanced  by  the
         appellant, the judge should have considered all the material before
         her, including the matters set out in the expert's report.


      8. That in itself is in my judgement sufficient to establish an  error
         of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  that  it
         should be set aside.  There is  however  also  some  force  to  the
         second ground of appeal that in assessing the risk upon return, the
         judge erroneously proceeds upon the basis that  the  appellant  has
         close family in the IKR.  Having accepted the appellant  originates
         from the 'contested area of Hawija', it appears the judge  proceeds
         upon the erroneous understanding that Kirkuk is  in  the  IKR.   At
         paragraph [12] of the decision, the judge refers to the appellant's
         mother having two brothers [M] and [A], who "both lived  in  Kirkuk
         in the IKR".  At paragraph [34] of her decision, the  judge  states
         "... I have not accepted the appellant's  claim  that  he  and  his
         family would be at risk in Kirkuk or elsewhere in the  IKR  because
         of his father's membership of the  Ba'ath  Party...".   Mrs  Abhoni
         accepts the judge appears to be confused regarding  whether  Kirkuk
         is in the IKR, but she submits, the judge makes it clear  that  she
         is considering internal relocation to the IKR.  The difficulty with
         that submission is that at paragraph  [39]  of  her  decision,  the
         judge states that she has not accepted the appellant's account that
         he is unable to relocate to the IKR, because she has  not  accepted
         as credible, his account for the reasons outlined. The judge states
         the appellant  could  relocate  to  Northern  Iraq  "where  he  has
         relatives who can support him upon return...".  The relatives  that
         were referred to by the appellant are his maternal uncles  who  the
         judge noted at paragraph [12], lived in Kirkuk.


      9. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         is vitiated by a material error of law and should be set aside.  As
         to disposal, the parties submit that the appropriate course is  for
         the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing de-
         novo with no findings  preserved.   The  parties  submit  that  the
         Tribunal will be required to hear extensive  evidence  and  to  and
         address the risk upon return by reference  to  the  recent  country
         guidance set  out  in  SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);  identity
         documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC). Ms Harper  submits  the
         appellant has been denied a fair  opportunity  of  having  all  the
         evidence considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    In  all  the
         circumstances, I am persuaded that the appropriate  course  is  for
         the matter to be  remitted  for  rehearing  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal with no findings preserved.


NOTICE OF DECISION


     10. The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Graham  promulgated  on
         31st December 2018 is set aside.


     11.  The  matter  is  remitted  for  rehearing  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  The parties will be notified of a hearing  date  in  due
         course.

    Signed                                  Date 27th February 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
