
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/08187/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 March 2018                          | On 13 April 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  mr a j j
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION continued)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Akinbolu instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the Respondent as the Appellant as he was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Gambia  and  his  date  of  birth  is  8
    September 1990.  He made an application for asylum and this was refused
    by the Secretary of State on 20 July  2016.   The  Secretary  of  State
    refused to revoke a deportation order in respect of the Appellant  made
    on 14 December 2010.

3.     The Appellant was born in Norway and lived in Gambia from the age  of
    3 to 9.  He came to the UK with his mother and brother on 30 July 2002.
     He was granted leave to remain here until  March  2002.   In  December
    2008 he was granted indefinite leave on the basis  of  long  residency.
    In May 2010 he was convicted of GBH and an offence  of  perverting  the
    course of justice which related to the concealment of a weapon.  He was
    sentenced to fifteen months imprisonment in respect of the GBH and  one
    month to run consecutively in relation to the offence of perverting the
    course of justice.  Following conviction, the Secretary of  State  made
    an order to deport the Appellant on 14 December 2010 (under Section  32
    of the 2007 Act).  He appealed against this and the First-tier Tribunal
    dismissed his appeal, finding that the  Appellant  had  connections  in
    Gambia through a maternal uncle and two  aunts,  and  that  his  mother
    would  be  able  to  financially  support  him  there  until  he  found
    employment.

4.   The Appellant made an application  to  revoke  the  deportation  order.
    This was refused by the Secretary  of  State  in  December  2012.   The
    Appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal was allowed  by
    the First-tier Tribunal in October 2013.  However, the Court of  Appeal
    found an error and remitted the matter back to the Upper Tribunal.   In
    August 2015,  the  Upper  Tribunal  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse to revoke the deportation  order.   This
    was refused and the Appellant's appeal was allowed on  31  March  2013.
    This resulted in various further hearings, including before  the  Court
    of Appeal that ordered a rehearing before the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  a
    decision of 24 August 2015 the Upper Tribunal dismissed the Appellant's
    appeal against  the  refusal  to  revoke  the  deportation  order.  The
    Appellant made further representations under paragraph 353 of the Rules
    which were refused. He was removed to Gambia in December 2015.  He  was
    refused entry by the Gambian authorities.

5.   The Appellant appealed against the decision of 20 July 2016  to  refuse
    to grant him asylum and his appeal was allowed by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Colvin under Article 8 of the 1950  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  Judge  Colvin  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds. The Appellant's asylum claim was based on his sexuality.  This
    was not accepted  by  the  judge.   However,  the  appeal  against  the
    decision to refuse to revoke the deportation order was  allowed.    The
    Secretary of State was  granted  permission  to  appeal  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge JM Holmes on 11 January 2018.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

6.   Judge Colvin recorded  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  2011,  when
    dismissing his appeal against deportation, found that the Appellant had
    connections to Gambia through a maternal uncle and two aunts, and  that
    his mother would be in a position to financially support him  until  he
    found employment.  Judge Colvin found recorded that at that time  there
    was no evidence that the Appellant's mother had medical problems or was
    in  any  sense  dependent  upon  the  Appellant.   The  judge   applied
    Devaseelan guidelines (Devaseelan  (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -  Extra-
    Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT 00702) indicating that his
    starting point  was  the  findings  as  made  by  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    recording and commenting on them at [36]. These can  be  summarised  as
    follows:-

    1.   The application's offending was serious and the offence was not  a
         single isolated offence.


    2.   In terms of the mother's mental health the Upper Tribunal found:


         "We do not consider that, taken overall,  the  mother's  condition
             and the  role  and  involvement  he  [the  Appellant]  has  in
             supporting that condition is at the level  of  a  powerful  or
             very compelling reasons".


    3.   There was more evidence before the Upper Tribunal than before  the
         First-tier at the earlier hearing that the uncle is in poor  health
         and a pensioner and that one of the aunts is  undergoing  treatment
         for her mental health, the  other  aunt  is  elderly  and  in  poor
         health.


    4.   The Appellant would be able to  take  up  immediate  residence  in
         Gambia in an existing family household and be supported  there  for
         whatever period of time it takes, and that they could not  reach  a
         conclusion  that  there  is  no  active  tie  to  the  country   of
         citizenship.


    5.   The submissions overstated the position in respect with the degree
         to which the Appellant is integrated in the UK  and  the  obstacles
         that he would face in Gambia.  The link to Gambia was found not  to
         be "tenuous" or "without meaning.

7.   Judge Colvin found that the "most prominent  matter  that  has  changed
    since this decision" related to the Appellant's  mother's  health.   He
    concluded  from  the  various  medical  reports  before  him  that  she
    underwent a major operation on her brain on 19 October 2015 for a brain
    tumour.

8.   The judge at [38] attached weight to several references in the  reports
    to the Appellant's mother being cared for by her  son.   In  particular
    there was a letter from the University College  London  Hospital  which
    was not dated reporting on her  discharge  after  the  operation  which
    stated that her son is her main carer.  This was also  referred  to  in
    the discharge summary.  The judge attached weight  to  a  reference  to
    whether the Appellant's mother required a care home. She had apparently
    stated that she did not want to go into care  if  her  cognitive  state
    deteriorated and that her son was deported and  she  could  not  return
    home.

9.   The judge noted at [39] the Appellant's evidence that his mother had  a
    carer who came to the house twice a day for 30 to 45  minutes  to  wash
    and dress her.   However,  he  provided  care  the  rest  of  the  time
    including ensuring that she took  medication  three  times  a  day  and
    undertaking household chores such as shopping,  cooking  and  cleaning.
    His evidence was that he tried to ensure that his mother  went  outside
    for a walk and her enjoyment of  life  was  seriously  limited  by  her
    continuing depression.  The judge concluded at [40] that he was  in  no
    doubt that the Appellant was playing a significant role caring for  his
    mother and that this  represented  a  "major  change  since  the  Upper
    Tribunal Decision in August 2015".  The judge concluded that the  level
    of support which included important emotional support was not something
    that is likely to have been or would be provided in the future  to  the
    Appellant's mother in his absence.  The judge concluded at [39]:

         "There is therefore in my view a dependency which goes well  beyond
         the normal physical and emotional ties of a mother and her grown-up
         son.  And, from the Appellant's  own  statements,  I  believe  this
         dependency to be mutual in some respects as he says  that  he  does
         not  know  how  he  himself  would  cope  emotionally  without  her
         particularly as he has always lived with her even though he is  now
         nearly aged 27."

10.  The judge found at [41] that there had been  other  changes  since  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision.  The judge  found  that  this  included  the
    death of the uncle in Gambia and the removal of one  of  the  aunts  to
    Senegal in order to receive medical treatment.  The  judge  found  that
    there was one elderly aunt living in Gambia  which,  according  to  the
    judge, lessened the  active  tie  in  Gambia  as  found  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The judge found that there was no obvious means of financial
    support for the Appellant on his immediate return which  was  a  factor
    mentioned in a previous decision when his mother was  running  a  small
    business from home.  The judge stated that two years had passed and the
    Appellant had not committed any further offences.  The judge considered
    that the Appellant was aged 19 in 2009 when the offence  occurred,  and
    that he had spent eight years since  then  and  he  had  not  committed
    further offences.

11.  The judge considered the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  made
    findings as follows:

         "42. I have set out above those matters that need to be  considered
             under paragraph 390 in relation to an application to revoke  a
             deportation order.  There is no doubt in this  case  that  the
             deportation order was made following a serious offence of  GBH
             being committed by the appellant.   As  the  Sentencing  Judge
             remarked, this was 'a wholly unprovoked attack on an  innocent
             member of the public' that caused 'grave injuries'.  There  is
             therefore also no  doubt  a  strong  public  interest  in  the
             deportation of a foreign national who has  committed  such  an
             offence.  On  the  other  hand,  I  consider  that  there  are
             compassionate circumstances in this case as referred to  above
             particularly in relation to the appellant's mother and this is
             a matter that I return to below.
         43.  As the appellant received a prison sentence for  less  than  4
             years but at least 12 months he fails within paragraph  398(b)
             of the Immigration Rules.  This means that I must consider the
             matters set out in paragraph 399A.   It  is  the  respondent's
             case in the refusal letter that the  appellant  cannot  fulfil
             the requirements of subpar (a) as he  has  not  been  lawfully
             resident in the UK for most of his life.   It  points  to  the
             period of 5 years between 2002 and 2007 when he had  no  leave
             to remain.  He would have been aged 12 to 17 during this  time
             and  still  dependent  on  his  mother   to   regularise   his
             immigration status in line with hers.  In this context  it  is
             submitted that as the appellant was brought to  the  UK  as  a
             young child and thus had no choice over where he  was  obliged
             to live that he ought to be treated as  a  settled  immigrant.
             And the fact is that he has been here since childhood is still
             a weighty matter even though a part  of  the  period  was  not
             lawful: JO (Uganda) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 10.


         44.  Although there is clearly substance in such a  submission,  it
             is nevertheless the fact that on a  strict  interpretation  of
             the 'lawful residence' requirement it means that the appellant
             has had 13 years lawful residence in the  UK  out  of  the  18
             years that he has been here and this, in turn, means  that  he
             has only spent half his life lawfully resident in the  UK.   I
             am therefore forced reluctantly to reach the  conclusion  that
             the appellant does not fulfil this requirement of subparagraph
             (a).


         45.  However, I consider that it may be helpful to address also the
             other requirements of paragraph 399A.  It is worth noting that
             the Upper Tribunal in its Decision  questions  the  degree  to
             which the appellant is truly integrated in the UK but gives no
             specific reasons for this position.  I am of the firm  opinion
             that the appellant is socially and  culturally  integrated  in
             the UK after having been here for the past 18 years during the
             most formative years,  receiving  his  secondary  and  college
             education and working here and making his friendships in  this
             country.  I also find on the evidence that there would be very
             significant obstacles to his integration into Gambia.  This is
             due to the significant lessening of any 'active ties'  he  has
             there in the form of  family  members  as  stated  above,  his
             absence from the country for 18 years  and  the  lack  of  any
             financial support on his initial  return.   He  will  also  be
             returning after separating from his mother for the first  time
             and despite the dependency that they  continue  to  have  with
             each other which I have referred to in some detail  above.   I
             consider that the cumulative effect of all  these  factors  is
             likely to mean that the  appellant's  return  to  Gambia  will
             entail very serious hardship in  establishing  a  new  private
             life which, according to the Home  Office's  own  Guidance  is
             sufficient to show 'very significant obstacles'."

12.  The judge considered Article 8 outside of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    made findings as follows:
         "46. As the appellant does  not  fulfil  all  the  requirements  of
             paragraph 399A of the  Immigration  Rules  I  must  go  on  to
             consider the issue of  revocation  of  the  deportation  order
             under Article 8 outside of the Rules.  In paragraph 398 it  is
             stated that in the evet (sic) that  paragraph  399A  does  not
             apply,  the  public  interest  in  deportation  will  only  be
             outweighed by other factors where [there] are very  compelling
             circumstances  over  and  above  those   described   in   this
             paragraph.


         47.  In this context I consider it is important to  refer  also  to
             paragraph 46 of the judgement of Sales LJ in the present  case
             when it was before the Court of  Appeal  [AJ  (Gambia)  [2014]
             EWCA Civ 1636]:
             'In my view, the UT should have approached the  assessment  of
             the claim under Article 8 by application of the new rules, and
             in particular (since the appellant  could  not  bring  himself
             within paragraphs 399 and 399A of the  new  rules)  by  asking
             itself whether there were very compelling reasons, within  the
             'exceptional circumstances' rubric in para  398,  to  outweigh
             the strong public interest in deportation in  the  appellant's
             case. In addressing that question, the UT  should  have  given
             due respect to the guidance from the Grand Chamber  in  Maslov
             at para 75 of the judgment (reading it in the context  of  the
             general guidance given by the Grand Chamber at paras 68-76  of
             the judgment), but as a matter to be brought into the  overall
             assessment and balanced against the strong public interest  in
             deportation to which the UK Borders Act 2007 and the new rules
             give expression. On a proper approach under the new rules,  in
             relation to a person assessed  to  have  active  ties  to  his
             country of citizenship, without a relevant family life in  the
             United Kingdom and whose serious offending had  occurred  when
             he was an adult, I think the more natural conclusion would  be
             that deportation would be found to be justified in a case like
             this.'


         48.  Taking this approach I find that on the  evidence  as  it  now
             stands that the appellant no longer has the active  ties  with
             Gambia for the reasons already  given.   His  only  connection
             with Gambia was his uncle and two aunts on the findings of the
             Upper Tribunal Decision in 2015.  His uncle  has  since  died,
             one aunt is in Senegal for medical  treatment  and  the  other
             aunt is elderly and in poor health as  adduced  by  a  medical
             report that  has  been  submitted  again  in  the  appellant's
             supplementary bundle.  The other major factor is that  I  find
             that the appellant does have a 'relevant family  life  in  the
             UK'.  His mother is  now  dependant  (sic)  on  him.   She  is
             mentally ill and recently had a major  brain  operation.   The
             appellant is a young adult  who  has  always  lived  with  his
             mother and clearly has a level of emotional dependency on  her
             as well as being her primary carer.   He  has  not  formed  an
             independent family unit and as it was  held  in  the  case  of
             Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 639  at  paragraph  24  'a  young
             adult living with his parents or siblings will normally have a
             family life to be respected under Article 8'.  However,  as  I
             have indicated above, the elements of dependency  in  fact  go
             much further in this case and are, in my view, a clear  factor
             pointing to there being compelling reasons not to  deport  the
             appellant.


         49.  There is also the fact that the appellant has spent  18  years
             living continuously in the UK during his formative years  from
             the age of 9 and therefore the  guidance  in  Maslov  must  be
             heeded  as  relevant.   At  paragraph  71  the  Grand  Chamber
             indicated that where the person to  be  expelled  is  a  young
             adult who has not yet founded a family the  relevant  criteria
             are: the nature and seriousness of the offence; the length  of
             the applicant's stay in the country from which  he  is  to  be
             expelled; the time elapsed since the offence was committed and
             the applicant's conduct during that period and the solidity of
             social, cultural and family ties with  the  host  country  and
             with the country of destination.


         50.  In making my assessment under  Article  8  I  must  also  take
             account of the public interest matters set out  in  s.117C  of
             the NIAA 2002.  Clearly, for the same reasons as given  above,
             I find that the appellant cannot fall within the  Exception  1
             set out in subparagraph (4) solely on the grounds relating  to
             lawful residence.


         51.  To summarise, the appellant has been in the UK  for  18  years
             since the age of 9.  He committed the offence, which is  fully
             acknowledged as being serious, when he was still young at  the
             age of 19.  He has committed no further  offences  since  then
             over a period of some 8 years.  At the same time, I have found
             on the evidence before me that the appellant is  socially  and
             culturally integrated in the UK,  that  there  would  be  very
             significant obstacles to his integration in Gambia  not  least
             because of having significantly weakened active ties there and
             that he has a family life with  his  mother  in  the  UK  that
             engages Article 8.  And, most importantly, I find  that  there
             are serious compassionate circumstances in this case  relating
             to the appellant's mother and her dependency on  her  son  for
             her physical and emotional care.


         52.  I have reached the firm conclusion in this case that there are
             sufficiently compelling  reasons  to  outweigh  the  need  for
             deportation on Article 8 grounds.   Accordingly  I  allow  the
             appeal.  An anonymity order has been made previously and  this
             is to continue."

The Law

13.  The statutory scheme for automatic  deportation  of  foreign  criminals
    from the United Kingdom is contained in Section 32  of  the  2007  Act.
    Section 32(1)  in  conjunction  with  Section  32(2)  defines  "foreign
    criminal": a description which it is accepted applies to the  Appellant
    in this case.  The Secretary of State is obliged to make a  deportation
    order in  respect  of  a  foreign  criminal.   The  exceptions  to  the
    automatic deportation regime are contained in Section 33  of  the  2007
    Act.  Section 33(2) provides that a  foreign  criminal  is  not  to  be
    deported where that would breach that person's Convention rights or the
    United Kingdom's obligations under the  Refugee  Convention.   Where  a
    court or Tribunal is required to  determine  whether  a  decision  made
    under the Immigration Act breaches a person's rights  under  Article  8
    ECHR, Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ["the
    2002 Act"] applies.  Section 117A of the 2002 Act states:

         "(1) This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -




             (a)      breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and


             (b)      as a result would be unlawful under Section 6 of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.


         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard -


             (a)      in all cases, to the considerations listed in Section
                  117B, and


             (b)       in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                  criminals, to the considerations listed in Section 117C.


         (3)  In subsection (2), 'the public interest  question'  means  the
             question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2)."

14.  Section 117C of the 2002 Act, so far  as  is  relevant,  sets  out  the
    following considerations to which  the  court  or  Tribunal  must  have
    regard in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals:

         "(1)     The deportation of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the public
             interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ('C')  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


             (a)      C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                  for most of C's life,


             (b)      C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)      there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.


         ...


         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2."

15.  The appeal is against the refusal of  a  revocation  of  a  deportation
    order and Rule 390 applies which reads as follows:

         "390.    An application for revocation of a deportation order  will
                be  considered  in  the  light  of  all  the   circumstances
                including the following:


                (i)    the grounds on which the order was made;


                (ii)   any representations made in support of revocation;


                (iii)   the  interests  of  the  community,  including   the
                    maintenance of an effective immigration control;


                (iv)    the  interests  of  the  applicant,  including   any
                    compassionate circumstances.


         390A.    Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary  of  State  will
                consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies  and,  if  it
                does not, it will only be in exceptional circumstances  that
                the public interest in  maintaining  the  deportation  order
                will be outweighed by other factors."


16.  The relevant Immigration Rules concerning  deportation  and  Article  8
    ECHR are paragraphs A398 to 399A.  Rule 398 reads as follows:

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
                contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the
                Human Rights Convention, and


                (a)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive  to  the  public  good  [and  in  the   public
                    interest] because they have been convicted of an offence
                    for which they  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
                    imprisonment of at least 4 years;


                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive  to  the  public  good  [and  in  the   public
                    interest] because they have been convicted of an offence
                    for which they  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
                    imprisonment of less  than  4  years  but  at  least  12
                    months; or


                (c)    ..., the Secretary of State in assessing  that  claim
                    will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,
                    if it does not, [the public interest in deportation will
                    only be outweighed by other factors where there are very
                    compelling circumstances over and above those  described
                    in paragraphs 399 and 399A]."


17.  Paragraph 399A reads as follows:

         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -


         (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
             his life; and


         (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and


         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
             into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."
18.  There are two frameworks in which Article 8  is  to  be  considered  in
    foreign criminal deportation cases.  First, there are Sections 117A  to
    D of the 2002 Act.  Second, there are paragraphs 398, 399 and  399A  of
    the Immigration Rules (including  paragraph  390  in  this  case  which
    concerns revocation).
19.   In relation to Sections 117A and 117D of the 2002  Act,  Sales  LJ  in
    Rhuppiah v The Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2006]  EWCA
    Civ 803, [2016] 1 WLR 4204 held at [45] that:
     "It is common ground that the starting point for consideration  of  the
         proper construction of Part 5A of the 2002  Act  is  that  sections
         117A-117D, taken together, are intended to provide for a structured
         approach to the application of Article  8  which  produces  in  all
         cases a final result which is compatible with, and not in violation
         of, Article 8."
20.  In NE-A (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 239 at [15] Sir Stephen Richards stated:
         "... That a requirement of 'very compelling circumstances' in order
         to outweigh the public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign
         criminals  sentenced  to  at  least  four  years'  imprisonment  is
         compatible with Article 8 was  accepted  in  MF  (Nigeria)  and  in
         Hesham Ali itself. Of course,  the  provision  to  that  effect  in
         Section 117C (6) must not  be  applied  as  if  it  contained  some
         abstract statutory formula. The context is that  of  the  balancing
         exercise under Article 8, and the 'very  compelling  circumstances'
         required are circumstances sufficient to outweigh the strong public
         interest in the deportation of the foreign criminals concerned".
21.  Furthermore, although Section 117C (6) of the 2002 Act applies  on  its
    face to people who  have  been  sentenced  to  more  than  four  years'
    imprisonment, the Court of Appeal has held that the  words  "or  unless
    there are very compelling circumstances, over and  above  Exceptions  1
    and 2 "are to be read into the end of Section 117C(3) in order for that
    Section to be complied with Article 8: NA  (Pakistan)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662.   In MF (Nigeria)  v
    The Home Office Lord Dyson MR held at [44]:
         "... the new rules are a complete  code  and  ...  the  exceptional
         circumstances to be considered in the  balancing  exercise  involve
         the application of  a  proportionality  test  as  required  by  the
         Strasbourg jurisprudence".

22.  In Ali v Home Secretary [2016] UKSC 60, [2016] 1 WLR  4799,  Lord  Reed
    JSC, with whom the other members of the  Court  agreed,  explained  (at
    paragraph 38):

         "The implication of the new rules is that paragraphs 399  and  399A
         identify particular categories of case in which  the  Secretary  of
         State accepts that the public interest in the  deportation  of  the
         offender is outweighed under article 8 by  countervailing  factors.
         Cases not covered by those rules (that is to say, foreign offenders
         who have received sentences of at least four  years,  or  who  have
         received sentences of between 12 months and four  years  but  whose
         private or family life does not meet the requirements of paragraphs
         399 and 399A) will be dealt with on the  basis  that  great  weight
         should generally be given to the public interest in the deportation
         of such offenders, but  that  it  can  be  outweighed,  applying  a
         proportionality test, by very compelling  circumstances:  in  other
         words, by a very strong claim indeed, as Laws LJ put it in  the  SS
         (Nigeria) case [2014] 1 WLR 998. The countervailing  considerations
         must be very compelling in order to  outweigh  the  general  public
         interest in the deportation  of  such  offenders,  as  assessed  by
         Parliament and the Secretary of State. The Strasbourg jurisprudence
         indicates relevant factors to consider, and paragraphs 399 and 399A
         provide an indication of the sorts of matters which  the  Secretary
         of State regards as very compelling. As explained at para 26 above,
         they can include factors  bearing  on  the  weight  of  the  public
         interest in the deportation of the particular offender, such as his
         conduct since  the  offence  was  committed,  as  well  as  factors
         relating to his private or family life. Cases  falling  within  the
         scope of section 32 of the 2007 Act in which the public interest in
         deportation is outweighed, other than those specified  in  the  new
         rules  themselves,  are  likely  to  be  a  very   small   minority
         (particularly in non-settled  cases).  They  need  not  necessarily
         involve any circumstance which is exceptional in the sense of being
         extraordinary (as counsel for  the  Secretary  of  State  accepted,
         consistently with the Huang case [2007] 2 AC  167,  para  20),  but
         they can be said to  involve  'exceptional  circumstances'  in  the
         sense that they involve a departure from the general rule."


23.   Going on, Lord Reed said this (in paragraph 46):

         "The  special  feature  in  that  context  [viz.  appeals   against
         deportation decisions]  is  that  the  decision  under  review  has
         involved the application of rules  which  have  been  made  by  the
         Secretary of State in the exercise of a responsibility entrusted to
         her by Parliament, and which Parliament has  approved.  It  is  the
         duty of appellate tribunals, as  independent  judicial  bodies,  to
         make their own assessment of the proportionality of deportation  in
         any particular case on the basis of their own findings  as  to  the
         facts and their understanding of the relevant law. But,  where  the
         Secretary of  State  has  adopted  a  policy  based  on  a  general
         assessment of proportionality, as in the present case, they  should
         attach considerable weight to that assessment: in particular,  that
         a custodial sentence of  four  years  or  more  represents  such  a
         serious  level  of  offending  that  the  public  interest  in  the
         offender's  deportation  almost  always  outweighs   countervailing
         considerations of private or family life; that great weight  should
         generally be given to the public interest in the deportation  of  a
         foreign offender who has received a custodial sentence of more than
         12 months; and that, where the circumstances  do  not  fall  within
         paragraphs 399 or 399A, the public interest in the  deportation  of
         such offenders can generally be outweighed only  by  countervailing
         factors which are very compelling,  as  explained  in  paras  37-38
         above."


24.  In paragraph 50, Lord Reed said this about the approach to  be  adopted
    by a Tribunal:

         "In summary, therefore, the tribunal carries out its  task  on  the
         basis of the facts as it finds them to be on  the  evidence  before
         it, and the law as established by statute and case law. Ultimately,
         it has to  decide  whether  deportation  is  proportionate  in  the
         particular case before it, balancing the  strength  of  the  public
         interest in the deportation of the offender against the  impact  on
         private and family life. In doing so, it  should  give  appropriate
         weight to Parliament's and the Secretary of State's assessments  of
         the strength of the general public interest in the  deportation  of
         foreign offenders, as explained in paras 14, 37-38  and  46  above,
         and also consider all factors relevant  to  the  specific  case  in
         question. The critical issue for the  tribunal  will  generally  be
         whether, giving due weight to the strength of the  public  interest
         in the deportation of the offender  in  the  case  before  it,  the
         article 8 claim is sufficiently strong to outweigh it. In  general,
         only a claim which is very strong indeed - very compelling,  as  it
         was put in the MF (Nigeria) case-will succeed."

25.  Lord Reed said the following at paragraph 26:

         ".........In Maslov v Austria [2009]  INLR  47,  paras  72-75,  the
         court added that the age of the person concerned can  play  a  role
         when applying some of these criteria. For instance, when  assessing
         the nature and seriousness of the offences, it has to be taken into
         account whether the person committed them as a juvenile  or  as  an
         adult. Equally, when assessing the length of the person's  stay  in
         the country from which he or she is to be expelled and the solidity
         of the social, cultural and family ties with the host  country,  it
         makes a difference whether the person came to  the  country  during
         his or her childhood or youth, or was even born there,  or  whether
         he or she only came as an adult. Some  of  the  factors  listed  in
         these cases relate to  the  strength  of  the  public  interest  in
         deportation: that is to say, the extent to which the deportation of
         the person concerned  will  promote  the  legitimate  aim  pursued.
         Others relate to the strength of the  countervailing  interests  in
         private and family life. They are not exhaustive."


26.      Lord Wilson JSC,  in  Ali  said  (at  paragraph  70)  that  he  now
    regretted his  reference  to  society's  "revulsion"  (that  being,  he
    considered, "too emotive a concept to figure in this analysis"), but he
    adhered to the view that he was "entitled to refer to the importance of
    public confidence in our determination of these issues".


27.  The 2002 Act and the  Immigration  Rules  are  consistent  and  clearly
    state that it is in the public interest to  deport  foreign  criminals.
    The Act and the Rules provide a  framework  for  the  determination  of
    Article 8 in that context.  There is  some  limited  guidance  on  what
    constitutes "very compelling circumstances" but the exercise is  always
    fact-specific and involves the balancing  of  the  public  interest  in
    deportation with the other factors.  It is clear  that  it  is  a  high
    hurdle to clear.  Jackson LJ, giving  the  judgment  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal in NA (Pakistan) held at [33] that:

     "Although there  is  no  'exceptionality'  requirement,  it  inexorably
         follows  from  the  statutory  scheme  that  the  cases  in   which
         circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  high
         public interest  in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The  commonplace
         incidents of family life, such as ageing parents in poor health  or
         the  natural  love  between  parents  and  children,  will  not  be
         sufficient".

28.  In NA the Court concluded that a foreign  criminal  is  not  altogether
    disentitled from seeking to rely on matters falling within the scope of
    the circumstances described in Exceptions  1  and  2  when  seeking  to
    contend that "there are very compelling circumstances, over  and  above
    those described in Exceptions 1 and 2". The position is that:

         "a foreign criminal is entitled to rely upon such matters,  but  he
         would need to be able to point to features of his case  of  a  kind
         mentioned in Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paragraphs 399 or  399A  of
         the 2014 rules),  or  feature  falling  outside  the  circumstances
         described on these exceptions and those paragraphs, which made  his
         claim based on article 8 especially strong".


    In the case of a medium offender, therefore (as explained in  paragraph
    32):

         "if all he could advance in support of his article 8  claim  was  a
         'near miss' case in which he fell short of bringing himself  within
         either Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not be possible to  say
         that he had shown that there were 'very  compelling  circumstances,
         over and above those described in Exceptions 1  and  2'.  He  would
         need to have a far stronger case than  that  by  reference  to  the
         interests protected by article 8 to bring himself within that  fall
         back protection. But again, in principle  there  may  be  cases  in
         which such an offender can say that features of his case of a  kind
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2 have such great force for article 8
         purposes   that   they   do   constitute   such   very   compelling
         circumstances, whether taken by themselves or in  conjunction  with
         other factors relevant to article 8  but  not  falling  within  the
         factors described in Exceptions 1 and 2. The decision-maker, be  it
         the Secretary of State or a tribunal, must look at all the  matters
         relied upon collectively, in order to determine  whether  they  are
         sufficiently compelling to outweigh the  high  public  interest  in
         deportation."

The Judge's sentencing remarks

29.      In relation to the offence committed by the Appellant which was  an
    offence of grievous bodily harm pursuant to Section 20 of the  Offences
    Against the Person Act, the Secretary of State relied  on  the  judge's
    sentencing comments, specifically as follows:

     "I turn now finally to you, [AJJ].  I deal firstly with the offence  on
         18 April.  This was a  wholly  unprovoked  attack  on  an  innocent
         member of the public.  On the evidence that I have read he was  not
         involved in any way in  any  dispute  with  you  which  would  have
         provoked you into an attack upon him.

     There was a football match and, as often happens, tempers  flared,  but
         you were not on the field of play at the  time.   You  entered  the
         field of play and you struck him once on the jaw which  caused  him
         grave injury.  You fractured his jaw.  It was a displaced  fracture
         of his jaw.  It resulted in the displacement of his teeth.

     Fortunately, the surgery that  was  necessary  has  resolved  in  large
         measure that problem.  The complainant was left, as  far  as  I  am
         aware, with a sensation of numbness in his lip.

     It was a wholly unprovoked attack that caused grave injuries.  Had  you
         pleaded not guilty and been convicted by the jury before me I would
         have imposed a sentence of twenty one months and I have had in mind
         the relevant sentencing guidelines.

     You pleaded guilty and I therefore reduce that sentence by  one  third,
         so in respect of that offence there will be a sentence of  fourteen
         months.

         In respect of the offence of attempting to conceal the weapon,  all
         that I have said in respect of [DA] applies to  you  in  the  sense
         that I suspect that you were present on 6 August, but that  is  not
         supported by then jury's verdict.  I will therefore sentence you on
         the basis that you came onto the scene  at  some  point  after  the
         violent disorder took place.


         There is no fair basis on which I could conclude  that  the  weapon
         that you sought to conceal with your colleagues was the weapon that
         was used to stab [IG].  Were I able to reach the conclusion that it
         was the sentence would be longer.
         It was in my judgment, however,  one  of  the  weapons  carried  on
         Western Road.  There would be no other logical reason for  you  and
         your colleagues and the others who were present seeking to  conceal
         it.  So in respect of that offence, given the sentence that I  have
         imposed today as far as the 18 April offence is concerned, there is
         no sentence other than an immediate custodial sentence  that  would
         be appropriate.


         Were it the only offence that you stood to be sentenced for and had
         you spent time in custody and on tag in the same way that your  co-
         defendant on this charge has, then I would have imposed  some  form
         of community disposal, but in view of the fact of  your  conviction
         on the 18 April offence, it seems to me that the  only  sentence  I
         can impose is one of immediate custody  and  the  sentence  that  I
         impose is the shortest that I feel meets the gravity of the offence
         and that is one month and because that is for an entirely  separate
         matter it will be consecutive to the fourteen months on  the  first
         matter.


         So the total sentence is fifteen months of  which  you  must  serve
         precisely half, which is seven and a half months, from  which  will
         be deducted the 155 days that I am told you have already  spent  on
         remand."

The Grounds of Appeal

30.  Ground 1 is defined as a misapplication of the unduly harsh test.   The
    grounds assert  that  the  judge  erred  in  defining  "unduly  harsh".
    However, I do not see an attempt by the judge to  define  unduly  harsh
    and the test was not applicable in this case.  There  is  reference  to
    very serious hardship in the  grounds  and  this  is  likely  to  be  a
    reference to the findings of the judge at [45] in the context  of  very
    significant obstacles.  The grounds  are  wrong  to  suggest  that  the
    appeal was allowed on the basis that the judge found that  there  would
    be "very serious hardship" on return.  What is clear is that  there  is
    no properly articulated challenge to the  finding  of  the  judge  that
    there will be very significant obstacles to integration. On  the  basis
    that the grounds are an attack on the judge's finding  that  there  are
    very significant obstacles to  integration,  the  challenge  is  poorly
    articulated and without substance. It is not capable on the face of  it
    of establishing an error of law. The point was  not  expanded  upon  in
    oral submissions by Mr Avery.

31.  Paragraph 3 of ground 1 is a challenge to  the  conclusion  that  there
    are very compelling circumstances. It is argued that they do not  arise
    from a commonplace incident such as aging parents in poor  health.  The
    challenge  ignores  that  the  judge  found  family  life  between  the
    Appellant and his mother in the Kugathas sense to  which  there  is  no
    properly articulated challenge.

32.  Paragraphs 4 and 5  assert  that  there  is  no  good  reason  why  the
    Appellant's mother could not be cared for by those who  cared  for  her
    when the Appellant was in prison. This does not take into  account  the
    unchallenged findings of  the  judge  in  respect  of  the  significant
    deterioration in her health and that dependency was not simply that  of
    a physical of practical nature.   Paragraph 6 is a bare assertion  that
    s117C is a complete code.

33.  Ground 2 is headed "Risk of Re-Offending" and asserts  that  the  judge
    was wrong to attach significant weight to the low risk of re-offending.
     Following Ali, the  judge  should  have  carried  out  the  assessment
    bearing in mind that great weight is  generally  given  to  the  public
    interest in deportation if a foreign criminal is sentenced to 12 months
    or more. The First-tier Tribunal  should  give  appropriate  weight  to
    Parliament 's and the Secretary of State's assessment of  the  strength
    of the public interest in deporting a foreign criminal.

The Error of Law

34.  I accept that paragraph 6 of ground 1 and ground 2 generally amount  to
    a challenge to the application of s117C of the 2002 Act (and  paragraph
    399A of the Rules) and  the  assessment  of  proportionality  (and  the
    conclusion by the judge that there are  very  compelling  circumstances
    that outweigh the public interest  in  deportation).  Properly  read  I
    accept  the  poorly  articulated  grounds  are  a  challenge   to   the
    proportionality  assessment.  I  conclude  that   the   assessment   of
    proportionality conducted by the judge is flawed. The judge  considered
    proportionality and very compelling circumstances without applying  the
    principles in Ali and the current statutory  regime  particularly  with
    respect to the public  interest.  The  judge  referred  to  the  public
    interest at [42] stating that there is no doubt that there is a  strong
    public interest in deportation. This underplays the significance of the
    public interest in deportation: the starting point should be  that  the
    deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest  and  it  is
    here where the error lies. This was, broadly speaking, the reason given
    by FtTJ Holmes when granting permission.

Conclusions

35.  The Appellant is a foreign criminal  and  his  deportation  is  in  the
    public interest.  The  issue  here  is  whether  there  are  compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2  and
    found in s117C (3) of the 2001 Act which would outweigh this.

36.  The Appellant has  remained  out  of  trouble  since  2009  when  these
    offences were committed and he is at low risk  of  re-offending.   Even
    considering the period served in custody, this is a significant  period
    of time. I attach weight to this bearing in mind that the risk  of  re-
    offending is only one facet  of  the  public  interest  which  was  not
    properly acknowledged by the First-tier Tribunal.  I  accept  that  the
    FtT did not properly appreciate this.

37.  Whilst the Respondent attempted to deport the Appellant, this  was  not
    successful.  It is stated that the Appellant claimed  to  be  Norwegian
    and this frustrated removal. There is no suggestion that the  Appellant
    was not born in Norway as he claims. I was not referred to any evidence
    on the issue.  It was not raised by  Mr  Avery.  I  conclude  that  the
    aborted attempt to remove him is a neutral point which neither adds  to
    or detracts from the public interest.

38.  This offence of GBH is one of violence.  Mr Avery  could  not  confirm,
    but from the sentencing remarks and sentence handed down, I proceed  on
    the basis that the offence was one under s20 of the OAPA 1861.   I have
    noted the judge's sentencing remarks.  I have taken into  account  that
    the two offences committed are not connected, but  both  are  historic.
    The Appellant was not a juvenile when the offences were  committed.  He
    was a young man, aged 19.  However, he had arrived  here  when  he  was
    very young and this is reflected in  Judge Colvin's findings (to  which
    there is no properly articulated challenge) that there  would  be  very
    significant obstacle  to  integration  and  that  he  is  socially  and
    culturally integrated here (having been here lawfully half  his  life).
    As stated above, if indeed there is a challenge to the very significant
    obstacles decision in the grounds, it  is  inadequately  expressed  and
    does not establish an error  of  law  let  alone  arguable  error.  The
    judge's conclusion in respect of very significant obstacles was open to
    him on the evidence in the light of  the  change  in  circumstances  as
    found since the decision of the Upper Tribunal. (see [41] and [45]).

39.  The Appellant has spent a period of 5 years  here  unlawfully  when  he
    was a child.   An argument founded on a "near  miss"  alone  could  not
    amount to very compelling circumstances, but the findings made  by  the
    judge are matters that weigh in favour of the  Appellant  are  properly
    placed into the mix.  He has a relationship with his mother which  was,
    as found by the judge to of a Kugathas  kind,  where  there  is  mutual
    dependency. The judge made  findings  about  the  Appellant's  mother's
    health and dependency to which there is challenge of substance.

40.  The findings at [38] - [41] are lawful and sustainable.   The  findings
    as made by the judge do  not  suggest  that  the  Appellant  is  simply
    looking after an aged parent in poor health, which would not on its own
    amount to very compelling circumstances.  Due to the  passage  of  time
    and the significant deterioration in the mother's health, it was of  no
    assistance to First-tier Tribunal to  consider  the  care  arrangements
    that were in place when the Appellant was in custody.   The  judge  did
    not make  a  finding  about  alternative  care,  but  he  accepted  the
    Appellant was his mother's main carer and that dependency was not  only
    of a practical and physical nature, but there was emotional dependency.
    Because of the extent and the nature of  dependency  as  found  by  the
    judge it was not necessary  for  him  to  make  further  enquiry  about
    alternative care arrangements.

41.  The judge  attached  significant  weight  to  the  correspondence  from
    University College London hospital  (at  [38])  and  reference  to  the
    Appellant's mother not being able to return home when the Appellant was
    deported. I can envisage cases where  such  a  relationship  would  not
    amount to very  compelling  circumstances,  in  this  case  taking  the
    significant level of dependency into  account  and  the  other  matters
    which  undermine  the  public  interest  (the  Appellant's  social  and
    cultural integration, very significant obstacles to integration and the
    low risk of re-offending) and the principles in Ali,  I  conclude  that
    there are  very  compelling  circumstances  that  outweigh  the  public
    interest in deportation.

42.  When properly considering very compelling circumstances and the  public
    interest in deportation, applying the statutory regime  now  in  place,
    the relevant case law (acknowledging the  high  hurdle  and  that  such
    cases as these are rare), and applying this to the lawful  findings  of
    the  judge,  I  conclude  that  the  circumstances   are   sufficiently
    compelling and exceptional to outweigh the interest in deportation. The
    judge erred, but if I were to remake the decision I would arrive at the
    same conclusion. The error is not material to the outcome. The decision
    of the judge to allow the appeal under Article 8 is maintained.

Notice of Decision

43.  The Secretary of State's application is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 11 April 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
