
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08766/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 July 2018                       | On 19 July 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                 JMS (IRAQ)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ian Palmer, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Burnett sitting at Taylor House on 21 March 2019) dismissing his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ("the Department") to refuse his protection claim  in  which
    he maintained that he had a well-founded fear of persecution or serious
    harm at the hands of a group linked to Al-Qaeda as a result  of  having
    sexual relations out of wedlock with one of their family  members,  and
    that  internal  relocation  was  not  a  viable  option   as   he   was
    undocumented.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Iraq, who claims to have been born on  1
    March 1984.  He is  recorded  as  having  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally on 11 July 2004 and as having applied for asylum on the  same
    day.  He said that in July 2003 he had started a  relationship  with  a
    girl who was a member of an Islamic Fundamentalist group called Jund Al-
    Islam.  The relationship developed  to  such  an  extent  that  on  two
    occasions prior to April 2004 members of  the  appellant's  family  had
    visited family members of the girlfriend  to  ask  permission  for  the
    appellant to marry  her.   But  on  both  occasions  the  proposal  was
    refused.  On 22 April 2004 the appellant claimed  that  he  received  a
    message from his girlfriend to come and see her at her home, as she was
    alone.  They had sexual intercourse, and when he left her house he  was
    seen by a relative of the girl.  He heard shortly thereafter  that  she
    had been killed by her father and brothers because  she  had  lost  her
    virginity to him.  He decided to leave Iraq on 25 April 2004 because he
    feared that his life was in danger.

 3. The Department refused the asylum claim on credibility grounds, and the
    appellant's appeal against the refusal came  before  Adjudicator  Moore
    sitting at Birmingham on 12 November 2004.  In a  decision  promulgated
    on 25 November 2004, Adjudicator Moore gave his reasons for  dismissing
    the  appeal.   He  found  that  the  appellant's  claim  regarding  the
    relationship, the alleged sexual intercourse and the reasons  for,  and
    the nature of, his departure from  Iraq  lacked  credibility  and  were
    unsupported by any credible evidence.

 4. The appellant became appeal-rights  exhausted  on  4  March  2005.  The
    appellant presented further submissions in January 2012, relying  on  a
    newspaper article offering a US $50,000 reward  for  information  about
    his whereabouts that had been purportedly  carried  in  a  local  Iraqi
    newspaper on 20 January 2011.  He said that his  brother  in  Iraq  had
    sent it to him.   The  further  submissions  based  on  this  newspaper
    article were refused.

 5. In 2016, the appellant's legal representatives commissioned  an  expert
    report from Sheri Laizer in support of a fresh asylum  claim,  and  she
    produced  her  report  on  10  November  2016.   She  opined  that  the
    appellant's appearance in the newspaper article of 20 January 2011  was
    genuine. She said that the Jund Al-Islam group was  a  very  well-known
    Sunni Islamic militant group in the Kurdish region that was  linked  to
    Al-Qaeda, and that it was plausible that they would  kill  a  girl  for
    bringing shame on  her  family  through  sexual  relations  outside  of
    marriage; and thus that the appellant would remain at risk  of  violent
    retribution for violating the honour of her family.

 6. On 26 June 2018 the Department gave  their  reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellant's fresh claim for asylum.  On the topic of  re-documentation,
    the Department said that he could attempt to obtain his  CSID  card  at
    the Iraqi Embassy in London, or alternatively he could obtain  it  from
    the KRG's Bureau for Migration Displacement, or at an UNHCR  Assistance
    Centre, once he had returned to the KRG.



The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. Both parties  were  legally  represented  before  Judge  Burnett.   The
    appellant's solicitors filed a bundle of  documents  containing,  among
    other things, a signed witness statement  from  the  appellant  and  an
    expert report from Alison Pargeter dated 29 July 2018.

 8. On the topic of his lack of documentation, the appellant  said  in  his
    witness statement that, as he  had  said  in  2004  during  his  asylum
    interview, he had left his only form of identification in Iraq.   Since
    then he had attempted to obtain Iraqi identification.  On  29  November
    2018 he had gone to the Iraqi Embassy to ask for an Iraqi passport.  He
    was asked whether he had any proof of his nationality.  All he had  was
    his Home Office ID, which he gave to them.  He was told that he  needed
    his original documents and without them he could not  prove  his  Iraqi
    nationality.

 9. In section 9 of her report, Mr Pargeter  said  that  a  CSID  card  was
    required if one was applying for a  passport.   The  Iraqi  Embassy  in
    London was clear that in  order  to  acquire  a  new  passport  it  was
    necessary to provide one's original CSID.  However, the  Iraqi  Embassy
    could provide the appellant with a laissez  passer,  provided  that  he
    could confirm his nationality  and  personal  details.   These  details
    would need to be checked with the relevant Civil Status Directorate  in
    Iraq, which in his case was the  Directorate  in  Suleimania  where  he
    would have been registered.  The relevant Directorate should be able to
    ascertain his details from his name and place of birth.  Once the Iraqi
    authorities had retrieved his details, he should be able  to  obtain  a
    laissez passer to enable him to travel to Iraq.  Once there,  he  could
    apply for a replacement CSID.  Acquiring a replacement CSID should  not
    be  problematic  and  could  be  done  from  his  local  Civil   Status
    Directorate.

10. In his subsequent decision, the Judge found at [72] that the  appellant
    was not in a relationship with a girl who  was  later  killed,  and  he
    found that her family was not now  seeking  the  appellant  to  revenge
    their  honour.   The  Judge  turned  to  consider  the  issue  of   re-
    documentation. He said at [73]:

         "The appellant states that he was asked for his original  documents
         and that the Home Office ID he gave was  not  sufficient  and  that
         without original documents he could not prove his  nationality.   I
         note that this evidence does not sit with what Ms  Pargeter  stated
         in her expert report and which I have set out above.   Ms  Pargeter
         suggests that the appellant should be able to get ID  documents  by
         stating where he is  from  and  giving  his  date  of  birth.   The
         appellant also has his brother in Iraq who could assist with his re-
         documentation, although I note the  appellant  states  they  cannot
         help him.  I accept the appellant attended  the  Embassy,  but  the
         visit ads little to his claim as to the suggestion  that  he  could
         not be re-documented."

11. At [74], the Judge cited the Country Guidance case of AAH (Iraqi  Kurds
    - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] 00212 (IAC) and set out the  head
    note.  The Judge continued at [75]:

         "I note that the Guidance states that  a  laissez  passer  will  be
         taken away at Baghdad despite  what  Ms  Pargeter  asserts  in  her
         expert opinion.  However, she states that the appellant  should  be
         able to get documentation from the directorate from his area.   The
         appellant has his brother in Iraq (in the IKR (KRI)) who can assist
         him with his re-documentation.  The appellant stated that he was in
         contact with his brother a week ago.  There is no good reason  that
         the appellant should not be able to obtain the  help  he  needs  in
         Iraq with the process.  I  conclude  that  the  appellant  can  re-
         document himself.  I conclude that the appellant is not at risk  of
         ill-treatment or persecution in Iraq."

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

12. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal,  but  was
    allowed by Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith on 5 June 2019,  for  the
    following reasons:

         "The unusual feature of this case is that the  appellant  seeks  to
         challenge the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that
         the Judge preferred the evidence of the appellant's own expert,  Ms
         Pargeter, to the relevant country guidance.  Ms Pargeter  concluded
         the appellant would be able to obtain a  CSID  with  relative  ease
         (see [73]). Although the Judge quoted  extensively  from  the  head
         notes in AA (Article 15C) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT  544  (IAC)  and  AAH
         (Iraqi Kurds - internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00212
         (IAC), he arguably failed to  engage  with  the  specifics  of  the
         likely process the appellant would have to follow in order  to  re-
         document himself ...

         The other grounds have less  merit  and  amount  to  no  more  than
         disagreements with  the  legitimate  findings  of  fact.   However,
         permission is granted on all grounds."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

13. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr  Palmer,  who  did  not  appear  below,  focused  on  Ground  2
    (Misdirection  on  Country  Guidance  and  failure  to  follow  Country
    Guidance, regarding the appellant's ability to document himself in  the
    UK), and Ground 3 (Misdirection  on  country  evidence  or  failure  to
    follow Country Guidance regarding the appellant's ability  to  document
    himself in Iraq).   Mr Whitwell submitted that the findings made by the
    Judge on the appellant's ability to re-document  himself  did  not  run
    counter to the guidance given in AAH.  While his reasoning  was  brief,
    it was adequate.

Discussion

14. Ground 1 relates to  the  Judge's  conclusion  on  the  core  claim  at
    paragraph [72].  It is pleaded that, having accepted  a  key  piece  of
    evidence in the appeal and having found that the country  evidence  was
    supportive of  the  appellant's  account,  the  Judge  had  nonetheless
    impermissibly  relied  on  speculation  in  rejecting  the  appellant's
    account of past persecution and future risk.

15. I consider that Ground 1 is no more than an expression of  disagreement
    with findings that were open to the Judge  for  the  reasons  which  he
    gave.  His conclusion was reached after careful  consideration  of  the
    two expert reports.  On the topic of the newspaper article of 2011,  Ms
    Pargeter's report was helpful to the appellant's case in some respects,
    but unhelpful in  other  respects.   The  Judge's  findings  reasonably
    reflect this dichotomy.  On the one hand, he  was  persuaded  that  the
    newspaper in question was a genuine, low circulation  publication;  and
    that an article had been placed in the newspaper  in  2011  offering  a
    large  reward  for  information  about  the  appellant's   whereabouts.
    However, in his view, there was a further issue which was whether  this
    advertisement  was  a  genuine  attempt  by  the  appellant's   alleged
    oppressors to locate him with a view to carrying out an honour killing,
    or whether the advertisement had been planted to buttress a  fabricated
    claim.

16. The Judge noted at [62] that Ms Pargeter observed that it seemed rather
    surprising  that  they  would  choose  to  place   a   missing   person
    advertisement in a local newspaper "so many  years  after  the  event",
    especially if the event would have been considered taboo and  shameful.
    Ms Pargeter also commented that the group had been driven out  of  Iraq
    in 2003, and most of its members had been captured, killed or had  fled
    across the border to Iran.  She said that they  had  tried  to  rebuild
    within the Kurdish region between 2003 and 2007.  After 2011, when  the
    US pulled out of Iraq, the group had started being  active  again,  but
    she said that the group did not have any real presence in  the  Kurdish
    region any more.

17. The Judge observed at [68] that the timing of the  appellant's  claimed
    re-connection with his  family  in  Iraq  and  the  production  of  the
    newspaper article was significant.  It was  odd  that,  if  the  girl's
    family genuinely wanted to find the appellant,  that  they  would  have
    placed an advert in a local newspaper which had a low circulation,  and
    not one which was widely published.  Secondly, the  appellant  did  not
    claim that there had been a further attempt to find him or his brother.
     It was odd that the first newspaper article should be placed in such a
    paper after a period of 7 years.   The  Judge  also  commented  on  the
    contents of the article.  It was  suggested  that  there  had  been  an
    extensive search for the appellant and that all media channels had been
    contacted.  But no evidence of this had  been  provided.   The  article
    asked for information regarding the appellant, offering a reward of  US
    $50,000, and yet there had been no suggestion of any attempt to contact
    the appellant's brother who remained in Iraq: "It  is  very  surprising
    that with such a high reward offered that people had  not  inquired  of
    the appellant's brother."   The Judge also found that the appellant had
    not given  a  credible  explanation  for  not  producing  the  Facebook
    messages which he had exchanged with his brother.

18. For the above reasons, Ground  1  is  not  made  out.  The  Judge  gave
    adequate reasons for finding that the newspaper article and the  expert
    evidence pertaining to it did not salvage the credibility of  the  core
    claim, which Adjudicator Moore had found to be incredible in 2004.

19. Grounds 2 and 3 relate to the issue of re-documentation.  I accept that
    the Judge did not map out what would  happen  in  the  event  that  the
    appellant obtained a laissez passer to  travel  to  Baghdad,  and  then
    sought to obtain a CSID with the assistance of his  brother  so  as  to
    enable him to travel from Baghdad to the KRG.

20. However, as is recognised in the  permission  application,  the  burden
    rested with the appellant to show BOTH that he could not obtain a  CSID
    from the Iraqi Embassy in the UK  AND  that  he  could  not  -  in  the
    alternative - obtain a CSID within a reasonable time after returning to
    Iraq.

21. Under Ground 2, reliance is placed  on  the  following  passage  in  AA
    [2015] UKUT 554 (IAC) at [171]: "In summary, we  conclude  that  it  is
    possible for an Iraqi national living  in  the  UK  to  obtain  a  CSID
    through the Consular section of the Iraqi Embassy in London, if such  a
    person is able to produce a current or expired passport and/or the book
    and page number for their family registration details."

22. The appellant had, on his own account, left his CSID  in  Iraq.   Since
    his claim of past persecution had been rejected, there was no reason to
    suppose that his CSID did not remain in the family home and was thereby
    retrievable.  In any event, the  appellant  was  in  contact  with  his
    brother, who had sent him a copy of the newspaper  article.   So  there
    was no reason to suppose that his brother would be  unable  to  provide
    the  appellant  with  the  book  and  page  number  for  their   family
    registration details which he could pass on to the Consular section  of
    the Iraqi Embassy.

23. The head note  guidance  cited  by  the  Judge  at  [74]  includes  the
    following:

         1.   Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee  (P)
         to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to do so, or do so within  a
         reasonable  time   frame,   will   depend   on   the   individual's
         circumstances.  The factors to be considered include:

           i. Whether P has any form of documentation, or information  about
              the location of his entry in  the  civil  register.   An  INC,
              passport, birth/marriage certificate or an expired CSID  would
              all be of substantial assistance.  For someone  in  possession
              of one of more  of  these  documents  the  process  should  be
              straightforward ...

          ii. The location of the relevant civil registry office.  If it  is
              in  an  area  held,  or  formally  held,  by   ISIL,   is   it
              operational?"

24. It was common ground that the relevant civil  registry  office  was  in
    Suleimania, which has never been a contested area.   So  there  was  no
    reason to suppose that it was not  operational,  and  it  was  not  the
    appellant's case that it was not operational.  Against this background,
    and the fact that he could call upon his brother to send him  documents
    and information from Iraq to assist him in proving  his  identity,  the
    appellant had not discharged the burden of showing that  he  could  not
    obtain a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy in the UK. Thus, any deficiency in
    the Judge's reasoning on re-documentation was not material.

Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  an  error  of
    law, and accordingly the decision stands.  This  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 13 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson




























