
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/08059/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 January 2020                   |On 24 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    r s b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Tramboo, Counsel instructed by MT UK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because the Appellant is an asylum seeker and is entitled to
    privacy.

 2. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 9 October 2019 dismissing the Appellant's appeal against
    the decision of the Respondent on 26 July 2019 that he was not entitled
    to asylum or other form of international protection.

 3. It is a feature of the case that the Appellant has  previously  claimed
    asylum unsuccessfully.  It is accepted now  that  the  Appellant  is  a
    national of Afghanistan who follows the Sikh religion.  He said he  was
    born in 1952 and he arrived in the United Kingdom with members  of  his
    family in June 2014 and claimed asylum on arrival.  As  indicated,  his
    application was unsuccessful and an appeal against  that  decision  was
    dismissed and his appeal rights were exhausted on 11  April  2016.   In
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his  appeal  against
    the first application it was found that he had not established that  he
    follows  the  Sikh  religion  or  that  he  has  been  ill-treated   in
    Afghanistan.

 4. At the hearing of  the  appeal  against  the  "2019  decision"  it  was
    accepted  that  the  Appellant  is  a  national  of   Afghanistan   and
    established that he is Sikh.  This was based on important and plausible
    evidence that was not before the First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  earlier
    appeal and the finding has not been challenged.

 5. However,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dealing  with  the  2019  decision
    followed the finding in the earlier decision that the Appellant had not
    been subject to attacks Afghanistan.  The judge did not accept that the
    earlier decision that the Appellant had not been attacked  was  in  any
    way tainted by the now known to be wrong finding that he was not a Sikh
    and, although the judge noted the diminishing opportunities  for  Sikhs
    in Afghanistan, the judge found nothing to dislodge  the  finding  that
    the appellant had not been ill-treated whilst living there.

 6. It was established at the earlier  hearing  that  the  appellant  is  a
    citizen of Afghanistan but not that he is Sikh.   He  had  produced  an
    identity document describing him as "Hindu".  I recognise that  I  have
    the benefit of information not available in 2016 but it does seem to me
    surprising that a  person  from  Afghanistan  who  followed  the  Hindu
    religion and claimed to be persecuted on that  account  would  see  any
    advantage in claiming untruthfully to follow the  Sikh  religion.   The
    background  evidence  tends  to  show  that  the  two  communities   in
    Afghanistan have a degree of harmony not  found  throughout  the  world
    because they are both too small to ignore each other.

 7. I cannot accept that the  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  not  been
    truthful about his experiences in Afghanistan can be separated from the
    finding that he was not a follower of the Sikh religion.  The  two  are
    clearly connected and one of those  findings  is  now  accepted  to  be
    wrong.  I find that the other finding  should  have  been  doubted  and
    given little or no weight in the starting point because  they  were  no
    longer reliable.  In failing to appreciate this I am satisfied that the
    First-tier Tribunal has now erred.

 8. In the present case the Appellant relied on his own account.  The judge
    said at paragraph 29 that "in the absence of any further evidence  from
    the appellant on this matter, I endorse Judge  Sweeney's  finding  that
    the  appellant  was  not  subject  to  persecution   before   he   left
    Afghanistan".

 9. I am satisfied that this finding is the result of an erroneous approach
    in law.  The judge should have found that Judge Sweeney's  finding  was
    no longer reliable because it relied at least in part on a  finding  of
    fact which may well have been entirely sensible when Judge Sweeney made
    it but is now known to be wrong.  The judge should have  started  again
    and looked at the evidence in isolation.  Given the  finding  that  the
    Appellant is a Sikh there is no good reason to disbelieve his evidence.
     The claims are not extravagant in themselves  or  unlikely  given  the
    background material.

10. There is another point.  The Appellant's children have been  recognised
    as refugees.  Mr Tufan went out of his way to tell me that a reason for
    the Appellant's sons being given refugee status is that  they  gave  an
    account about violence against their  father,  the  present  Appellant,
    which was believed.

11. Whilst it may be strictly permissible  because  each  case  has  to  be
    decided  on  its   own   facts   there   would   something   profoundly
    unsatisfactory in the Secretary of State  believing  a  witness  in  an
    administrative context and then maintaining that the same incident  did
    not happen in submissions in a hearing.  Mr Tufan  very  carefully  did
    not do that.

12. The standard of proof in asylum cases is low.  The background  evidence
    shows that although Sikhs and Hindus in Afghanistan  are  not  refugees
    per se discrimination is commonplace and discrimination is, by its very
    nature, often very closely  allied  to  persecution.   Even  relatively
    minor  discriminatory  acts  can  become  persecution   if   they   are
    unrelenting.  Rather than follow in  the  earlier  decision  the  judge
    should have applied the low standard of proof to the evidence including
    the background material and should have allowed the appeal.

13. I find the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in  following  findings  of
    fact that should not have  been  followed  rather  than  assessing  the
    evidence.  I set aside its decision.

14. I also find, given the low standard of proof and the fact that there is
    no proper  basis  for  challenging  the  important  evidence  which  is
    inherently believable, the appeal should have been allowed.

    Notice of Decision

15. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal because it erred in
    law and I substitute the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 January 2020                |

