
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/08230/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21 December 2018                      | On 14 January 2019               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                SS (Pakistan)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Iengar, Counsel instructed by SMA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr David Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Parkes sitting at Birmingham on 31 August 2018)  dismissing  her
    appeal against the refusal of her protection and  human  rights  claims
    which she had brought on the basis  that  she  faced  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm on return to Pakistan as a lone  woman  with  a  dependent
    child.  The First-tier Tribunal made  an  anonymity  direction  in  the
    appellant's favour, and I consider that  it  is  appropriate  that  the
    appellant continues to enjoy anonymity for  these  proceedings  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.



Relevant Background Facts

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, whose  date  of  birth  is  18
    November 1986.  On 11 December  2013  the  appellant  married  "MH",  a
    Spanish national.  The appellant came to the United Kingdom on 7  April
    2016 on a valid visa to join MH in the UK.

 3. As summarised in the decision letter of 10 August 2017, the appellant's
    case was that she stayed with MH for one week.  He then left her at the
    home of a woman, "KB".  MH would visit the appellant at  KB's  home  on
    weekends only.  She did not have sexual relations with her husband, but
    instead she began a relationship with a man named F, who was  a  friend
    of MH's and was also known to KB.  F would visit her once  or  twice  a
    week whilst KB was visiting her mother.

 4. On 2 December 2016 MH came to KB's home  unexpectedly.   He  found  the
    appellant and F sitting in the same room on a bed.  The  appellant  was
    wearing her head scarf.  He asked her what F was  doing  in  her  room.
    She said nothing, but F said that they were in a  relationship.   There
    was a fight, following which MH divorced her on  the  spot  and  F  ran
    away.  She has not seen or heard  from  F  since.   At  the  time,  the
    appellant was 7-8 months' pregnant.

 5. MH knew that she was pregnant in July/August 2016 because she had  told
    MH about her relationship with F, and he had said to her that the child
    must be from F (AIR Q128-129).  Alternatively, MH did  not  know  about
    her relationship with F until December 2016 when he found them together
    (AIR Q126).

 6. The respondent rejected the appellant's asylum claim as her account was
    considered  to  be  internally   inconsistent,   vague,   evasive   and
    incoherent.  Accordingly,  the  respondent  did  not  accept  that  her
    husband had left her, or that her family in Pakistan had threatened  to
    kill her because she had had an extra-marital affair.

 7. The  appellant's  appeal  first  came  before  Judge  Juss  sitting  at
    Birmingham on 22 September 2017.  In his subsequent decision,  he  gave
    his reasons for dismissing the appeal on the ground that the  appellant
    was not credible.  His decision was overturned on error of law  grounds
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul in a decision promulgated on  19  April
    2018.  He remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing on all issues.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier  Tribunal  following
Remittal

 8. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Parkes.   Ms  Iengar
    of Counsel appeared on behalf of the appellant.

 9. In his subsequent decision, Judge Parkes  set  out  the  background  at
    paragraphs [7]-[10].  He summarised the appellant's  case  as  follows:
    "As an unmarried mother without male support, the appellant's  case  is
    that she cannot return to Pakistan where, in addition to  the  problems
    that single mothers in her situation face, her family believe that  she
    has dishonoured them and she would be a risk from that quarter too."

10. At paragraphs [11]-[16], the Judge summarised the evidence given at the
    hearing,  including  some  of  the  appellant's   answers   in   cross-
    examination.  The appellant said that she was still living with KB, but
    KB was not present to give evidence as she cared for her elderly father
    and she could not leave him alone.

11. The Judge noted that the bundle of documents compiled for  the  hearing
    included a decree nisi dated 29 August 2018.  He  observed  that  there
    were no other related documents, such as  the  divorce  petition.   The
    Judge recorded the appellant's evidence as being that her  husband  had
    said that he wanted a divorce "with no conditions".   She  believed  it
    was her fault, and so she did not want to complicate things, and so she
    just signed the papers.  She maintained that F, not MH, was the  father
    of her child.  She was asked why therefore at questions 73  and  75  of
    her substantive interview she had  said  that  she  did  not  know  the
    child's paternity.   The  appellant  replied  that  it  was  her  first
    interview, and so she had got worried and  answered  the  questions  in
    that way.

12. The Judge set out his findings at paragraphs [17]-[26].   At  paragraph
    [19], he said the absence of KB was  a  concern,  and  it  reduced  the
    weight that could be attached to her evidence.  At paragraph  [20],  he
    said that he could not see how the appellant's  differing  accounts  in
    interview and oral  evidence  could  be  reconciled  with  each  other.
    Clearly, the appellant, while married and living in the UK  at  a  time
    when her spouse could be the father, had conceived a  child  and  given
    birth.  There was no  father  named  on  the  birth  certificate.   She
    maintained that there had been difficulties over translation, but  this
    did not explain the clear differences between her answers in  interview
    or the differences in the appellant's evidence at the hearing.

13. At paragraph [21], he addressed the claim that F had  disappeared.  The
    Judge observed that if the appellant had  so  wished,  she  could  have
    enlisted the help of the CSA to locate F, and it was  not  obvious  why
    this had not been done, bearing in mind the issues and  the  fact  that
    she  had  the  benefit  of  legal  representation:  "Conveniently   the
    appellant did not have DNA evidence of available, and I do not rule out
    the possibility that this has been done to frustrate a full examination
    of the facts."

14. At paragraph [22], the Judge said that there was no  dispute  that  the
    appellant was divorced, but it was not clear why the appellant had  not
    provided evidence of the petition and any  allegations  that  may  have
    been made by her husband against her,  and  whether  there  was  a  co-
    respondent to the divorce.  Given that the divorce documentation  would
    have included contact details for the ex-husband, it appeared  that  no
    effort had been made to obtain DNA evidence from him either,  and  this
    reinforced his view that this was a matter  that  the  appellant  would
    prefer not to have resolved.

15. At paragraph [23], the Judge observed that if the appellant had  had  a
    child outside marriage, then it was clear that she would be  in  danger
    in Pakistan.   The evidence did not show that  the  appellant  had  the
    level of education or  resources  that  would  enable  her  to  support
    herself as a lone  woman  or  to  relocate.   The  Judge  continued  in
    paragraph [24]: "However, the appellant's  evidence  is  confusing  and
    contradictory, and relevant supporting evidence in the form  of  a  DNA
    test has not been sought.  Given the difficulties  with  the  evidence,
    the appellant has not discharged the burden of proof.  I find that  the
    appellant has not shown that her child is not that of her husband,  and
    I do not accept the evidence of the threats that she claims  were  made
    against her.  The appellant has not  shown  that  she  is  in  need  of
    international protection on any basis."

16. At paragraph [25], the Judge addressed the issue of  the  child's  best
    interests.   At  paragraph  [26],  the  Judge  held  as  follows:  "The
    appellant came to the UK on a basis that she claims did not  work  out.
    The evidence does not show that her child is not that  of  her  husband
    and I have found that it would be safe for the appellant and her  child
    to return to Pakistan as they would have the support of the appellant's
    family available."



The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

17. Ms Iengar settled the grounds of appeal upon which permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal was sought.

18. Ground 1 was that the Judge had erred in law in not making a conclusive
    finding on the appellant's risk of persecution  on  return  as  a  lone
    woman arriving with a dependent child.  This aspect of  the  protection
    claim did not require any positive credibility findings.  No  reference
    had been made to the  guidance  given  in  SM  and  MH  (Lone  women  -
    ostracism) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 00067 (IAC).

19. Ground 2 was that the Judge had erred in law in making no clear finding
    on whether he accepted or rejected the appellant's  evidence  that  she
    had had an affair with F.

20. Ground 3 was that the Judge had erred in requiring DNA  evidence.   The
    issue of DNA evidence had not been raised by either  party  during  the
    appeal hearing, and it had not been put to the appellant when  she  was
    giving evidence, nor had the Judge raised it as a material  issue  with
    the legal  representatives.   Giving  weight  to  the  absence  of  DNA
    evidence when it was not an issue taken in the  appeal  was  irrational
    and unsustainable.  The Judge had also not considered  the  feasibility
    of either F or  her  ex-husband  giving  the  appellant  permission  to
    conduct a DNA test.

The Reasons for Granting Permission

21.  On  19  October  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  SH  Smith  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons: "There is  an  arguable
    material error of law.  The Judge did not make any findings  concerning
    the central tenet of the appellant's case, namely that, as a lone woman
    returning to Pakistan, she engaged the risk criteria outlined in SM and
    MH (Lone woman - ostracism) Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT 00067  (IAC).   The
    appellant's reliance on that case was clear from the skeleton  argument
    submitted on her behalf.  By failing to make findings pursuant  to  the
    relevant country guidance, the decision arguably  features  a  material
    error of law.  In addition, the Judge arguably should  have  given  the
    appellant the opportunity to respond to the  concerns  surrounding  DNA
    evidence, given the centrality of its absence to the Judge's  dismissal
    of those aspects of the appellant's case  that  were  considered.   The
    ground that the Judge failed to make a clear finding in  this  case  in
    respect of the appellant's affair has less merit."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

22. At the hearing before me to determine whether an  error  law  was  made
    out, Ms Iengar developed the  arguments  advanced  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  On behalf of the respondent, Mr Clarke  submitted  that  there
    were no material errors in Judge Parke's decision.   He  conceded  that
    the Judge ought to have raised his concerns about the  absence  of  DNA
    evidence in the course of the hearing. However, he submitted  that  his
    failure to do so did not have a material bearing  on  the  outcome,  as
    pursuant to section 50(9A) of the  British  Nationality  Act  1981  (as
    amended by the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 at  section
    9) there was a presumption that  the  child  was  legitimate,  and  the
    appellant had not rebutted this presumption by providing  DNA  evidence
    to show that the child had not been fathered by MH.



Discussion

23. Ground 1 is that the Judge erred in law in not making a  clear  finding
    on the central thrust of the appellant's case, and that  he  failed  to
    apply relevant country guidance to this issue.

24. There were two strands to the appellant's case.  One was that she faced
    a real risk of serious harm on return to her home area, because she had
    dishonoured her family by having a child out of wedlock, and  thus  she
    faced a real risk of being subjected to an honour killing.   The  other
    strand to her case was that internal relocation was not a viable option
    for her, having regard to SM and MH, and to passages in the  background
    evidence cited by Ms Iengar in her skeleton argument for the First-tier
    Tribunal.

25. I consider that the Judge adequately summarised the appellant's case at
    paragraph [7] of his decision.  I consider that his summary  adequately
    encompassed both strands of the protection claim.   The  issue  of  the
    viability of internal  relocation  was  only  going  to  arise  if  the
    appellant made out her case that she had had a child  out  of  wedlock,
    and thereby faced a real risk of persecution by her family in her  home
    area, or at least a real risk of social ostracism, such that she  would
    be  compelled  to  live  elsewhere  in  Pakistan  without  adult   male
    protection.

26. The  Judge  made  clear  findings  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    threatened by her family, and indeed that she would be supported by her
    family on her return to Pakistan with the child who had  been  born  in
    wedlock.  Assuming for present purposes that these findings of fact are
    sustainable,  the  issue  of  internal  relocation   did   not   arise.
    Everything hinged on the credibility of the appellant's claim that  her
    child was illegitimate, and that her child was known by her  family  in
    Pakistan to be illegitimate.  The Judge accepted that if this was true,
    she would be in danger in Pakistan and that internal  relocation  would
    not be viable.  In making this finding, he  clearly  had  in  mind  the
    County Guidance case of SM and MH cited at paragraph 6 of  Ms  Iengar's
    skeleton argument.  In finding that the appellant did not have a  level
    of education or resources that would enable her to support  herself  or
    to relocate, the Judge was clearly alluding to sub-paragraph 4  of  the
    Headline Guidance in SM & MH which provides as follows:  "It  will  not
    normally be unduly harsh for the educated, better off, or  older  woman
    to seek internal relocation to  a  city.   It  helps  if  a  woman  has
    qualifications enabling her to get well paid  employment  and  pay  for
    accommodation and child care if required."

27. Ms Iengar accepts that it  was  open  to  the  Judge  to  make  adverse
    credibility findings against  the  appellant  on  the  grounds  of  the
    internal inconsistency and also because a key supporting  witness,  KB,
    was not  tendered  for  cross-examination  on  her  witness  statement.
    However, she submits that the issue of the appellant's  credibility  is
    irrelevant to the issue of the viability of internal relocation, as  it
    is an undeniable fact that the appellant is divorced, and so she  would
    be going back to Pakistan as a  lone  woman  with  a  dependent  child.
    However, as I have already indicated,  this  submission  overlooks  the
    fact that the appellant must also show that the child  is  illegitimate
    and/or  would  be  perceived  by  her  family  in  Pakistan  as   being
    illegitimate.  The appellant's credibility as a witness  of  truth  was
    (and is) pivotal to the resolution of these crucial questions; and, for
    that reason, there is no merit in the submission that the  Judge  ought
    to have considered the issue of internal relocation independently of  a
    credibility assessment.

28. Ground 2 is that the Judge erred in law in not making a  clear  finding
    as to whether, in line with the respondent, he rejected the appellant's
    account of having an affair with F.

29. In South Bucks District Council v Porter (2) [2004] UKHL 33 Lord  Brown
    said at [26]:

         The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and  they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues  falling  for  decision  (my  emphasis).   The
         reasoning must not give rise to a substantial doubt as  to  whether
         the decision maker erred in law, for example,  by  misunderstanding
         some relevant policy or some other important matter or  by  failing
         to reach a rational decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse
         inference will not readily be drawn.  The reasons need  only  refer
         to  the  main  issues  in  the  dispute,  not  to  every   material
         consideration (my emphasis).

30. In finding that the appellant had not shown that the child was not that
    of her husband, and that she would have the support of  her  family  on
    return to Pakistan, the Judge adequately indicated that he rejected all
    material aspects of the appellant's core claim, including her claim  to
    have committed adultery; and her claim that her adultery  had  come  to
    the knowledge of her family in Pakistan.  In short, while  it  was  not
    spelt out, it is  tolerably  clear  that  the  Judge  agreed  with  the
    respondent that the appellant had not shown that she had had an  affair
    outside marriage, let alone that the child to whom she had given  birth
    in the UK was not the child of her husband.

31. Turning to Ground  3,  I  do  not  consider  that  there  was  material
    unfairness in the Judge raising as part of his  reasoning  process  the
    absence of DNA evidence to show that the child was  illegitimate.   The
    appellant was advancing a sur place claim, and at  all  material  times
    she had the assistance of  legal  representation  in  the  jurisdiction
    where her protection claim was said to have arisen.  It was open to the
    Judge to comment on the absence of supporting  evidence  which  in  his
    view could reasonably  had  been  expected  to  have  been  sought  and
    obtained by the appellant on the advice of, and with the assistance of,
    her legal representatives. It was open to the Judge  to  find  that  it
    would have been  feasible  for  the  appellant  to  have  obtained  DNA
    evidence from F through employing the services of the CSA to trace him.

32. Section 50(9A) of the British Nationality Act 1981 provides  that,  for
    the purposes of this Act, a child's father is - "(a)  the  husband,  at
    the time of the child's birth, of the  woman  who  gave  birth  to  the
    child, or ... (c) where none of paragraphs (a)-(ba) applies,  a  person
    who satisfies prescribed requirements as to proof of paternity."

33. The presumption  of  legitimacy  is  a  well-known  principle  in  this
    jurisdiction.  Its  recognition  is  not  confined   to   the   British
    Nationality Act 1981. The child  is  presumptively  legitimate,  having
    been born in the UK while the appellant was married to her EEA national
    sponsor husband.  It was not essential that the appellant  should  have
    obtained DNA evidence to prove illegitimacy to the  lower  standard  of
    proof, and the Judge did not state that it was.  As  he  indicated,  it
    was open to her to prove illegitimacy through other credible sources of
    evidence.  However, for the reasons given by the Judge elsewhere in his
    decision, there were not any other  credible  sources  of  evidence  to
    establish that the child was illegitimate. In addition to her  evidence
    being internally discrepant  and  KB  not  being  tendered  for  cross-
    examination, there had been no disclosure of the  divorce  petition  or
    any other documents supportive of her claim that  the  reason  for  the
    divorce was the child being fathered out of wedlock.  Accordingly,  the
    Judge's observations  about  the  absence  of  DNA  evidence  were  not
    material to the outcome.  The appellant had not in any event discharged
    the burden of proving, even to the lower standard of  proof,  that  her
    child was illegitimate.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 27 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
