
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/08306/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 November 2018                            |On 21 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 mr S M M R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Wilcox, counsel instructed by J S Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on 1 October  1986.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on a Tier 4 Student visa  on  28  October
    2009 and made a subsequent application as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  and
    then as a Tier 4 Student, which is ultimately refused with no right  of
    appeal on 13 March 2014.  On  30  April  2015  the  Appellant  made  an
    application for leave to remain on the basis of Articles 3 and 8 of the
    ECHR, which was refused and the claim certified. He claimed  asylum  on
    29 December 2015, which application was refused on 14 August 2017.  The
    basis of the Appellant's claim is that he would be at risk on return to
    Bangladesh due to his political opinion as a leader  of  the  Jamaat-e-
    Islami Political Party that he had been general secretary of the  party
    in 2009 whilst attending university.  He had previously  been  attacked
    by members of the Awami League in October 2006, again on 6 January 2009
    and finally on 16 May 2009 before coming to the UK as a student  on  28
    October 2009.  He stated that he and his family had  been  targeted  by
    the police with false claims being made against him and his family home
    being repeatedly raided and that his brother had disappeared.  He  also
    claimed to have written a number of newspaper articles about government
    corruption both whilst in Bangladesh and since he came  to  the  United
    Kingdom. He stated he continued with his political activities in the UK
    where he is director of global fund raising of the Universal Voice  for
    Justice.

 2. The Appellant appealed against the refusal of his asylum claim and  his
    appeal came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Boylan-Kemp  for
    hearing on 25 April 2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on  11
    June 2018, his appeal was dismissed.  Permission to appeal was  sought,
    in time, on the basis that the judge had erred materially in  law:  (i)
    in failing to take account of relevant considerations,  in  particular,
    the corroborative effect of witness evidence from Mr Sirajul Shahin who
    stated that he knew the Appellant in Bangladesh as one  of  the  rising
    student leaders of the organisation then  studying  at  university  and
    dominating student politics in that campus and  Mr  Mahabubur  Rahaman,
    who wrote that he knew the Appellant as both had been  members  of  the
    Dhaka Union of Journalists in Bangladesh and the Appellant was targeted
    by the ruling authority.  The judge at [16] to [17] of the decision and
    reasons had rejected this evidence at [17] as follows: "I find  that  I
    am in agreement with Mr Tallis  (who  appeared  for  the  Secretary  of
    State) that  these  two  witnesses  did  not  add  much  value  to  the
    Appellant's account though only able to speak  to  general  matters  as
    told to them by the appellant and because they did not appear  to  have
    any particular specific first-hand knowledge of the Appellant's alleged
    difficulties in Bangladesh."

 3. The  second  ground  of  appeal  asserted  that  the  judge  had  erred
    materially  in  law  in  failing  to  take  account  of  the   relevant
    consideration that the report from Muhammad Nuruzzaman of  Capital  Law
    Chamber dated 19th April 2018 was an independent report from  a  lawyer
    instructed and approached directly by the Appellant's lawyers whilst he
    was visiting the UK and accordingly the information  contained  therein
    could not reasonably be tarnished by inference that the  Appellant  was
    involved in its production.  Mr Nuruzzaman in his report confirms  that
    an associate from his firm had attended police stations  in  Bangladesh
    with a view to confirming the authenticity of the  FIRs  the  Appellant
    said had been lodged against him and  that  they  had  been  positively
    identified  as  matching  genuine  FIRs  which  was  not   taken   into
    consideration by the judge.

 4. Thirdly, it was submitted that the judge had erred in finding that  the
    e-mail from the Appellant's brother as to the  continued  disappearance
    of another brother was self-serving at [27] which is  contrary  to  the
    jurisprudence SS [2017] UKUT 164 (IAC) and AK Afghanistan  [2007]  EWCA
    Civ 535.

 5. Fourthly, it was submitted that the judge had erred in finding that the
    newspaper articles provided by the Appellant were unreliable  and  that
    he was assisted by his friends in journalism to place these articles in
    the Bangladesh media, in that the judge failed to consider in light  of
    the Court of Appeal judgment in Danian [1999] EWCA  Civ  3000,  whether
    this would, in any event, put him at a risk of persecution.

 6. There was no Rule 24 response lodged by the Respondent.

     Hearing

 7. At the outset of the hearing I informed Mr Wilcox that I did  not  have
    all the relevant documents and it materialised that this was  also  the
    case for Mr  Mills.   Thus  copies  were  taken  of  both  the  witness
    statements of Mr Shahin and Mr Rahaman; the report of  the  lawyer,  Mr
    Nuruzzaman and the expert report of Dr Ashraf Ul Hoque. I then gave  Mr
    Mills time to read that evidence.

 8. Having had the opportunity to consider this evidence, in particular the
    witness statements that pertain to the first ground of appeal, Mr Mills
    stated that the decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge could not  be
    defended.  He accepted that in light of the evidence contained in those
    statements,  the  two  witnesses  were  sufficiently  involved  in  the
    Appellant's political activity at the  relevant  time  and  given  that
    credibility was core to a proper assessment of the claim, this evidence
    was potentially quite  significant  in  corroborating  the  Appellant's
    claim. Consequently, the judge had at [17] of the decision and  reasons
    fallen into  error  in  finding  "they  did  not  appear  to  have  any
    particular specific first-hand knowledge  of  the  Appellant's  alleged
    difficulties in Bangladesh."

 9. In light of Mr Mills' concession that there is a material error of  law
    in the decision of the Judge and with the agreement of both parties,  I
    set the decision aside and remit the  appeal  for  a  hearing  de  novo
    before the First tier Tribunal, to be listed before a Judge other  than
    First tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp.

Directions

(1)  The appeal should be transferred to Taylor House in London due  to  the
fact that     whilst the Appellant lives in Loughborough his  witnesses  and
his legal team are     London based.

(2)  The Appellant's solicitors are to prepare a concise  and  comprehensive
new  Appellant's bundle, which  contains  all  the  material  evidence  upon
which they seek   to rely.

(3)  A Bengali interpreter will be required and the hearing  should  be  set
down for three    hours.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 14 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


