
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08500/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|At a remote hearing via Skype for Business    |                              |
|On 20 July 2020                               |On 30 July 2020               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     EJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wilding, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The  appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Shore sent on 16 March 2020, dismissing  his
         appeal on international protection and human rights grounds.  In  a
         43-page decision the FTT allowed the appeal brought by  the  second
         appellant, this appellant's wife ('A2') on international protection
         and human rights grounds.  This was predicated inter alia, upon the
         FTT's acceptance that their daughter ('D') faced  a  real  risk  of
         serious harm in Gambia  by  reason  of  female  genital  mutilation
         ('FGM').

      2. The respondent did not appeal against A2's successful appeal before
         the FTT.  This decision therefore solely  focuses  upon  the  first
         appellant before the FTT, who is now the only remaining appellant.

Background

      3. The appellant is a citizen of Gambia, as are  A2  and  their  three
         children (D, and her two brothers).  He entered the United  Kingdom
         ('UK') in December 2009 as  a  diplomat  working  for  the  Gambian
         government.  His wife and sons followed him after  this.   The  two
         sons arrived in the UK as very young children in 2011 and 2013.   D
         was born in the  UK  in  2015.   The  appellant  was  convicted  of
         dishonesty  in  December  2014   and   sentenced   to   six   years
         imprisonment.  This related  to  financial  dishonesty  perpetrated
         against the Gambian government whilst working as a diplomat in  the
         UK.  He served three years in prison.  The  respondent  issued  him
         with a deportation order on 10 July 2017.

      4. The procedural history is lengthy and only summarised here.  Having
         each made asylum claims, the appellant and A2's appeals were linked
         before the FTT.  Judge Shore considered the  linked  appeals  at  a
         hearing on 14  February  2020,  when  the  appellant  and  A2  gave
         evidence.  Having set  out  the  background,  the  decisions  under
         appeal, the evidence and submissions, Judge Shore dealt  with  A2's
         appeal first and reached the following key conclusions: she  was  a
         credible witness in relation to the FGM she was subjected to  as  a
         child and the risk of FGM to D, but she was not at risk of  serious
         harm for reasons relating to her husband's criminal  activities  in
         the UK; she and D are at  risk  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
         Reason for reasons relating to the risk that D will be subjected to
         FGM; it would be a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR to remove A2 and
         the  children  as  this  would  result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
         consequences, in the light of,  inter  alia,  the  earlier  finding
         regarding the risk of FGM and the finding  that  it  would  not  be
         reasonable to expect the first child, a "qualifying child"  (as  he
         had resided in the UK for seven years) to leave the UK.

      5. Judge Shore then turned to this appellant's appeal  and  began  his
         assessment with Article 8 of the ECHR, before then turning  to  the
         certification of his asylum claim and Article 3 of  the  ECHR,  and
         reached the following conclusions:

          i) The effect of  the  appellant's  deportation  upon  his  three
             children would not be "unduly harsh" and he did not  meet  the
             requisite threshold in Exception 2  for  the  purposes  of  s.
             117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
             ('the 2002 Act');

         ii) The test in s.  117C(6)  of  the  2002  Act  "very  compelling
             circumstances over and above Exceptions 1 and 2" was not met.

        iii) The appellant's case was correctly certified under  s.  72  of
             the 2002 Act  because  he  was  convicted  of  a  particularly
             serious crime and remained a danger to the community.

         iv) Even if the appellant was able to rebut the s. 72 presumption,
             his asylum appeal would have been dismissed both  in  relation
             to his claim that he is at risk at the hands  of  the  Gambian
             government and in relation to the risk of FGM in  relation  to
             D.

          v) The appeal under  Articles  2  and  3  of  the  ECHR  must  be
             dismissed as they were certified.

         vi) The appeal under Article 8 'outside the Rules'  was  dismissed
             because  of  an  absence  of  exceptional   circumstances   or
             unjustifiably harsh consequences.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

      6. The appellant challenged the  FTT's  findings  and  conclusions  in
         relation to his appeal only.  No issue was  taken  in  relation  to
         A2's appeal, which was of course allowed.  The  grounds  of  appeal
         are fivefold and can be summarised as follows:

             (1)  The FTT misdirected itself when applying  s.  117C(6)  of
         the 2002 Act.

             (2)  The approach to undue harshness was  flawed,  which  then
                  infected the findings on Article 8.

             (3)   There  was  insufficient  consideration  of   the   best
                  interests of the children.

             (4)  The FTT failed to take  into  account  material  evidence
                  regarding  the  appellant's  risk  of  re-offending,  when
                  assessing whether he presented a danger to  the  community
                  for the purposes of s. 72 of the 2002 Act.

             (5)   The  reasoning  given  for  dismissing  the  appellant's
                  Article 3 / asylum claims are inadequate.

      7. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds of  appeal  by  FTT
         Judge Kelly in a decision dated 8 April 2020.

      8. At the beginning of the hearing before  me,  Mr  Wilding  confirmed
         that there was no appeal against the failure on the part of the FTT
         to determine a wasted costs application that had been  made  before
         the FTT.  I was told that  this  was  yet  to  be  determined.   Mr
         Wilding clarified that this was included at [31] of the grounds  of
         appeal as a means of drawing attention to this outstanding  matter,
         and not with a view to alleging any error of law on the part of the
         FTT.  I therefore need say no more about it.

      9. Mr Wilding relied upon the grounds of appeal as drafted.   I  refer
         to his submissions in more detail below.  Mrs Pettersen invited  me
         to find  that  even  if  there  were  misdirections  in  the  FTT's
         decision, these are not  material  because  the  appellant's  human
         rights and asylum claim could not on any legitimate  view  succeed,
         even when the evidence is taken at its highest.

     10. After hearing from both representatives, I  reserved  my  decision,
         which I now provide with reasons.

     11. At the conclusion  of  the  remote  hearing,  both  representatives
         confirmed that they felt able to make  full  submissions,  and  the
         hearing had been completed remotely  in  a  fair  and  satisfactory
         manner.

Error of law discussion

     12. As set out above, there are five grounds  of  appeal  -  the  first
         three deal with Article 8 and then the  fourth  and  fifth  grounds
         address the findings relevant to Article 3 and asylum.  I begin  by
         considering the latter.  When  considering  an  appeal  based  upon
         international protection as well as human  rights  grounds,  it  is
         more appropriate to begin  with  international  protection.   After
         all, if the appellant is  successful  on  international  protection
         grounds, there might be no need to go on to deal  with  Article  8.
         In addition,  the  findings  of  fact  made  for  the  purposes  of
         determining an international protection appeal are likely  to  play
         an important role in an Article 8 appeal.

Asylum /Articles 2/3 ECHR: Grounds 4 and 5

     13. At [186] the judge found that the appellant had  not  rebutted  the
         presumption that he is a danger  to  the  community.   Two  of  the
         reasons offered  for  this  fail  to  take  into  account  relevant
         evidence.  First, the judge observed that "the documents showed  no
         more than a perfunctory engagement with taking  academic  courses".
         The judge has failed to clearly engage with a letter dated  5  July
         2019 from the appellant's offender manager (found at page 1 of  the
         supplementary bundle) that he was assessed as being "a low risk  of
         serious harm to the public, due to zero significant  indicators  of
         risk", albeit a reference to low risk is made at [173.6].   Second,
         the judge's comments that the appellant  "has  never  accepted  his
         guilt" at [173.6] and "does not acknowledge his guilt" at [186]  is
         difficult to reconcile with the FTT's own summary of  his  evidence
         at [68]: "he was remorseful about his Index Offence and its  impact
         on his family and the community...".

     14. As Mrs  Pettersen  submitted,  it  is  important  to  consider  the
         substance of the Article 3 and asylum claims, that  were  rejected.
         Mr Wilding accepted that if ground 5 was not made out,  any  errors
         in relation to certification would  be  immaterial.   He  therefore
         properly focussed  his  attention  on  ground  5  during  his  oral
         submissions.

     15. Mrs Pettersen correctly conceded that  the  FTT  erred  in  law  in
         purporting to dismiss the appeal on Articles 2  and  3  grounds  at
         [188] "as they were certified under s.  72".   They  were  not  and
         could not be certified in this way, and I agree that [188] contains
         a clear error of law.  However, the Article 2/3  claim  were  based
         upon the same asserted prospective risk in Gambia that  underpinned
         the asylum claim.  The error in approach to the Article  2/3  claim
         would not be material if the FTT was entitled to make the  findings
         it did regarding the appellant's asylum claim at [187].   Ground  5
         vaguely asserts that [188] is "perverse and inadequate.  It  wholly
         lacks reasons for dismissing the core of  the  asylum  claim".    I
         have already addressed [188].  The grounds of appeal  are  entirely
         silent as to [187].

     16. During the course of his submissions Mr Wilding agreed with me that
         the appellant relied upon two sources of risk to himself in Gambia,
         in support of his asylum claim, and this mirrored his  Article  2/3
         claim.  First, the risk to him as a consequence  of  the  financial
         dishonesty against the Gambian government and the embarrassment  he
         caused.  Second, the risks that flow as a result of D's risk of FGM
         in Gambia.  Mr Wilding accepted that there was no  clearly  pleaded
         challenge to the FTT's findings as to the  alleged  risk  emanating
         from the Gambian government and focussed  his  attention  upon  the
         second limb to the appellant's alleged risk in Gambia  relating  to
         D's risk of FGM.

     17. Before turning to the second limb and for the sake of completeness,
         I note that the judge gave very brief  reasons  for  rejecting  the
         first limb within [187].  That must however be read  together  with
         [129], wherein the judge made comprehensive adverse  findings.   In
         particular, the judge considered the evidence provided by A2 to  be
         inconsistent on this issue and the claim that there was a risk from
         the government was "undermined to a huge extent by...[the  evidence
         that one of the] co-defendants  returned  to  Gambia  in  2018  and
         suffered no ill consequences,  other  than  an  inability  to  find
         work".  Although these findings were made in respect of  the  claim
         from  A2's  perspective,  they  apply  with  equal  force  to   the
         appellant's claim.  The reasoning on this aspect of the appellant's
         appeal, specific to  the  appellant,  is  sparse.   It  is  however
         important to note that the case was advanced before the  FTT  in  a
         particular way, with a focus upon the consequences for  the  family
         members relating to the risk of FGM for D.  As the judge  noted  at
         [38], the appellants' Counsel's skeleton argument dealt solely with
         the risk of FGM for D.  The judge also made it clear at  [42]  that
         he dealt in more detail with those grounds that  Counsel  chose  to
         emphasise.  The judge  recorded  the  closing  submissions  of  the
         appellants' Counsel in considerable detail at [97] to [115].  These
         entirely focus upon the risk of FGM for D  until  [114],  when  the
         appellant's case under Article 8 (and not  asylum/Article  2/3)  is
         summarised.  When the decision is read as a whole,  and  given  the
         manner in  which  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  vis  a  vis  the
         government was not relied upon in substance, the FTT gave  adequate
         reasons  for  rejecting  it.   In   these   circumstances   it   is
         unsurprising that the grounds of appeal are silent on this specific
         issue.

     18. The judge's  reasoning  in  relation  to  the  risk  posed  to  the
         appellant for reasons relating to D's risk of FGM in Gambia is also
         brief.  The judge concluded that although D and her mother  are  at
         risk in Gambia, there is no reason why the appellant  would  be  at
         risk there without D, as she would be able to safely reside in  the
         UK with her  mother.   Mr  Wilding  criticised  this  as  wrong  in
         principle and relied upon the ground 5 which asserts  that  "it  is
         not clear on what basis the Judge determined that the  daughter  at
         risk ought to remain in the UK with mother as opposed  to  father".
         Mr Wilding argued that it was erroneous for the FTT to 'choose' who
         should succeed in their asylum claim in order to remain in  the  UK
         with D, without giving any reasons for this.   Mr  Wilding  alleged
         that the FTT only dealt with A2's appeal first in order to give him
         a foundation to reject the appellant's asylum appeal.

     19. A decision that deals with two  appellants  with  dependents,  when
         each appellant relies at least in part  upon  materially  different
         circumstances, needs to be carefully structured.  This family is  a
         good example of that.  The appellant is a foreign criminal and  any
         consideration of Article 8 in relation to him had  to  include  the
         strict requirements contained in s.  117C  of  the  2002  Act.   By
         contrast the focus of A2's Article 8 claim lay in the  more  benign
         application  of  s.  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act.    Although   the
         international protection claims of the  two  appellants  were  very
         similar, the  judge  had  to  start  with  one  appellant.   In  my
         judgment, the judge was entitled to start with A2.  After all,  she
         was clearly the primary carer for  D  and  the  children  when  the
         appellant was in prison.  She was able to give first-hand  evidence
         regarding her experience of FGM in Gambia in order  to  demonstrate
         the risk of FGM for D.  It is this  issue  that  took  centre-stage
         during the course of the  appeal  and  that  is  reflected  in  the
         closing submissions of the appellants' Counsel.  These  submissions
         foreshadowed this by dealing with what would happen if A2's  appeal
         was allowed and the appellant's was not.  In all the circumstances,
         it was entirely logical to start with A2's appeal.

     20. Having made the findings he did in relation to A2 and D, the  judge
         was obliged to consider the appellant's asylum claim vis a vis  the
         risk to D, within that context.  The judge had to consider  whether
         this appellant had a well-founded fear of persecution  for  reasons
         relating to the risk of FGM to  D  in  Gambia.   This  presented  a
         straightforward answer: no, because D would not be  in  Gambia  but
         would be in the UK with her mother  and  siblings.   The  surrogate
         protection of the Refugee Convention was  therefore  not  required.
         Mr Wilding did not rely upon or take me to any discrete claim  that
         the appellant feared serious harm to himself for  reasons  relating
         to the desire on the part of family members to subject  D  to  FGM,
         when D was living in the UK and would not be returning to Gambia.

     21. That does not mean that D's risk of FGM in  Gambia  was  completely
         irrelevant - it was clearly relevant to a proper  determination  of
         the appellant's Article 8 claim, which I now turn to.

Article 8 ECHR: grounds 1-3

Legal framework

     22. Before turning to the grounds that rely upon Article 8, I summarise
         the relevant law regarding the correct approach to s. 117C  of  the
         2002 Act in a case like this.

     23. Section 117A(2)(b) of the 2002 Act provides  that,  in  considering
         the public interest question, in cases  concerning  deportation  of
         foreign criminals, the court or tribunal must  in  particular  have
         regard to the considerations listed in section 117C. That  provides
         as follows:

             "117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases  involving
             foreign criminals

             (1) The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

             (2) The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.

             (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4) Exception 1 applies where-(a) C has been lawfully resident
             in the United Kingdom for most of C's life, (b) C is  socially
             and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and (c) there
             would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration  into
             the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

             (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

             (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

             (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
             taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

     24. The correct approach to the unduly harsh test is  now  well  known,
         having been set out by the Supreme Court in  KO  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
         [2018] UKSC 53.  It is self-contained, that is to say it  does  not
         require a balancing of the  relative  levels  of  severity  of  the
         parent's offence.  Importantly, the unduly harsh test  requires  an
         elevated threshold to be met as set out by Lord Carnwath at [23]:

             "On the other hand the expression unduly harsh  seems  clearly
             intended  to  introduce  a  higher   hurdle   than   that   of
             reasonableness under Section 117B(6), taking  account  of  the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word unduly implies an element of comparison.   It
             assumes that there is a due level  of  harshness,  that  is  a
             level which may be acceptable or justifiable in  the  relevant
             context.  Unduly implies something going  beyond  that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by Section 117C(1),  that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn  by  the  section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of
             sentence".

     25. Subsequent decisions of the Court of Appeal  have  emphasised  that
         unduly harsh requires the court or tribunal to focus on whether the
         effects of deportation of a foreign criminal on a  child  would  go
         beyond the degree of harshness which would necessarily be  involved
         for any child of any foreign criminal faced with  deportation:  see
         for example per Holroyde LJ at [34] of SSHD v PG  (Jamaica)  [2019]
         EWCA Civ 1213. As Irwin LJ said in OH (Algeria) v SSHD [2019]  EWCA
         Civ 1763 at [63]: "As a matter of language and  logic,  this  is  a
         very high bar indeed".

     26. It is clear that, in the case of an offender sentenced to less than
         4 years  imprisonment,  even  if  Exceptions  1  and  2  cannot  be
         satisfied, the offender may still avoid deportation  if  there  are
         "very compelling circumstances" within ss. (6) - see NA  (Pakistan)
         v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662; [2017] 1 WLR 207. Jackson LJ emphasised
         at [32] to [33] how stringent a test is in this way:

             "32. Similarly, in the case of a medium offender,  if  all  he
             could advance in support of his Article 8 claim  was  a  "near
             miss" case in which he fell short of bringing  himself  within
             either Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not be possible to
             say that  he  had  shown  that  there  were  "very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2". He would need to have a far stronger case than that by
             reference to the interests protected by  Article  8  to  bring
             himself within  that  fall  back  protection.  But  again,  in
             principle there may be cases in which such an offender can say
             that features of his case of a kind described in Exceptions  1
             and 2 have such great force for Article 8 purposes  that  they
             do constitute  such  very  compelling  circumstances,  whether
             taken by themselves  or  in  conjunction  with  other  factors
             relevant to Article 8  but  not  falling  within  the  factors
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2. The decision maker, be it the
             Secretary of State or a tribunal, must look at all the matters
             relied upon collectively, in order to determine  whether  they
             are  sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  high  public
             interest in deportation.

             33. Although there  is  no  'exceptionality'  requirement,  it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient."

     27. The very broad approach has been highlighted in subsequent Court of
         Appeal  authorities  -  there  is  no  closed  list  of  what  will
         constitute very compelling circumstances and a flexible approach is
         required to both the circumstances and the public  interest  -  see
         Akinyemi v SSHD (No. 2) [2019] EWCA Civ 2098.

Grounds 2 (undue harshness) and 3 (best interests)

     28. The findings in relation to the effect upon the  children  for  the
         purposes of s. 117C(5), the focus  of  ground  2,   feed  into  the
         broader  approach  necessitated  when  applying  s.   117C(6),   as
         submitted in ground 1.  For this reason it is  more  convenient  to
         address ground 2 first.  Ground 2 overlaps with  ground  3,  and  I
         therefore deal with them together.

     29. Ground 2 is multi-faceted and widely drafted.  I  attempt  to  deal
         with all of its strands here.   I begin by noting what has not been
         challenged.  The grounds of appeal do not criticise  the  inclusion
         of [167.1] to [167.5] of the decision, and neither did Mr  Wilding.
         Those paragraphs appear to be based upon a  summary  of  the  legal
         position prior to KO (Nigeria).  Contrary to the what  is  said  at
         [167.1] and [167.4], the  unduly  harsh  test  is  entirely  child-
         focussed and the public interest has no role  to  play.   This  was
         presumably not challenged because it was clearly  included  in  the
         decision as a result of oversight.  The  judge  correctly  directed
         himself to the relevant authorities  explaining  the  unduly  harsh
         test at [168] to [171].  The grounds of appeal do not suggest  that
         the FTT unlawfully imported any public interest considerations into
         the unduly harsh test, and neither did Mr Wilding.

     30. The observation in the grounds of appeal that the  FTT's  focus  on
         undue harshness "is not understood given  that  the  appellant  was
         sentenced to more than four years" is difficult to follow, and  was
         not relied upon by Mr  Wilding.   It  was  important  to  logically
         address the nature and extent of the evidence said to  support  any
         of the Exceptions being met, before the FTT went on to holistically
         determine whether there were "very  compelling  circumstances  over
         and above" the Exceptions.

     31. The point is repeatedly made in ground 2 that  the  FTT  failed  to
         take into account a crucial consideration: this is a case in  which
         D and her mother have been found to have  a  well-founded  fear  of
         serious harm in Gambia, and cannot return  there.   I  accept  that
         this is one of those cases in which deportation  will  involve  the
         complete physical separation of  the  family  members  for  a  very
         lengthy period (at least 10 years before the appellant can apply to
         have his deportation  revoked).   This  was  undoubtedly  a  highly
         relevant aspect of the appellant's case on Article 8 grounds.  I do
         not accept that the FTT's decision "entirely omits"  any  reference
         to this, as submitted in ground 2.  When the decision is read as  a
         whole, it is clear that the FTT  appreciated  the  gravity  of  the
         interference with family life that would follow as a result of  the
         appellant's  deportation.   At  [114],  the  judge   recorded   the
         submission on behalf of the appellant that to allow A2's appeal and
         dismiss the appellant's appeal would result in a "total  severance"
         of family life.  At [173.4] the judge said that he was "very  aware
         that there will be a physical barrier between the appellant and the
         family...".  Further at [194.5], the judge said  that  he  did  not
         make a decision "that effectively splits the  family  lightly"  and
         there would "obviously be a negative  effect"  on  the  family:  A2
         would be unable to visit Gambia because of her  asylum  status  and
         the appellant would be unable to visit the UK.

     32. I am satisfied that  the  judge  properly  took  into  account  the
         practical reality - both D and A2 could not be expected  to  return
         to Gambia even for a visit (based upon his own findings  that  they
         were at risk of serious harm as a result of the risk  of  FGM  upon
         D), and this meant that the family would  be  separated  from  each
         other for a very lengthy period.

     33. Ground 2 criticises each of the findings made  at  [173],  said  to
         support the judge's conclusion that  the  effect  on  the  children
         would not be unduly harsh.

     34. At [173.1] the judge found that "no evidence was presented" to show
         that the appellant's relationship with his  children  "went  beyond
         the normal parental relationship".   I accept that  the  judge  has
         not  employed  careful  language   when   applying   the   relevant
         authorities and should not have used the  phrase  "normal  parental
         relationship".  In my judgment, he was clumsily attempting to apply
         the authorities he referred to earlier to the effect that in  order
         to meet the high threshold there needs to be a degree of  harshness
         going beyond what would 'normally' be involved for any  child  face
         with the deportation of a parent.   The focus is upon the effect on
         the child.  The  more  the  child  is  dependent  upon  the  parent
         emotionally or physically, the more likely it is that the effect of
         separation will be unduly harsh.  A child with  significant  health
         or other needs is likely to be more  dependent  but  as  the  judge
         noted at [128.5], the children are  all  healthy.   The  judge  was
         entitled to find that there  was  no  evidence  that  the  children
         enjoyed anything other than what one would  normally  expect  in  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.  The judge noted that
         there  was  no  dispute  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with the children at [167].

     35. Ground 2 criticises the finding at [173.2] that  "no  evidence  was
         presented as to the quality of the relationship with any child...".
          As Mr Wilding acknowledged, the judge probably  meant  no  'cogent
         supporting' evidence because there was clearly some  evidence  that
         they enjoyed a close relationship.   I asked Mr Wilding to take  me
         to evidence available to the FTT relied upon  to  demonstrate  that
         the effect of the disruption of that close  relationship  upon  the
         children would be severe or harsh, over and above  the  necessarily
         effects caused by deportation.  He was unable to do  so.   He  only
         took me to evidence from an organisation  supporting  family  unity
         for prisoners which highlighted  that  the  family  remained  close
         during the appellant's imprisonment.

     36. Mr Wilding submitted that the  judge  engaged  in  speculation  and
         acted unfairly in appearing to find  at  [173.3]  that  the  family
         relationship "could only be maintained  by  electronic  means  with
         occasional visits to third countries".  Ground 2 alleges  that  the
         FTT did not explore the particularities of how and in  which  third
         country all members of the family would be permitted  to  enter  to
         enjoy a family visit.  I do not accept  there  was  any  procedural
         unfairness here.  It was for the appellant, who was represented  by
         experienced Counsel, to make his case.  In any event, the judge was
         merely observing precisely that which he has  been  criticised  for
         ignoring.  Family life would be  physically  impossible  and  could
         only be  maintained  by  electronic  means  with  visits  to  third
         countries.  The judge did not observe that the  relationship  could
         or would be maintained in that manner.  Rather, that was  the  only
         possible means of maintaining some  form  of  family  relationship.
         The judge was entitled to make such a self-evident observation.

     37. I do not accept the submission that judge's finding at [173.4] that
         A's 2's ability to  care  for  the  children  was  irrelevant.   S.
         117C(5) is entirely child focussed  -  the  judge  was  obliged  to
         assess the effect of the  separation  of  the  appellant  from  the
         remainder of the family  upon  the  children.   It  was  clearly  a
         relevant factor that the children would have  the  care,  love  and
         support of their mother in the UK. That would serve to  lessen  the
         adverse effects of separation from their father. This  is  all  the
         more important in this case wherein the father was  separated  from
         the family for three years when he was imprisoned and there was  no
         cogent evidence before the FTT of any serious disadvantages to  the
         children.

     38. I accept Mr Wilding's submission that it is necessary  to  consider
         the  children's  best  interests  when  addressing  whether   their
         father's deportation would be unduly harsh  on  them.   Mr  Wilding
         submitted that the assessment of the children's best  interests  at
         [173.4] was inadequate.  This was the focus  of  ground  3  and  he
         therefore dealt with grounds 2 and 3 together in  so  far  as  best
         interests are concerned, as do I at this juncture.

     39. The judge correctly directed himself to KO (Nigeria) and was  fully
         aware of the relevant best  interests  principle,  having  directed
         himself to ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 11.  Although the judge
         did not expressly refer to the children's best interests at  [173],
         when the decision is read as a whole I am satisfied that the  judge
         had the children's best interests  in  mind  when  considering  the
         effect of the appellant's deportation  on  them.    The  judge  was
         entitled to find that the children would  be  well  cared  for  and
         loved by their mother in their father's absence.  In addition,  the
         judge had already considered best interests at [142], and  referred
         to best interests again at [194.5].  I am satisfied that the  judge
         addressed all relevant  factors  and  applied  the  correct  child-
         focussed test for the purposes of s. 117C(5).  At  [172]  he  found
         that "the effect will be distressing and unpleasant, but not to the
         extent that it would go beyond 'due' harshness".  As made clear  in
         SSHD  v  PG  (Jamaica),  the  'commonplace'  distress   caused   by
         separation from a parent is insufficient to meet the  unduly  harsh
         test.

     40. Mr Wilding did not take me to any cogent evidence said to  be  left
         out of the judge's assessment relevant to the manner in  which  the
         children would suffer without their father's presence in the UK.  I
         note that D was born in April 2015, at a time when her  father  was
         imprisoned.  He has been in prison for much of her short life.   At
         [172] the judge expressly accepted that the effect  of  deportation
         would be  distressing  and  unpleasant  for  the  children,  having
         earlier accepted at [142] that it was in their  best  interests  to
         remain with both parents.  It is implicit from this that the  judge
         considered that the appellant's deportation would  not  be  in  the
         children's best interests i.e.  it  would  be  harsh,  but  he  was
         entitled to find for the  reasons  provided,  that  the  effect  of
         deportation upon them would not be unduly harsh.

     41. Finally, Mr Wilding submitted that [173.5] and [173.6] are entirely
         irrelevant to s. 117C(5), and the FTT erred in law in  taking  into
         account irrelevant matters.   I  accept  that  the  judge  has  not
         clearly  distinguished  between  matters  that  are   relevant   to
         Exception 2 (effect upon the children)  and  Exception  1  (private
         life) when setting out his findings at [173].  This does  not  give
         rise to any material error of law.  When the decision is read as  a
         whole, it is tolerably clear that the FTT found the appellant to be
         a long way off meeting the requirements of  Exception  1.   As  the
         judge observed at [166], the appellant fell at  the  first  hurdle.
         At [174] the judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet
         Exceptions 1 and 2.  At [173] the judge was attempting to draw  the
         threads together: [173.1-173.4] in  relation  to  Exception  2  and
         [173.5-173.6] in relation to Exception 1.

     42. The FTT provided adequate reasons  for  concluding  that  the  high
         threshold demanded by the test of  undue  harshness  was  not  met.
         Although the FTT's findings and reasons could have been clearer and
         better structured,  the  FTT  has  adequately  explained  why  that
         threshold could not be met in this case.  In any event, there was a
         dearth of evidence available to support the  proposition  that  the
         degree of harshness would  go  beyond  what  would  necessarily  be
         involved for children facing the deportation of a parent.  When the
         evidence is viewed at its highest together with the judge's finding
         that the best interests of the children are to  remain  in  the  UK
         with both parents, the conclusion that the high threshold  required
         by the test of undue harshness was not met, was inevitable.

Ground 1

     43. I now turn to the FTT's  approach  to  s.  117C(6),  which  is  the
         subject of challenge in ground 1.   The  judge  correctly  directed
         himself to the need to consider all relevant  matters  holistically
         for the purposes of s. 117C(6) at [162], [163] and [175].  However,
         the judge contradicted himself by stating that  if  the  Exceptions
         cannot be met the appellant cannot "logically" show very compelling
         circumstances  over  and  above  the  Exceptions  at  [165].   This
         approach is repeated at [174].  These are  clear  misdirections  in
         law.  S. 117C(6) should not be  interpreted  literally  -  it  just
         requires circumstances that are more compelling than  the  existing
         Exceptions - see Akinyemi v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 236, NA (Pakistan)
         and Akinyemi No 2

     44. As Mrs Pettersen submitted, the real issue is whether or  not  this
         legal misdirection is a  material  error  of  law.   I  invited  Mr
         Wilding to take me to the factors and  associated  evidence  before
         the FTT, that he relied upon to support the  proposition  that  the
         appeal could possibly succeed under s.  117C(6),  bearing  in  mind
         that it is an "extremely demanding" test - see MS (s.117C(6): "very
         compelling circumstances")  Philippines  [2019]  UKUT  122  and  RA
         (s.117C "unduly harsh":  offence:  seriousness)  Iraq  [2019]  UKUT
         00123 (IAC), per Mr Justice Lane, the President of UTIAC.

     45. Mr Wilding accepted that in order for there to be a material  error
         of law the appeal must be capable of success on a  legitimate  view
         of the facts  taken  at  their  highest.    He  relied  upon  three
         factors: (i) impact upon the three children, particularly D;  (iii)
         the appellant's lengthy residence; (iii) appellant's  low  risk  of
         offending.  I have already addressed the impact upon  the  children
         when dealing with grounds 2 and 3 above.  That assessment  includes
         the impact upon D, who together with A2, will be unable  to  return
         to the DRC because of the risk of FGM she faces there.  D  and  her
         mother  would  not  be  able  to  even  visit  the  appellant.  The
         separation between the appellant and his family  is  likely  to  be
         sharp, distressing and lengthy.  That is what happens when  parents
         are deported.  Here there was no cogent evidence that the degree of
         harshness would go beyond that necessarily involved for  any  child
         faced with the deportation of a  parent.     This  plight  of  this
         family in not being able to even visit the deported parent  is  not
         unique or uncommon, given the costs and practical hurdles  involved
         in international travel.  As Jackson LJ put it  in  NA  (Pakistan),
         whilst the best interests of children certainly carry great weight,
         it  is  nevertheless,  a  consequence  of  criminal  conduct   that
         offenders may be separated from  their  children  for  many  years,
         contrary to the best interests of those children. The  desirability
         of children being with both parents  is  a  commonplace  of  family
         life. That is not usually a sufficiently compelling circumstance to
         outweigh the high public interest in deporting  foreign  criminals.
         For the reasons I have provided above on no legitimate view of  the
         evidence could it be said that the appellant came anywhere near  to
         meeting Exception 2.

     46. The appellant's residence in the UK from 2009 has included  serious
         criminal offending  which  resulted  in  a  six  year  sentence  of
         imprisonment.  Similarly, on no legitimate  view  of  the  evidence
         could it be said that the appellant came anywhere near  to  meeting
         Exception 1.  That leaves the appellant's low risk.  That  must  be
         seen in the context of the undeniably  strong  public  interest  in
         favour of deportation as a result of the serious criminal  offence.
         Mr Wilding was simply  unable  to  identify  any  features  of  the
         appellant's case of a kind or similar in impact  to  those  matters
         described in the Exceptions, far less  matters  that  go  over  and
         beyond these.

     47. Had the FTT properly directed itself  to  the  need  to  conduct  a
         holistic exercise and consider all the relevant factors relied upon
         by the appellant (even though they did not meet the Exceptions), it
         would have inevitably come to the conclusion  that  the  very  high
         threshold required for s. 117C(6), was not  met.   I  am  satisfied
         that on no legitimate view of the evidence, even when taken at  its
         highest, could the appeal succeed under s. 117C(6).

     48.  It  follows  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  may  have  identified
         misdirections in law but these were not material to the outcome and
         the decision of the FTT is not set aside.

Notice of decision

     49. The FTT's decision does not contain a material error of law  and  I
         do not set it aside.



Signed:  UTJ  Melanie  Plimmer                                     Date:  22
July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
