
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08415/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 October 2017                           |On 18 December 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                    [v s]
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanski, of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, a Home Office presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Details of the Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine, who was born on 1st of  February
    1970.

The Appellant's Immigration and the history of the appeal proceedings

 2. The appellant entered the UK 1999 on the back of a  lorry.  It  appears
    that he was initially detained but  subsequently  released.  In  August
    2011 was convicted of fraud and sentenced to six  months  imprisonment.
    On 6 November 2012 he applied for leave to remain, but this was refused
    on 3 June 2013. On 7 August 2015 he was detained whilst  reporting.  On
    13 August 2015 a temporary admission request was received  but  refused
    on 17 August 2015. On 21 August  2015  he  applied  for  EEA  Residence
    Permit. This was also refused, on 3 September 2015.

 3. Appellant applied for asylum on 20 September 2015. On 19  October  2015
    the asylum claim was refused by the respondent, as was his  application
    for humanitarian protection and / or  for  protection  under  the  ECHR
    articles 2 and 3. A judicial review application was made in relation to
    that decision which resulted in reconsideration on 27th of  July  2016.
    However, the respondent still refused the  application.  This  provided
    the appellant with a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (FTT).

 4. The appellant appealed against that refusal to the  FTT  on  10  August
    2016.

 5. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 21 March 2017 Immigration  Judge
    Coutts (the Immigration Judge) decided to dismiss  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (FTT).

 6. The appellant appealed that adverse decision on 8 August 2017.

 7. An 11 September 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Nadine Finch decided that the
    grounds were arguable in that she considered the Immigration Judge  had
    failed to consider adequately the country information  and  the  expert
    evidence called on behalf of the appellant from a Dr Rano Tureva-Hehne.

 8. Finally, the respondent provided a response to the appeal under rule 24
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  (the  Procedure
    Rules) indicting that the Upper Tribunal ought to uphold  the  decision
    of the FTT. The respondent pointed out that the appellant's account had
    not been found to be credible by the tribunal and full reasons had been
    given for its decision. In any event, the appellant  would  not  be  at
    risk on return to the Ukraine.

The Upper Tribunal hearing

 9. The appellant's representative, Ms Solanki of counsel,  submitted  that
    the assessment of credibility by the FTT was fundamentally  flawed  and
    that the Immigration Judge had failed to deal adequately with the  risk
    on return.

10. She drew my attention to paragraphs 52-54 of the decision  which  state
    that the Immigration  Judge  did  not  accept  the  evidence  that  the
    "Ukrainian authorities" had been in contact with the appellant's former
    wife in the Ukraine as there was "no need  for  them  to  do  so".  The
    Immigration Judge had found it not to be plausible to  think  that  the
    authorities would "waste their resources" in looking for the appellant.
    Moreover, he went on to find that there was no  evidence  to  establish
    that the appellant had gone through court proceedings  to  divorce  his
    wife in 2012. The Ukrainian authorities  not  have  a  record  of  such
    proceedings as the appellant was living  in  the  UK  rather  than  his
    former matrimonial home in Ukraine. In fact, divorce  proceedings  were
    conducted by him in the U K.

11. The appellant claims to be at risk of being drafted into  the  military
    in Ukraine.

12. The Immigration Judge had mistakenly  concluded  that  the  appellant's
    account was incredible because  he  considered  those  responsible  for
    enforcing the draft would not have gone searching for the appellant via
    his former  wife.  Ms  Solanki  considered  there  was  no/no  adequate
    evidence as to the basis for this assertion. Her understanding was that
    no questions were asked at the hearing as to  the  requirements  for  a
    divorce in Ukraine. The suggestion, by the appellant, had been that the
    authorities had visited his home on two occasions. I was referred to  C
    15 in the respondent's bundle, was a copy of the  appellant's  military
    service card. It states that the appellant had  done  military  service
    previously. Ms Solanki also said that it was known that the authorities
    were particularly keen to draft into the military  those  with  driving
    experience; the appellant was one such person.  The appellant had  been
    deemed fit for military service in the past  and  the  maximum  age  at
    which persons were  accepted  for  that  had  been  gradually  extended
    upwards. This was supported by documentary evidence. Ms Solanki  argued
    that her client's documents  were  authentic  and  therefore  could  be
    relied on.

13. I was referred to the country guidance in relation to increases in  the
    draft age in 2014 and 2015. Ms  Solanki  said  that  the  objection  to
    military service by her client related to his Russian orthodox religion
    and his  unwillingness  to  take  part  in,  what  Ms  Solanki  called,
    "atrocities". Ms Solanki was unimpressed  by  the  Immigration  Judge's
    analysis as to whether the appellant's wife was approached in  2015  as
    had been claimed. At this point I was referred to  paragraph  8.1.4  of
    the Country Information Report (at D88 of the appellant's bundle  filed
    in advance of the Upper Tribunal hearing). That report suggests that:

         "... War weary Ukraine is struggling to recruit soldiers the  fight
         pro-Russian separatists in the East,  there  are  reports  of  ill-
         equipped troops and ill-treatment of families of missing soldiers".



14. The appellant may be identified for mobilisation again therefore.

15. The appellant's representative went on to comment that  it  was  by  no
    means implausible for the appellant's former wife to be approached many
    years after the appellant's departure for the UK considering he  was  a
    potential draft evader and that there was a great need for  his  skills
    (driving). I was then referred to paragraph 56 of  the  decision  which
    states that the appellant's situation is distinguished from that in the
    case of OK (PA/01943/20) and to the country guidance case of VB  [2017]
    UKUT 00079 (at tab E in the appellant's latest bundle). I was  referred
    to paragraphs 53 and 62 of that decision, which state that in that case
    the appellant have been prosecuted under Article 409  of  the  Criminal
    Code of Ukraine and according to the Canadian Refugee Board, a  request
    to undertake military service can be by written instruction to attend a
    commissary. All further instructions, such as a medical check-up,  will
    follow. A notice of call up is hand delivered  to  the  recipient,  who
    must sign his call-up papers to  confirm  receipt.  As  UTJ  Finch  had
    suggested, when she gave permission two appealed to the Upper  Tribunal
    to, it was wrong of the Immigration Judge to  criticise  the  appellant
    for not producing signed call up papers when it was known that a  large
    number of recipients ignore such notices, even though they ought to  be
    signed for. It was also pointed out that the Immigration Judge had been
    referred  to  the  relevant  background   material.   The   appellant's
    representative concluded her criticism  of  the  Immigration  Judge  by
    stating that "all findings are fundamentally flawed".  The  Immigration
    Judge failed to consider uncontested evidence  over  the  risk  to  the
    appellant on return  of  having  to  undertake  military  service.  The
    Immigration Judge had been wrong to conclude on the evidence  that  the
    appellant was not at risk on return. Miss Solanki again referred to the
    case of VB and pointed out that the head note (at E 1) dealt  with  the
    risk on return of individuals such as the appellant. In that case  both
    appellants had their appeals allowed under article 3 of the ECHR. Next,
    I was referred to paragraph  71  of  that  decision,  where  the  Upper
    Tribunal which identified certain aggravating  circumstances.  In  this
    case the Immigration Judge  had  not  considered  the  risk  on  return
    adequately or at all.

16. Ms Solanki then went on to deal with the appellant's moral  entitlement
    to  object  to  having  to  "commit  atrocities".  She  made  extensive
    reference to her lengthy skeleton argument before the FTT. She  pointed
    out that there was a state of  armed  conflict  where  atrocities  were
    committed by the Ukrainian government. I was  referred  to  an  Amnesty
    international report (C 10) which evidence this. I was also referred to
    a decision from New Zealand and the leading case of Septet  and  Bulbil
    [2003] UKHL 15.

17. The  appellant  was  an  Orthodox  Christian,  in  addition.  He  would
    therefore be required to carry out acts of violence be contrary to  his
    religious beliefs. He had expert evidence to support his case.  He  had
    produced the expert report at the FTT.  Notwithstanding  that  evidence
    Immigration Judge had gone on to  make  adverse  credibility  findings.
    Because those findings were unsustainable, for the reasons submitted by
    the appellant which went to the heart of the case, I was invited to set
    aside the entire decision and remit the matter to the FTT for  a  fresh
    hearing before a different immigration judge.

18. The respondent on the other hand did not accept  that  there  were  any
    significant flaws in the Immigration  Judge's  approach,  pointing  out
    that the absence of expertise on the divorce laws of  Ukraine  did  not
    prevent the Immigration Judge  reaching  a  common-sense  view  of  the
    matter. The assumption would be that there would be no  record  of  the
    appellant's divorce from his wife and since the divorce had taken place
    some years previously it was not perverse of the Immigration  Judge  to
    find that the appellant  would  not  now  be  sought.  It  was  curious
    therefore that the authorities had gone in pursuit of  the  appellant's
    wife. These findings were perfectly open to the  Immigration  Judge  as
    were findings over the appellant's military record. The  appellant  had
    never done military service in the  Ukraine  but  only  in  the  former
    Soviet Union.

19. Mr Mills also referred me to paragraph 71 of the case of VB.  Mr  Mills
    did not accept that  simply  leaving  Ukraine  would  give  rise  to  a
    suspicion on the part of the authorities. Finally, the  respondent  did
    not  accept  that  the  appellant  was  a  conscientious  objector.  In
    addition, the two cases where individuals had been arrested  for  being
    conscientious objectors appeared to be in very different  circumstances
    from those of the appellant. There was no information in possession  of
    the respondent which suggested that the appellant would be at risk.  Mr
    Mills also submitted that, by and large, members of the Orthodox  faith
    were accepted in the Ukraine and it was for the appellant to  show  his
    Russian Orthodox Church membership placed him at any risk.  Credibility
    findings were for the Immigration Judge and insufficient  material  had
    been placed before the Upper Tribunal to reopen the case.  No  material
    error of law had been established therefore.

20. Ms Solanki provided a lengthy reply, pointing out that  the  respondent
    had not examined the  appellant's  credibility  in  the  light  of  the
    documents. The appellant's expert had done this in his report and  have
    fully gone into the nature of  military  service  in  the  Ukraine.  Ms
    Solanki launched a further criticism of the Immigration Judge, pointing
    out that large parts submissions made  had  not  been  covered  in  the
    decision. The decision produced had been below the level  required  and
    there had been no proper analysis of  the  country  guidance.  The  two
    individuals who had been identified as having been subject to sanctions
    for not undertaking the draft should also have been considered  by  the
    Immigration Judge. Ms Solanki also referred to the New Zealand case  at
    E 29 -ED47 of her bundle. When combined with the expert evidence  there
    was  more  than  enough  information  for  the  case  on  conscientious
    objection to be made out.

21. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as  to  whether  there
    had been a material error of law and if there had been what  steps  the
    Upper Tribunal should take to address that error. Both  parties  agreed
    that if I found material deficiencies in  the  credibility  findings  I
    would have to set aside the decision remit the matter to the FTT  or  a
    fresh hearing a different judge. However, Mr Mills pointed out that  if
    I were simply concerned as to the analysis of the risk on return,  this
    could be a matter for fresh findings by the Upper Tribunal.

Discussion

22. The issues before the Immigration Judge were:

      i) Whether the appellant is a conscientious objector on  religious  or
         political grounds?

     ii) Whether he would be at risk of being forced to  commit  acts  which
         would be contrary to international law?

23. It was not disputed that the appellant was a Ukrainian national who was
    born on 1 February 1970. Nor was it disputed that the appellant was  an
    Orthodox Christian, who had served in the  military  between  1988  and
    1990, whilst Ukraine still formed part of the USSR. During that period,
    he had served in a private-aircraft station in Kazakhstan. According to
    the appellant's skeleton argument before the FTT, it was also  accepted
    by the respondent at page 8 of her refusal that  the  appellant  had  a
    "genuine subjective fear  on  return  Ukraine"  (paragraph  22  of  the
    respondent's decision).  The appellant had come  to  the  UK  in  1999,
    claiming that his involvement with an opposing political  party  (RUKH)
    placed him at imminent risk on return. Although the appellant had  been
    away from Ukraine for more than 18 years at the date of the hearing  in
    the FTT he argued he would nevertheless be liable to undertake military
    service.

24. The appellant has a poor immigration history having been  detained  for
    an offence of fraud by using a false instrument. All  his  applications
    had been rejected in the past and it was not, as I understand it, until
    he had tried a number of bases for remaining UK rejected  that  finally
    claimed asylum. In particular, he had applied in 2012 to stay based  on
    long residence (10 years) and made an application for an EEA  residence
    permit in 2015. As I understand it, the application for asylum was  not
    advanced until 20 September 2015, after these applications had  failed.
    The appellant's ex-wife was contacted in Ukraine in  January  and  July
    2015 (see paragraph 26 of the decision). Therefore, the timing of these
    approaches appears very convenient for the  appellant.  The  respondent
    certified that application as being "clearly unfounded". This  resulted
    in a judicial review application and the subsequent hearing before  the
    Immigration Judge.

25. It is against this background that the Immigration Judge dismissed  the
    appeal before him.

Conclusions

26.  I  share  much  of  the  Immigration  Judge's  scepticism  as  to  the
    credibility of the appellant's  account.  Given  his  poor  immigration
    history and conviction for fraud in  addition  to  the  long  delay  in
    advancing  his  claim,  the  credibility  of  that  claim  was   highly
    questionable. In addition, Immigration Judge had substantial experience
    of this area, having been the judge in  the  earlier  case  of  OK.  He
    clearly demonstrated a knowledge of the issues.  He  also  applied  the
    correct  standard  of  proof  and  was  entitled  to  come  to  adverse
    credibility findings in relation to the  appellant's  account  in  oral
    evidence of the approaches by the authorities which had  been  made  to
    his former wife.

27. However, unfortunately, there  is  insufficient  consideration  of  the
    objective evidence and the extent of the appellant's moral objection to
    undertaking military service. I  am  not  satisfied  Immigration  Judge
    fully took account the gravity of  conditions  within  Ukraine  or  the
    apparently significant risk that the appellant  would  be  required  to
    undertake military service. Unfortunately, his  reference  to  Dr  Rano
    Tureava-Hoehne's report  dated  March  2017  at  paragraph  13  of  his
    decision, was cursory only. There is no analysis and  consideration  of
    the picture that the expert paints in relation to the appellant's case.
    Were the Immigration Judge to have given any  consideration  to  issues
    raised in that report I would undoubtedly upheld his decision. However,
    in the absence of such analysis of the issues, regrettably, I  consider
    that there was a material error of law and that is necessary  to  remit
    this matter the FTT for a De Novo hearing.  Both  parties  agreed  that
    this was the correct course for me to take on finding such an error.

28. I find that there was a material error  of  law  decision  of  the  FTT
    failing to have adequate regard to the expert evidence and accordingly,
    for the purposes of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007
    s.12(2)(b)(i), I have decided to set aside that decision and  direct  a
    fresh hearing in  the  FTT  at  which  none  of  the  findings  of  the
    Immigration Judge stand.

29. I make the following directions:

      i) I direct that the appeal be remitted to the FTT for a fresh hearing
         before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Coutts;

     ii) At that hearing none of the findings  of  fact  by  the  FTT  shall
         stand;

    iii) Directions for the future listing of this matter including any case
         management directions and for a hearing in the FTT are to be  dealt
         with by that tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. The decision of the FTT is set  aside.  The  case  is
remitted to the FTT for a fresh hearing in accordance  with  the  directions
above.

I continue the anonymity direction made by the FTT.


Signed                              Date 15 December 2017

Judge Hanbury
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Dated 15 December 2017

Judge Hanbury
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

