
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/08774/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 June 2017                               |On 11 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                                    [s m]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Mellon of Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and background

1.   The appellant is an Iranian Kurd who was born on  [  ]  1996,  although
    there are other dates of birth given in the papers that I have seen.

2.   The appellant was arrested on 24 February 2016  by  Lancashire  police.
    It appears that he entered the UK clandestinely.  He claimed during his
    screening interview that he had helped Kurdish  freedom  fighters  move
    from one area to  another  and  that  put  him  at  conflict  with  the
    authorities. According to Ms  Mellon,  who  represented  the  appellant
    before the Upper Tribunal, the appellant came into the UK shortly prior
    to  his  arrest  by  the  police.  However,  there  is  no  independent
    verification as to when he came here.

3.   He appeals to the Upper Tribunal with  permission  from  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison given on 17 May 2017. Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison considered it at least arguable that Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Cohen (Judge Cohen) in his decision promulgated  on  24  April
    2017 may have misdirected himself by not making  any  findings  on  the
    expert evidence. This failure, it was argued,  could  make  a  material
    difference to the outcome of the decision. In addition, the grounds  of
    appeal dated 4 May 2017 impugn the findings the judge made in  relation
    to several aspects of the case including credibility.  As  to  the  sur
    place claims, the appellant  claimed  that  his  involvement  with  the
    Komala Party had continued since he  came  to  London,  i.e.  after  he
    claimed asylum in the UK, in that the appellant had met  deputy  leader
    of KOMALA in the UK. It was contended in the  grounds  of  appeal  that
    Judge Cohen failed to deal adequately with this additional risk factor.

The Appeal Proceedings

4.   The appellant's application for asylum was refused  by  the  respondent
    in a detailed Reasons for Refusal Letter dated  9  August  2016.   That
    document states that the respondent did not accept that  the  appellant
    had given a credible and truthful account of events  in  Kurdish  Iran.
    The claimed immigration history was noted as  was  the  fact  that  the
    appellant appeared to have travelled through a number of safe countries
    before he arrived into the UK.  The respondent did not accept that  the
    appellant had demonstrated a risk on return, noting references  in  the
    screening interview to the events in his home country.  The  respondent
    noted a number of inconsistencies. In  particular,  the  appellant  had
    claimed to have helped the peshmerga move from one place to another but
    there was an  inconsistency  between  this  claim  and  answer  in  the
    screening interview to the question "did you carry out any  other  work
    to support the peshmerga?", to which he replied  "no".  The  respondent
    doubted the credibility of the asylum  claim,  pointing  out  that  the
    discrepancies undermined the credibility  of  the  whole  account.  For
    example, when asked in the screening interview whether he had committed
    an offence in any country for which he would be  convicted  he  replied
    "no". However, in his asylum interview he had claimed  the  authorities
    were looking for him because he had helped the peshmerga and this would
    be an offence in Iran. In the end the respondent rejected  the  alleged
    fear of future persecution and considered the appellant did not qualify
    for humanitarian protection in the  UK  under  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   The  respondent  also  considered   whether   the
    appellant might qualify under any  of  the  Articles  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) but concluded that the appellant  did
    not satisfy the stringent criteria for the grant of protection  on  the
    basis that his Article 3 rights would be infringed, nor did he  satisfy
    the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  or  the  requirements  of
    Article 8 in relation to his private and family life.   There  were  no
    exceptional circumstances justifying departing from the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules.

5.    At  the  appeal  hearing  the  appellant  gave  evidence  through   an
    interpreter.  The Immigration Judge provided a succinct decision on  24
    April 2017, the hearing having been on  29  March  2017.   Amongst  the
    documentation submitted was an expert report in support of [SM]'s claim
    at page 16 of the bundle  of  documents  supplied  by  the  appellant's
    representatives in advance of the hearing.  That  was  prepared  by  Dr
    Firangis Ghaderi, a Middle East  expert.   Another  document  that  was
    produced at the hearing was the  photograph  of  the  appellant  taking
    coffee with one Reza Kaabi at Oxford Circus in the summer of 2016.   He
    was described as the deputy leader of Komala. The expert instructed  on
    behalf of appellant, Dr Ghaderi (also  referred  to  by  Ms  Mellon  in
    paragraph 8 (iii) of her skeleton argument as Dr Kakhi?) indicated that
    there was a  long  tradition  of  hospitality  between  Kurds.  It  was
    submitted that the appellant's claim of taking peshmerga backwards  and
    forwards was potentially consistent with the position on the ground and
    his  expert  opinion.   The  potential  punishment  for   members   and
    supporters of the Komala was severe and, as the expert indicated in his
    report, which Judge Cohen summarised at paragraph 13 of  his  decision,
    as  a  returning  failed  asylum  seeker  the   punishment   could   be
    particularly severe. Due to the appellant's Kurdish ethnicity, he could
    face a lengthy  prison  sentence.   Having  heard  evidence  at  length
    including cross-examination by Ms Vatish, the Presenting Officer at the
    hearing before the FtT, Judge Cohen decided that he did not accept  the
    appellant had given an honest and truthful account  and  basically,  he
    upheld the respondent's decision which was to  find  that  it  was  not
    credible.  The appellant had said that he  would  be  thought  to  have
    assisted freedom fighters if he returned to Iran and that he  would  be
    tortured if he had to give his name on returning there.  However,  this
    was not accepted by the respondent. There were several aspects  of  the
    appellant's claim which were rejected by  the  Immigration  Judge,  who
    found  the  appellant's  account  not  to  have  been  credible.    The
    Immigration Judge went on to find at paragraph 38 of his decision  that
    the appellant had not undertaken any political activities  in  the  UK.
    He found that the appellant did not exit the country illegally and even
    if he were to accept that claim, having regard to the appropriate  case
    law (see e.g. SSH & HR (Iran) CG [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC)) he  found  that
    the appellant would  not  be  detained,  interrogated  or  ill-treated.
    Based on his findings he concluded that the appellant qualified neither
    for asylum in the UK nor was he entitled  to  humanitarian  protection.
    Furthermore, he considered that the appellant had  not  shown  that  he
    qualified under any of the Articles of the ECHR for ongoing  protection
    in the UK.  He found overall there  were  no  substantial  grounds  for
    believing  that  the  appellant  would  face  torture  or  inhuman  and
    degrading treatment if he were returned to Iran.

6.    Notwithstanding  these  adverse  findings  of  credibility  and  fact,
    detailed grounds of appeal were submitted to the Upper Tribunal and  it
    is clear based on the decision of Judge Grant-Hutchison that they  were
    felt to be at least arguable. Mr Singh did not seek to  argue  that  it
    was inappropriate for the Upper Tribunal to consider  all  the  grounds
    raised, although the judge granting permission had focused  on  one  or
    two of the grounds of appeal.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

7.   At the hearing, I  heard  submissions  by  both  representatives.   The
    appellant was represented by Ms G Mellon, who  presented  her  client's
    case fully to the Upper Tribunal explaining that as far  as  she  could
    see the Immigration Judge had only found that the appellant had contact
    with the individual Peshmerga member concerned on two  occasions.   The
    individual concerned, called [S], is supposed to  have  introduced  the
    Peshmerga to the appellant.  It is true that  the  appellant  had  only
    assisted the Peshmerga on two occasions, but this was an issue  of  the
    utmost sensitivity in Iran and he would face persecution if he returned
    there.  There was the additional fact that the appellant  had  been  in
    touch with the Komala since he came to the UK  and  he  would  have  an
    imputed political opinion based on membership of  a  particular  social
    group.  The appellant was a person who  had  left  Iran  illegally  and
    would face persecution on his return.  There were  other  issues  about
    his ethnicity  which  also  were  relevant,  particularly  his  Kurdish
    background.  It was submitted forcefully  by  Miss  Mellon  that  Judge
    Cohen had  given  inadequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    account and that he had not dealt properly with  the  expert  evidence,
    mentioning it only once in his decision  at  paragraphs  11-13  in  the
    passages that I referred to earlier.  He should have properly  analysed
    the expert evidence and indicated why he rejected it, if he did.

8.   The second error identified by Ms  Mellon  was  that  Judge  Cohen  had
    failed to have adequate  regard  to  the  appellant's  account  at  the
    hearing. Instead, the Immigration Judge had given excessive  weight  to
    the account the appellant had given in the  screening  interview.  Miss
    Mellon said that he had not dealt fully with the full interview nor had
    Judge Cohen fully dealt with the evidence the appellant  had  given  at
    the hearing.  I was referred to a number of key passages in support  of
    the submission.

9.    Thirdly,  it  was  submitted  the  Immigration  Judge  had  not  dealt
    adequately with the appellant's sur place activities  and  his  Kurdish
    ethnicity.  These were issues of great importance to the outcome of the
    appeal.  The appellant had had contact with the Komala group.   It  was
    wrong of the First-tier Tribunal to require any  corroboration  of  his
    account.  The appellant had illegally exited from his country of origin
    and Ms Mellon reiterated that he would  face  adverse  consequences  on
    return.

10.  The respondent, represented by Mr Singh, also took me through  some  of
    the key points of the decision but said that it was open to Judge Cohen
    to make adverse credibility findings of fact based on the  evidence  he
    heard.  He referred me to an old case called YL  (China)  [2004]  UKIAT
    00145.  In that case he said that the IAT had to consider a case  where
    excessive weight had been  given  to  the  interview  rather  than  the
    screening interview.  The case gave an analysis of  the  importance  of
    the screening  interview  because  it  is  the  first  opportunity  the
    appellant has of presenting his case.  Provided there  is  no  question
    mark over the circumstances in which the interview  was  conducted,  it
    ought to be an opportunity for the appellant to put  forward  his  case
    straightforwardly.  Unfortunately,  this  case  had  not  been  at  all
    straightforward and the  screening  interview  contained  a  number  of
    inconsistencies with his later accounts and it was entirely  proper  of
    the Immigration Judge to give weight to these factors, as  he  did  at,
    for example, paragraphs 25 to 27 of his decision.  In particular, I was
    referred  to  paragraph  29,  where  the  appellant  had  produced  the
    photograph of himself with deputy leader of the Komala and it was  said
    that there was no attempt for the person in the  photograph  to  attend
    court or for the appellant even to obtain a letter from him to  explain
    who he was.

The issues

11.  It seems that  following  the  hearing  the  following  issues  present
    themselves:

    (1)  whether the failure to refer to or consider the substantive asylum
         interview undermined the whole of the Immigration Judge's  decision
         or whether it was a peripheral matter;


    (2)  whether there was a failure  to  consider  adequately  the  expert
         report, analyse its contents and apply it  to  the  facts  of  this
         case;


    (3)  whether the judge failed to consider adequately or at all the:


         (a)  sur place activities in the UK;


         (b)  the manner of the appellant's departure and risk on return.

Consideration of these issues

12.   In  consideration  of  these  issues  it  is  clear  to  me  that  the
    Immigration  Judge  was  presented  with  a  detailed  account  by  the
    appellant but essentially the appellant had  claimed  that  there  were
    only two occasions when he had assisted Peshmergas early in 2016.   The
    Immigration Judge did deal with the case succinctly but he was entitled
    to do so.  An Immigration Judge presented sometimes with three or  four
    contested hearings in one day which he has to write up  does  not  have
    the luxury of being able to analyse to the finest degree every part  of
    the case presented to him.  What is demanded of an Immigration Judge is
    that he  gives  an  overview  of  the  case  for  each  side,  that  he
    demonstrates that he has considered the relevant  factors  and  he  has
    come to conclusions which are sustainable  based  on  the  evidence  he
    heard.  In my view, the Immigration Judge did that  in  this  case.   I
    agree that it was unfortunate that he only made one  reference  to  the
    expert report but on the other hand it was in his  mind  and  the  fact
    that he did not make a subsequent reference to  it  under  the  heading
    "Findings" does not mean it was not a matter that he took into account.

13.  The first question therefore is: whether the failure  to  refer  to  or
    consider the subsequent interview with the respondent's  representative
    undermined the whole decision or whether that was merely  a  peripheral
    matter?  I considered that the appellant was given  an  opportunity  in
    the first screening interview to present his case. However, a number of
    inconsistencies arose, which he was  required  to  answer.  Some  weeks
    later (the initial screening interview  having  been  conducted  on  22
    February 2016 and  the  latter  statement  of  evidence  for  and  full
    interview having been conducted on 1 August 2016) he had an opportunity
    to plug some of the inconsistencies. It is  striking  that  even  after
    having several weeks to consider his case obtain the benefit  of  legal
    advice, he was unable to dispel  the  concerns  over  his  credibility.
    Therefore,  the  adverse  credibility  findings   which   Judge   COHEN
    subsequently came to appear justified. The fact that a different  judge
    might have included greater  detail  in  his  decision  and,  possibly,
    reached a different conclusion does not on its own suggest any material
    error decision of the F T T.

14   In relation to the expert's report I have now  had  an  opportunity  of
    considering that report. It is quite a detailed document,  but  it  has
    been stressed in a number of cases that an expert cannot  supplant  the
    role of the judge.  The judge is the person who hears the evidence  and
    has to make decisions based on the credibility of the account that  has
    been given. Judge Cohen had that opportunity here and he reached  clear
    findings.  They might not have been as fully reasoned  but  they  might
    have been but they were sufficiently clear for them to be sustained  on
    appeal.

15.  In relation  to  the  third  issue,  whether  the  appellant  has  been
    involved in any significant activities since he came to the  UK,  I  am
    satisfied that Judge Cohen dealt fully with that matter.  He found that
    the appellant had not undertaken any political activities  in  the  UK.
    It was right of him  to  record  that  there  had  been  no  additional
    evidence to corroborate the photograph.  The lack of  corroboration  is
    not in itself a reason for rejecting  an  asylum  claim  but  it  is  a
    relevant matter that a judge is  entitled  to  consider.   Furthermore,
    Judge Cohen was entitled to take into account  the  lack  of  any  oral
    evidence from Mr  Kaabi.  Indeed,  as  Judge  Cohen  and  commented  in
    paragraph 29 of his decision, Mr Kaabi lived in London and was  clearly
    aware of the appellant's appeal, yet  he  neither  attended  court  nor
    provided a letter himself. As I understand it, there was only a  letter
    from a "gentlemen", referred to in paragraph 30 of  the  decision,  who
    was a member of the KOMALA group.

16.  For these reasons, I have concluded that the decision Judge Cohen  came
    to was one he was entitled to come to based on the evidence  given  and
    the  submissions  made.  Accordingly,  the  appellant  has  failed   to
    establish any material error of law in the decision of the F TT.


Notice of Decision

17.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of
    Judge Cohen, promulgated on 24 April 2017 in the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    stands.

18.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 11 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 11 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
