
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08877/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 July 2017                               |On 3 August 2017              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [R R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

1.   The appellant is an Indian national born on [ ] 1986.  She entered  the
    UK as a Tier 4 Student on 20 September 2012 with valid  leave  until  6
    January 2014.  It was not until two years later that she claimed asylum
    in Croydon on 26 January 2016. The appellant  claimed  to  have  met  a
    British Muslim man called Saleem Butt, to whom she had fallen  pregnant
    and with whom she had a child.  She claimed that given  her  background
    in India she would be subject to serious mistreatment or killed if  she
    returned there.

The Reasons for refusal

2.   The respondent considered her application but set  out  in  a  detailed
    letter of refusal dated 8 August 2016, spanning  over  100  paragraphs,
    her reasons for refusal.  The respondent did not accept the appellant's
    account of having been allegedly persecuted whilst in India.

3.   The respondent considered the  claim  against  the  background  of  the
    relevant case law including the case of Karanakaran [2000] EWCA Civ 11.
    Whilst it was accepted that the appellant had given birth to a daughter
    with her partner, the respondent did  not  accept  that  the  appellant
    would suffer such ill-treatment at the hands of her family or that such
    treatment would amount to persecution falling within the UN  Convention
    relating to the status of Refugees 1951 (the Refugee Convention).   The
    respondent also considered the case under the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights 1950 (ECHR) but did not consider that the appellant  would
    be subject to honour killing or  would  suffer  inhuman  and  degrading
    treatment which would cross the threshold required by Article 3 if  she
    returned to India, her country of birth.

4.   The appellant was a primary carer for her child but it was  clear  from
    the objective evidence produced by the  respondent  that  such  persons
    would be subject to possible assistance from NGOs  in  India  and  that
    overall the Indian state can provide the appellant  with  a  sufficient
    degree of state protection if she returned there.

5.   The  respondent  in  the  alternative  considered  the  possibility  of
    internal  relocation  and  noted  that  the  Immigration  Rules  (339O)
    provided that where a person had a well-founded fear of persecution  in
    their own country, but could  be  reasonably  expected  to  move  to  a
    different part of that country, they would not in the circumstances  be
    entitled to either  protection  under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  to
    humanitarian protection within the UK. Nor, for that matter, would they
    be entitled to the protection afforded by the E C H R.

6.   The respondent noted that India was one of  the  largest  countries  in
    the world with a large and diverse population spread out over different
    areas and, a variety of  different  religions  existed  side  by  side,
    including many Muslims. The respondent suggested that there are a large
    number of areas to which the appellant could safely relocate well  away
    from her own family, should she feel at risk in  her  home  area.   The
    respondent also considered her private  and  family  life  and  whether
    there were any exceptional reasons for allowing her to remain in the UK
    on that basis but concluded that she could continue her family life  in
    India where she could, if necessary, avail herself of the protection of
    the state and non-governmental organisations which  were  available  to
    assist her.

The appeal proceedings

7.   The appellant appealed the refusal by a notice of appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal which was received on 22 August  2016.  Her  appeal  came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Aziz  (the  Immigration  Judge)
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 5 December 2016.  There  are  some  somewhat
    unusual mistakes within the  decision  and  some  inconsistencies  but,
    essentially, the Immigration Judge concluded that  the  treatment  that
    the appellant would be reasonably likely to receive at the hands of her
    family  would  amount  to  "discrimination"  rather  than  persecution.
    However, the Immigration Judge  went  on  to  allow  the  appeal.   His
    decision was promulgated on 12 January 2017.

8.   The respondent appealed to the Upper  Tribunal  against  that  decision
    and Judge Osborne considered that the grounds were at  least  arguable,
    noting that the question of discrimination,  which  seemed  to  be  the
    finding of the judge and the main reason why he allowed the  appeal  in
    paragraph 67, was not the  test  for  a  successful  application  as  a
    refugee  and  he  did  not  understand  the  conclusion  that  internal
    relocation would not be available to her.  There was no arguable  basis
    for finding a  fear  of  persecution  based  on  the  findings  of  the
    Immigration Judge.

Discussion

9.   The Immigration Judge did not fully indicate  the  basis  on  which  he
    allowed the appeal, but it is stated in paragraph 67 that the appellant
    qualified as  a  refugee,  alternatively,  that  she  was  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection in the UK. As Judge Osborne pointed out, it was
    necessary for  the  Immigration  Judge  to  make  a  finding  that  the
    appellant was in fear of persecution if  she  were  returned  to  India
    before the appellant could qualify under the  Refugee  Convention.  Far
    from making such a  finding,  Immigration  Judge  considered  that  the
    appellant would be able to seek assistance from one of one of the  many
    government/NGO run shelters for women in the  same  paragraph.  Such  a
    finding is completely at odds with the finding that the appellant was a
    refugee.

10.  The Immigration Judge purported to consider the internal relocation  in
    the same paragraph.  He said that in the  light  of  the  findings  the
    material question is whether internal relocation would be unduly  harsh
    and he came to an overall finding that the appellant  was  an  educated
    woman.


         "There is no reason why she should not be able to  seek  assistance
         from  one  of  the  many  government/NGO-run  shelters  for  women.
         However, any such help would be temporary.   Once  she  leaves  the
         shelter her  background  qualifications  and  experience  may  well
         assist her when applying for work."


    He then stated that:


         "Her situation is compounded by the fact that her small  child  had
         been born out of wedlock..."


    He concluded, in the circumstances, that to  put  the  appellant  in  a
    position that she would be  in  would  be  unduly  harsh  and  internal
    relocation would not be a viable option.


Conclusions

11.  I have carefully considered the grounds of appeal put  forward  by  the
    respondent and I have concluded that they are correct. The  Immigration
    Judge's findings of fact do not match the conclusions in law  which  he
    reached.  In particular, the appellant produced no  evidence  that  she
    would be subject to persecution if she were returned to India with  her
    young child, as opposed to discrimination and  possible  ostracization.
    With respect, the Immigration Judge failed to identify that persecution
    is  the  pursuit  of  a  person  with  malignancy.   Furthermore,   the
    Immigration Judge failed to identify  the  correct  test  for  internal
    flight which was: whether internal relocation  was  an  alternative  to
    seeking international protection reasonably available to the  appellant
    or whether it was unduly harsh to expect her to do this.  The fact that
    the appellant had a small child did not mean it would be  unduly  harsh
    for the appellant to relocate to a different part  of  India.   As  the
    Immigration  Judge  himself  pointed  out,  in  paraphraph  67  of  his
    decision, there were NGO-run shelters to which the appellant  could  go
    where she would be perfectly safe. It follows therefore that she  could
    internally relocate even if the treatment which claims  to  fear  from,
    and which crossed the threshold for persecution, were to occur.

12.  I therefore find that  there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  that  the  Immigration  Judge
    allowed the appeal in circumstances where  his  own  findings  did  not
    support that conclusion.  That error of law means that the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.

13.  The Immigration Judge made clear findings of fact in  relation  to  the
    availability of NGOs and other shelters  for  single  women  in  India.
    There were also opportunities for relocation within India. Many of  the
    barriers to this, such as the appellant's need  to  balance  employment
    caring for a small church child, are only examples of the  difficulties
    many single parents face in bringing up a young child and  not  in  any
    way amount to  it  being  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the  appellant  to
    relocate. It follows that even if  the  appellant  were  a  person  who
    qualified as a refuge/a person in need of humanitarian protection, or a
    person who would  suffer  a  serious  risk  of  death  or  inhuman  and
    degrading treatment in India, the respondent did not did  not  owe  any
    obligation in international law to  her  due  to  the  availability  of
    internal relocation within India.

14.  In the circumstances, it is appropriate to substitute the  decision  of
    the Upper  Tribunal,  which  is  to  dismiss  the  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's refusal in this case.


Notice of Decision

The respondent's appeal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
allowed. That decision is set-aside. The following decision is  substituted:
The appellant's appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to  allow  her
application for asylum is dismissed as is her appeal  under  the  ECHR.  The
appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to   refuse   her
humanitarian protection is also dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 2 August 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 2 August 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

