
[pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08256/2017

                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT

|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8th February 2018               |On 23rd February 2018              |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                     HK

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim of Silvine Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Griffith promulgated on the 11th  October  2017  whereby
    the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    Respondent to refuse his protection claim on  the  grounds  of  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Taking that and all of  the  circumstances  into  account  I
    consider it appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Page on 28 November 2017. Thus the case appeared  before
    me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law in the
    decision.

    Factual background

 4. The appellant is a national of Turkey.  The  appellant  applied  for  a
    visit visa on 23 December 2010. That was issued and he was given  leave
    to enter the United Kingdom for 6 months. The  appellant  came  to  the
    United Kingdom. On 1 July 2011 he submitted an application for leave to
    remain as an individual that had established himself in business in the
    UK. That application was refused and his appeal  against  the  decision
    was dismissed on 30 September 2011. There is  in  the  documentation  a
    copy of the decision in respect of that appeal. The appellant  remained
    in the United Kingdom. There is reference in the  papers  to  the  fact
    that the appellant for a short time was  in  a  relationship  but  that
    quickly broke up  and  there  has  been  no  suggestion  of  any  other
    significant relationship.

 5. On 3 February 2017 the appellant was served with a notice notifying him
    of his liability to be removed as an  overstayer.  The  appellant  then
    claimed asylum on 7 February 2017. By decision made on  8  August  2017
    the respondent refused the appellant's asylum claim.

 6. The factual basis for the appellants claim is set out as referred to by
    the judge in his screening interview, his substantive interview and his
    witness statements. Whilst the appellant had given  the  background  of
    discrimination by reason of the fact that he was an Alevi  Muslim,  the
    basis of his case as acknowledged in the decision was that he had  been
    critical of President Erdogan on Facebook and that otherwise he  had  a
    brother who was a member of the MLKP. The appellant claimed  by  reason
    of the Facebook postings and by reason  of  his  association  with  his
    brother he would be at risk on return to Turkey.

 7. An expert report had been obtained and background materials to  support
    the appellant's claim that he would be at risk on return to Turkey.

 8.  The  appellant's  representative  in  making  submissions  raised   in
    principle 3 separate issues: -

      i) the issue of the Facebook posts by the appellant  and  whether  the
         judge had properly considered those in assessing whether or not the
         appellant would be at risk.
     ii) the experts report: the fact that the judge has suggested that  the
         report is contradictory when it is not and that otherwise the judge
         has failed to properly consider and given  valid  reasons  for  not
         following the report. The judge has  given  little  weight  to  the
         report and failed to take account of its conclusions.
    iii) the objective material: the failure of the judge to  properly  take
         the objective material into account or failing to give reasons  for
         not following the objective material.
 9. The grounds of appeal themselves had commenced  by  claiming  that  the
    judge had  misdirected  himself  at  the  beginning  of  the  decision,
    paragraphs 4-10 of the decision, with regard to the appellant's  claim.
    It is clear from paragraph 5 that the judge was concentrating upon  the
    central core of the appellant's claim,  which  was  that  he  had  been
    critical of President Erdogan online, specifically Facebook, and  as  a
    result would be at risk on return having received warnings and  threats
    on Facebook. There  is  reference  thereafter  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had a brother, who is a member of a political  party  opposed
    to the regime in Turkey. In effect those were material  factors  giving
    rise to a risk to the appellant. The materials otherwise set out in the
    identified paragraphs are matters that are clearly  raised  within  the
    refusal letter and the judge was perfectly  entitled  to  set  out  the
    background as recited in the refusal letter.

10. Central therefore to the appellant's claim was the issue of  his  posts
    on Facebook. It was the posts on Facebook that were the basis  for  the
    conclusions within the expert's report and for references and  reliance
    being placed upon the background material.

11. I note that within paragraph  41  of  the  Judge's  decision  that  the
    experts report, which was dated 27 September  2017,  was  sent  to  the
    Tribunal by the appellant solicitors on  29  September  2017,  that  is
    after the date of the hearing.  I also note that the expert  refers  in
    his report to the appellant's account being credible.  Whilst  I  would
    say that it is not for an  expert  to  decide  whether  an  appellant's
    account is  credible,  in  the  context  in  which  it  appears  it  is
    suggesting that the appellant's view that Turkey has substantially  and
    significantly changed since he left the country is consistent with  the
    background information. Finally the expert not only commented upon  the
    impact of the Facebook posts by the appellant but was  responsible  for
    translating the posts. No issue has  been  taken  with  regard  to  the
    issues.

12. Issue was taken with the fact that whilst  the  expert  refers  to  the
    questions that have been posed to him having been set out "in turn", in
    fact they do not appear in his report. Issue was also  taken  with  the
    fact that the expert points indicates that he can argue various issues.
    The respondent's representative indicated that that was not an approach
    that the expert should take. It was not for  an  expert  to  become  an
    advocate for a specific view.

13. The judge has noted that the appellant himself had never been  involved
    in politics whether  in  Turkey  or  in  the  UK.  The  extent  of  the
    appellant's political activity or  involvement  has  been  confined  to
    reposting material critical of President Erdogan on Facebook. The judge
    had noted that the appellant had  referred  in  interview  to  postings
    referring to 2004 -2005 but, as the judge noted, that appear  to  be  a
    mistake as the appellant was still in Turkey at the time and there  was
    no other reference to any Facebook entries around that time.

14. The Facebook posts in question appear at pages 11, 12  and  13  of  the
    appellant's bundle.  The appellant's representative with regard to  the
    Facebook post commenced his submissions with consideration of paragraph
    39 of the decision. The paragraph  commences  by  setting  out  that  a
    number of postings from pages 6 to 10 of the appellant's bundle,  which
    appear not to have been translated; upon which the expert expresses  no
    opinion, if he saw them; and the judge as they were run translated  and
    were not explained by the expert gave no weight.

15. The experts report appears to have limited himself to 3 pages. At  page
    11 is a picture in  which  the  face  of  President  Erdogan  has  been
    superimposed over a picture ostensibly identifiable as Osama bin Laden.
    The expert  merely  states  that  the  appellant  has  "shared  a  post
    resembling Mr Erdogan to terrorist Bin Ladin".  The caption  below  has
    not been interpreted and the judge has made a note of  such.  The  post
    appears to have elicited a response, although where exactly the  expert
    translates the response is not entirely clear. The judge has noted that
    the response was  'make your life miserable'  effectively  if  he,  the
    appellant, came to Turkey. As the  judge  notes  there  is  nothing  to
    suggest where the person making the comment is or  has  any  connection
    with the authorities in Turkey or  with  the  President.  There  is  no
    indication that the comments emanate from any  of  the  authorities  in
    Turkey.

16. There are 2 further posts commented upon within  the  expert's  report.
    The further posts had also elicited responses as noted  by  the  judge.
    The appellant's representative was seeking to argue that the  responses
    contained explicit and implicit threats  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge had failed to recognise such. By comparison it was submitted that
    the expert had concentrated upon the posts  and  the  impact  that  the
    posts would have. The expert by reference to other background  material
    had suggested that the post would expose the appellant  to  a  risk  on
    return to Turkey. There are a  number  of  factors  which  have  to  be
    considered. Some of the examples relied upon involve  individuals  with
    high profiles outside of Turkey, who have been critical of the  Turkish
    regime in the press in a very  public  way  outside  the  country,  the
    example being the high-profile journalist  in  Spain.  Others  involved
    individuals inside the country  who  have  been  involved  in  Facebook
    posting remarks about the president and the government. For example  at
    page 22 of the appellant's bundle there is reference to the arrest of a
    teenager for insulting the president on Facebook but  it  appears  that
    the use of social media was in Turkey. It would be interesting  to  see
    if the Turkish authorities are monitoring all Facebook posts throughout
    the world.

17. With regard to the 2 Facebook pages at 12 and 13  there  is  clearly  a
    threat but the source of the threat is unclear.

18. With regard to the Facebook pages otherwise the judge has  pointed  out
    that of the 3 extracts none are dated, there is no response to  one  of
    them, the captions are untranslated without any copy  of  any  response
    being shown in the final extract.  One  of  the  postings  said  to  be
    insulting of the President and the AKP the party  the  source  for  the
    person responses unidentified.  It  would  be  a  significant  leap  to
    suggest that the post had  emanated  from  anyone  connected  with  the
    authorities in Turkey or otherwise for them to be anything  other  than
    an individual responding to a post to which they object.

19. It is suggested that the judge has wrongly  concluded  that  there  was
    inconsistencies in the report of Dr Demir. The point being made by  the
    judge is, paragraph 42, that whilst the experts suggest that there  was
    no offence attributable to the appellant in the sharing of the Facebook
    posts, still the appellant ' the expert can argue' would  be  at  risk.
    The expert appears more to be becoming an advocate rather  than  merely
    an expert. The judge was  also  making  the  point  that  some  of  the
    examples referred to by  the  expert  involved  individuals  that  were
    arrested for other offences as well as allegations of  having  insulted
    the President. The judge was making the point whilst the expert seem to
    be suggesting that the appellant would not have committed  any  offence
    and would therefore not have been liable to  arrest,  but  subsequently
    the appellant would still be at risk because of the postings.

20. It is in that context that the judge has given the expert's report. The
    judge has pointed out that there was no attempt to compare the contents
    of the 3 posts relied on by the appellant and whether they were similar
    or comparable to the post that resulted in individuals being  arrested.
    No comment has been made  otherwise  as  to  the  appellant's  lack  of
    political profile. The judge has considered the nature of the posts and
    the nature of the responses received. In the  circumstances  the  judge
    has given valid reasons  for  concluding  that  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence it had not been proved that the Facebook postings would expose
    the appellant to a risk on return to Turkey.

21. In coming to that assessment the judge has considered both  the  expert
    report and the background material relied upon to show that individuals
    that posted such matters were subject to arrest. In  the  circumstances
    the judge  has  given  valid  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  post
    themselves would not expose the appellant to  any  risk  on  return  to
    Turkey. The judge has also given valid reason for limiting  the  weight
    that he gave to the experts report pointing out  that  the  expert  had
    become an advocate, appeared to be  giving  contradictory  conclusions,
    failed  to  note  the  differences  between  the  appellant's   factual
    circumstances and those in the background material.

22. In those circumstances the judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    Facebook posts would not expose the appellant to any risk on return  to
    Turkey. On the basis of the evidence presented the judge  was  entitled
    to come to the conclusion that he did.

23. In the light of the matters set out the judge has not made  a  material
    error of law.

    Notice of Decision

24. I dismiss the appeal.

25. I make an anonymity direction




Signed                                                   Date 20th February
2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure





Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings





Signed                                                   Date 20th February
2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



