
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA089872016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31st July, 2017                    |On 07th August, 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    A R R
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Stefan Kotas, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Owain James of Counsel, instructed by Qualified
Legal Solicitors


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW


1.   In this appeal the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  is  the
    appellant and to avoid confusion I therefore refer  to  him  as  being,
    "the claimant".

2.   The respondent was born on [ ] 1981, and is a citizen of Iraq.

3.   The respondent gained entry to the United  Kingdom  clandestinely.   He
    was arrested on 26th May 2002, and on 10th June  2002,  wrote  claiming
    asylum, which was refused by the appellant  on  19th  July  2002.   The
    respondent was granted exceptional leave  to  remain  until  19th  July
    2006.

4.   On 19th August 2004, the respondent was convicted of  violent  disorder
    at Nottingham Crown Court and sentenced to 27 months' imprisonment.

5.    On  21st  June  2005,  the  respondent  applied  for  a  Home   Office
    certificate of identity in order to travel to Iran.   This  application
    was refused on 15th December 2005 and on 6th July, 2006 the  respondent
    applied for indefinite leave to remain.

6.   On 7th  November  2007,  the  respondent  was  convicted  at  Mansfield
    Magistrates' Court of driving whilst disqualified and using  a  vehicle
    whilst being uninsured.  He was fined and disqualified for driving  for
    six months  and  ordered  to  pay  costs.   Because  of  the  delay  in
    processing his application, the respondent sought judicial review,  for
    which  permission  was  refused.   He  withdrew  his  application   for
    indefinite leave whilst seeking an oral permission hearing.

7.   On 6th December 2012, the claimant  wrote  to  the  respondent  seeking
    reasons why he should not be deported.  He responded on  19th  December
    2012.

8.   On 10th July 2013, the claimant refused to grant asylum and decided  to
    make a deportation order by virtue  of  Section  5(1)  Immigration  Act
    1971, which included refusal of the 6th  July  2006,  ILR  application.
    The respondent appealed this decision and his appeal was  dismissed  by
    the First-tier Tribunal on 23rd September 2013.  Permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal was refused and a deportation order was signed on
    19th September 2004.

9.   Representations were made on his behalf seeking  a  revocation  of  the
    deportation order on 24th October 2014.  The claimant decided to refuse
    to grant him leave or revoke the deportation order on 8th  August  2016
    and the respondent appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  hearing
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Eames at Newport on 27th  October
    2016.

10.  Having examined the objective evidence,  including  an  expert  report,
    the judge found that he was not satisfied  that  the  respondent  would
    face a real risk of  suffering  serious  harm  in  terms  envisaged  by
    Article 15(c).  However, on the basis of all the evidence he heard,  he
    found that the respondent could not reasonably be expected to stay safe
    in Baghdad or in the Iranian Kurdish Region.

11.  The claimant sought  and  was  granted  leave  to  appeal  the  judge's
    determination and relied on three grounds.

12.  At the hearing before me, Mr Kotas very properly accepted that  grounds
    1 and 2 failed to identify any material errors of law on  the  part  of
    the judge.  Mr Kotas suggested, however,  that  there  was  a  material
    conflict in the judge's  findings  at  paragraphs  94  and  95  of  the
    determination, because  at  paragraph  94  the  judge  found  that  the
    respondent could not relocate  in  the  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region,  having
    earlier in the  determination  found  that  the  respondent  could  not
    relocate to Baghdad.  In paragraph 95 the judge said this:-

         "95. Overall, given the evidence,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
             [respondent] would face a real risk of suffering serious  harm
             in the terms envisaged by  Article  15(c).   However,  on  the
             basis of the evidence I have reviewed above, I  do  find  that
             the [respondent] cannot reasonably be expected to stay in  the
             parts of the  country  specified  by  the  [claimant]  as,  in
             effect, safe - Baghdad or  IKR.   In  both  cases,  conditions
             would plainly be highly adverse to him for different  reasons,
             even whilst not reaching the threshold of serious  harm.   All
             the hardships, difficulties and obstacles which are enumerated
             by Dr Fatah in both destinations do amount, in my view, to  an
             unreasonable level  of  adversity.   The  [respondent]  cannot
             reasonably be expected to stay in either area.  The effect  of
             that is that the [claimant] is not relieved  of  her  duty  to
             grant humanitarian protection on the basis  of  her  paragraph
             339O(i)(b)  reasoning.   Put  another  way,   the   grant   of
             humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C  is  appropriate,
             and my  decision  is  to  that  effect.   It  means  that  the
             deportation order is to be revoked."

13.  Counsel accepted that there were difficulties with  paragraphs  94  and
    95 of the determination and he told me that he had no objection to  the
    matter being remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in the  event  that  I
    were to set aside the determination.

14.  For the claimant, Mr Kotas pointed out that the  judge  had  failed  to
    properly engage with the decision of the Tribunal in AA (Article 15(c))
    Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT  00544  (IAC).   He  submitted  that  the  judge's
    reasoning and consideration was wholly inadequate.

15.  I reserved my decision.

16.  I have concluded that having stated that there was no risk of  harm  in
    either Baghdad or IKR, the judge  erred  and  contradicted  himself  by
    suggesting that the respondent could not be expected to stay in  either
    area as he did in Paragraph 95.  The judge gave reasons why  relocation
    to  IKR  may  cause  difficulties  for  the  respondent,  but  no  such
    explanation was given in respect of Baghdad.

17.  I have concluded that the determination cannot stand.   I  am  grateful
    to both representatives for agreeing that in the event that I  find  an
    error of law the matter needs to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    for a hearing afresh.

18.  I set aside  the  decision  of  Judge  Eames.   Given  the  delays  and
    difficulties that are likely to ensue in  the  event  that  I  were  to
    retain this file for hearing before me in the Upper Tribunal,  I  remit
    the appeal to be heard afresh by the First-tier  Tribunal  by  a  judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Eames.   Two  and  a  half  hours
    should be allowed for the hearing of the appeal and a Kurdish  (Sorani)
    interpreter be made available at the hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley
Upper                Tribunal                 Judge                 Chalkley
             Date 04/08/2017


