
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
PA/08844/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12th November 2019                     |On 14th November 2019          |
|                                          |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                      ER
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, Counsel, instructed by B.H.T
                  Immigration Legal Services
For the Respondent:  Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The claimant is a citizen of Iraq born in 2001. He arrived in the UK
       illegally in August 2017, and claimed asylum in September  2017.  He
       was refused permission to remain on asylum grounds on 29th June 2018
       but granted discretionary leave as an unaccompanied child until  1st
       July 2018. His appeal against the decision refusing  refugee  status
       and humanitarian protection was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
       O'Keeffe in a determination promulgated on the 6th September 2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was  granted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  by
       Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge MacDonald on 1st  October  2019
       on the basis that it was arguable  that  the  First-tier  judge  had
       erred  in  law  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had   arguably   made
       contradictory findings that firstly the claimant was at real risk of
       serious harm but secondly that his father's role would not  put  him
       at risk on return to Iraq now.  It  was  also  unclear  whether  the
       appeal was allowed under humanitarian protection grounds  or  asylum
       grounds.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. In the grounds of appeal the Secretary  of  State  argues  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal has conflated asylum and humanitarian protection
       issues, and been ambiguous as to the outcome granting the appeal  on
       both grounds. It is not possible for the  appeal  to  be  rationally
       allowed under the Refugee Convention  because  of  the  findings  at
       paragraphs 46 to 49 that the appellant would not be  at  persecutory
       risk due to his father, and due to the lack of reasoning as  to  why
       he would be at general risk.

    5. In a Rule 24 response the claimant responds, in summary, as follows.
       It  is  argued  that  the  appeal  was  allowed  under  the  Refugee
       Convention by the First-tier Tribunal. It is  argued  that  this  is
       clearly the case for the following reasons. It is  argued  that  the
       Secretary of State conceded that the claimant had been recruited and
       trained by Daesh/ISIL and that the claimant could not go back to his
       home area of Hawija, see paragraphs 9, 30 and 31 of the decision. It
       is argued that the First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  appellant
       would  be  at  risk  of  serious  harm  on  return  because  he  was
       undocumented without family and so could  be  detained  for  a  long
       period in Baghdad, and might be subjected to ill  treatment  in  the
       IKR due to an inability to dispel suspicion that he was linked  with
       ISIL, see paragraph 46 of the decision. It was found that he was  in
       poor mental health, and at real risk of destitution without  a  CSID
       at paragraphs 49 and 50. It was found at paragraph 49 that it  would
       be unduly harsh for him to have to relocate to the IKR,  Baghdad  or
       any other part of Iraq. As a result he was found at paragraph 51  to
       be a real risk of serious harm and to have a  well-founded  fear  of
       persecution if returned to Iraq. In the alternative it was found  in
       the same paragraph he would also be at risk under Article 15(c )  of
       the Qualification Directive.

    6. It is argued that the finding at paragraph 33 of the  decision  that
       he was not at risk due to his  father's  Baathist  profile  was  not
       relevant, as risk was conceded by the Secretary of State in the home
       area due to the appellant's own ISIL involvement. The  claimant  was
       found to be at real risk of persecution because of his  own  profile
       namely: he is a young man of fighting age; who had  previously  been
       resident in an area held by ISIL; he had been forced to  train  with
       ISIL; escaped from ISIL and been punished for  disobeying  them;  he
       was currently without documentation and family and mentally was  not
       well enough to explain himself. The decision was properly made  with
       direction with respect to the country guidance and consideration  of
       all of the evidence.

Conclusions - Error of Law & Remaking

    7. The First-tier Tribunal  properly  directs  itself  to  the  correct
       standards of proof and tests for asylum, humanitarian protection and
       under the European Convention on Human Rights at paragraphs 26 to 28
       of the decision.

    8. The Secretary of State conceded risk in his home area as a result of
       the claimant having been recruited and trained by ISIL,  but  argued
       that he could return to the IKR. The  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
       the Secretary of State's submission that the claimant would  not  be
       at risk due to his father's membership of the Ba'ath party, although
       that membership was believed, see paragraph 33 of the decision.

    9. The First-tier Tribunal then, having found that the claimant was  at
       real risk of serious harm due to his own political  profile  in  his
       home  area,  goes  on  to  consider  whether  the  appellant   could
       reasonably relocate within Iraq at paragraphs 34 to 49. Firstly  the
       judge examines the evidence and concludes that the appellant has  no
       family support if returned to Iraq at  paragraph  39;  secondly  she
       examines the evidence and concludes that the claimant does not  have
       a CSID at paragraph 43 of the decision; thirdly  she  looks  at  the
       country guidance and concludes at paragraph 44 of the decision  that
       the appellant would not be able to obtain a CSID within a reasonable
       period on return to Iraq;  fourthly  she  looks  at  the  claimant's
       mental health and concludes that return to Iraq would be deleterious
       to him and impact adversely on  his  PTSD;  fifthly  the  First-tier
       Tribunal looks at whether the appellant could return to the IKR with
       reference to the guidance in AAH, the contention of the Secretary of
       State being that he could find safety there, but  concludes  on  the
       totality of the evidence that it would be unduly harsh to expect him
       to relocate there or elsewhere  in  Iraq  at  paragraph  49  of  the
       decision.

   10. I find that it was therefore clear that the primary finding  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal at paragraph  51  was  that  the  appellant  was
       entitled to refugee status on the basis of his having a well founded
       fear of persecution in his home area based on his imputed  political
       opinions as a result of his previously forced involvement with  ISIL
       and the fact that internal relocation within Iraq  would  be  unduly
       harsh.

   11. I find that there are no errors of law in these findings.

   12. The decision at paragraph 56 could have been clearer: it  could  and
       perhaps should have said the appeal is  allowed  under  the  Refugee
       Convention and on human rights grounds,  instead  of  simply  saying
       that  "the  appeal  is  allowed".  I  therefore  remake  the  appeal
       substituting this clarified outcome.


          Decision:

   13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
       the making of an error on a point of  law  beyond  the  clarification
       that I identify at paragraph 12 of my decision.

   14. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal
       on asylum and human rights grounds.

Anonymity

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  his
    protection claim.




Signed:     Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:    12th  November
2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley






