
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08261/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 March 2018                               |On 27 March 2018              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                  V N B J V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris of Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  M  J  Gillespie  who  in   a   determination
    promulgated on 22 August 2017 dismissed his appeal against  a  decision
    of the Secretary of State to refuse to grant asylum.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on [ ] 1984.   He  entered
    Britain on 9 October 2006 as a student.  His leave in that capacity was
    extended until October 2011.  On 12 January  2012  an  application  for
    further leave to remain was refused without a  right  of  appeal.   The
    appellant made two further applications to remain as a student and as a
    post-study migrant which were  also  refused.   The  third  application
    which was refused was reconsidered and then refused  with  a  right  of
    appeal.  The appeal was however dismissed and the appellant's rights of
    appeal were exhausted on 26 March  2014.   A  further  application  for
    leave to remain as a student was then made, it was then  amended  to  a
    claim for leave to remain under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   That  was
    refused on 9 June 2015 with an out of  country  right  of  appeal.   In
    August 2015 the appellant was detained  and  informed  of  his  illegal
    status and liability to removal.  He then requested reconsideration  of
    his previous human rights claim but  that  was  rejected  in  September
    2015. A judicial review application was unsuccessful.  In December 2015
    the appellant claimed asylum.  It was the appeal against the refusal of
    that application which was heard by Judge Gillespie on 11 August 2017.

3.   The appellant is Sinhalese. He lived with  his  family  in  Wattala  in
    Colombo where his  father  owned  a  restaurant,  which  the  appellant
    managed.  Amongst the eleven employees of the restaurant were two Tamil
    men who were employed in January 2006.  In  May  2006  members  of  the
    terrorist investigation department of the Sri Lankan police visited the
    restaurant and  made  enquiries  about  these  men  because  they  were
    suspected of being collaborators with, or members of, the  LTTE.   When
    the enquiries were made the two  men  were  on  leave  in  Jaffna.  The
    appellant and his father were detained on  suspicion  of  collaborating
    with the LTTE.  The appellant said that he was first held  at  an  army
    camp and then at Boosa Prison where he was violently  interrogated  and
    been obliged to sign a confession.  He  was  traced  in  detention  and
    released through the intervention of an uncle who had bribed  a  police
    officer to arrange his release.   The  appellant  being  told  that  he
    should leave the country.  The appellant asserted that his  father  had
    never been traced and remained missing.

4.   The appellant then joined his  uncle  in  Watara  remaining  in  hiding
    there until he left Sri Lanka.  He received treatment for injuries  but
    no permanent mark was left.  He left through  the  airport  at  Colombo
    with the assistance of a corrupt policeman.

5.   The Secretary of State, in refusing the  application  referred  to  the
    appellant's immigration history and did not accept that his  story  was
    true.

6.   The judge heard evidence  from  the  appellant  and  in  paragraphs  17
    onwards set out a very detailed assessment of his credibility, and made
    detailed findings of fact.   He  stated  that  although  the  appellant
    appeared to have given a reasonably  coherent  account  which  was  not
    lacking internal consistency there was a material lack of particularity
    and consistency surrounding the account of the alleged police enquiries
    for the appellant since his arrival in Britain.  The judge stated  that
    up until the date of hearing the only visit by TID officers alleged  by
    the appellant with any particularity was one to which  he  referred  at
    interview as a recent visit although later at  the  interview  he  left
    hanging a suggestion there had been multiple visits to his  home  -  he
    referred to his mother being in fear of "visits" by the authorities  in
    which she had  been  abused.   The  judge  stated  there  was  a  clear
    progression  in  the  appellant's  claim  for  there  being  only   one
    particularised visit to the vague insinuation this had  been  the  most
    recent of many.  He said that although the appellant  had  changed  his
    evidence it appears that there had been no enquiries by the police  for
    him prior to March 2016.

7.    Having  considered  the  background  evidence  the  judge  stated   it
    indicated that even past LTTE collaborators and  members  were  not  at
    risk unless suspected by the sophisticated and  well-informed  security
    apparatus  of  continuing  separatist  activities.   The  claim  of   a
    resurgence of interest in the appellant six years after  the  LTTE  was
    defeated and ten years after his  departure  from  Sri  Lanka  was  "so
    widely  divergent  from  that  which  is  plausible  in  light  of  the
    background evidence that it carries no credibility".

8.   The judge referred to the delay in the appellant's claiming asylum.  He
    noted the number of applications made by the appellant which had failed
    and the further applications which he had made which would  have  given
    him an opportunity to claim asylum.  He stated in paragraph 22:-

         "Against this background, the continued failure of  the  appellant,
         even after March 2014, to raise a protection  claim,  is  seriously
         incompatible with any genuine fear of harm on return to Sri Lanka."

     He pointed out that it was only after removal directions had been  made
    that the appellant had uttered any protection fears.

9.   The judge in paragraph 23 dealt  with  the  documentary  evidence.   He
    noted that the appellant had produced a  document  from  a  Sri  Lankan
    attorney at the time of the first hearing of the appeal on 24  February
    and that on that occasion the respondent had asked for  an  adjournment
    to take steps to verify the documents but had not successfully  pursued
    their verification and had merely  relied  on  a  submission  from  the
    appropriate consular officials in Sri Lanka as to the prevalence of use
    of fraudulent documents and of fraudulent identification  of  attorneys
    in Sri Lanka.  The judge said that he could attach  no  weight  to  the
    substance of the claim of prevalence of fraud save only that it  was  a
    general caveat but  considered  the  documents  in  the  light  of  the
    principles enunciated in Tanveer Ahmed.  He referred to the  fact  that
    the appellant had been inconsistent  in  his  recourse  to  documentary
    support and indeed that the appellant had told the interviewing officer
    that he had no way of  obtaining  any  documents  and  indeed  that  no
    document had ever been issued.

10.  He noted the  appellant's  evidence  which  he  stated  was  "in  clear
    extemporisation" when asked if a warrant  of  arrest  had  been  issued
    against him when he had said that the police  had  a  paper  which  his
    mother was incapable of reading.  The judge thought that was  a  highly
    equivocal claim and therefore carried little weight.  At interview  the
    appellant had been asked for the ample evidence which the appellant had
    claimed supported his claim but  nothing  had  been  forthcoming.   The
    judge  therefore stated that there must be serious  concerns  from  the
    outset as to the reliability of the documents produced.  He stated that
    a relevant point was that existence of the documents  was  inconsistent
    with the appellant's statement that there were none  to  be  had.   The
    appellant had also said that he  had  received  the  document  from  an
    unknown source.  That the judge did not consider to be  plausible.   He
    went on to say:

         "If there had  been  the  genuine  and  honest  involvement  of  an
         attorney instructed for the  appellant  in  Sri  Lanka,  one  would
         reasonably expect there to be  proof  of  contact  and  good  faith
         between the alleged attorney and the appellant's solicitors in  the
         United Kingdom".

11.   The  judge  also  considered  that  the  contents  of  the  attorney's
    submissions threw up further inconsistencies in the appellant's account
    as the appellant had said that the  attorney  had  been  instructed  on
    behalf of both himself and his father in May 2006.  The judge said this
    was highly unlikely to be true as the appellant had at no time prior to
    the production of documents alleged involvement of  an  attorney.   His
    allegation throughout was that he was traced  by  his  influential  and
    well-connected uncle who had procured his release by corrupt  practice,
    whereas the attorney had said that the  appellant  was  released  on  a
    "bond" and that this added a  further  inconsistency  when  considering
    the appellant's release.  There was also an  inconsistency  about  when
    the appellant was to report.  The judge referred to  his  note  of  the
    proceedings and said that it reflected the fact that the answers  given
    by  the  appellant  showed  evasiveness  and  that  this  damaged   his
    credibility.

12.  The judge then went on to consider the detail in the  letter  from  the
    attorney setting out the various points which he  considered  were  not
    credible.

13.  The judge noted the medical evidence but did  not  consider  that  that
    assisted the appellant. He said that the contents of the report  showed
    that the doctor "was by no means fully or genuinely instructed".  There
    was a list of the medical treatment which the  appellant  had  received
    and a note that he had had  suicidal  thoughts,   having  lost  �29,000
    because he was  addicted to  gambling, and  had  then   been  diagnosed
    with depression.  That medical history had not been shown to the doctor
    who had prepared the psychologist's report.

14.  The judge came to the conclusion that the  communitive  effect  of  all
    the evidence was  that  the  account  of  the  appellant  was  "falsely
    devised".  He stated the documents produced were grossly unreliable and
    not at all likely to be genuine.

15.  Applying the relevant country guidance, the judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant would not face a risk of persecution on  return.   The  judge
    then dealt properly with the issue of the rights of the appellant under
    Article 8 of the ECHR finding that those were not engaged.

16.  The grounds of appeal asserted that the judge was wrong  to  aver  that
    the appellant had not  attempted  to  particularise  enquiries  by  the
    police for  him  prior  to  2006  referring  to  paragraph  12  of  the
    appellant's witness statement.  They also assert  that  the  judge  was
    wrong to find that the renewed interest in the appellant  was  at  odds
    with objective evidence - the ground referred to ongoing harassment  of
    suspected LTTE sympathisers eight years after the defeat  of  the  LTTE
    and stated that the renewed interest in the  appellant  occurred  after
    regime change in Colombo.   It  was  also  argued,   referring  to  the
    judgment in PJ (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1011, that the  judge
    had erred by not ordering that the respondent  verify  the  appellant's
    documents. They stated  that the letter from the  Sri  Lankan  attorney
    was at the centre of the request for protection  given  the  risks  for
    those detained as set out in the head note in GJ and Others (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

17.  It was also asserted the judge had erred in his  consideration  of  the
    documentary evidence and that the judge should not have found that  the
    appellant's evidence as set out in the attorney's letter  that  he  had
    been released on a "bond" was inconsistent with the  appellant's  claim
    to being released  on  "corrupt  payment".   They  submitted  that  the
    appellant's claim was not unreasonable as the  appellant's  family  had
    not been issued with the arrest warrant and his family would  not  have
    been in a position to obtain copies themselves.   With  regard  to  the
    warrant issued for the appellant's arrest by the  Colombo  Magistrates'
    Court the grounds stated "it is not in the nature of societies such  as
    Sri Lanka for the state to behave reasonably and  the  unusual  or  the
    strange things should not be dismissed incredible or  improbable  based
    on how one might expect them to operate".

18.  Those grounds were considered in the First-tier by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Osborne and refused.  He wrote:-

         "1.  The grounds seek permission to appeal a decision  and  reasons
             of First-tier Tribunal Judge M J Gillespie who in  a  decision
             and  reasons  promulgated  22  August   2017   dismissed   the
             Appellant's appeal for protection on all grounds.


         2.   The grounds assert that the judge misconstrued the Appellant's
             evidence.  The judge's findings  as  to  the  plausibility  of
             renewed interest in the Appellant are unreasonable and at odds
             with the objective evidence.  The judge failed to reference or
             consider submissions advanced by the Appellant in  respect  of
             established case law.  The judge erred in  his  assessment  of
             the documentary evidence.


         3.   Contrary to what is stated in the grounds, in  a  careful  and
             well-reasoned decision and  reasons  the  judge  set  out  the
             pertinent issues, law, and evidence relating to the  facts  of
             the appeal.  In appeals of this nature it is the task  of  the
             judge to make findings of fact on the basis  of  the  evidence
             and to provide adequately clear reasons  for  those  findings.
             That is what the judge did.  The findings made  by  the  judge
             were properly open to him on the basis of the  evidence.   The
             judge's Decision should be read as a  whole  in  order  to  be
             given its full context.  The judge considered all the evidence
             as a whole and made adequate findings for adequately expressed
             reasons.  The judge was in the best  position  to  assess  the
             evidence as he scrutinised it and so and heard  the  Appellant
             as he gave his evidence.


         4.   Neither the grounds nor the decision and reasons disclose  any
             arguably material error of law."

19.  Renewed  grounds  were  considered  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Macleman.  He wrote:-

         "It is unnecessary to hold an oral hearing of the  application  for
         permission to appeal because I consider that  it  can  properly  be
         dealt with on the papers.  Permission to  appeal  is  granted,  for
         these reasons:


         1.   Grounds 1, 2 and  4  are  in  substance  only  insistence  and
             disagreement on the facts.  They crystallise no proposition of
             error on a point of law whereby the decision might arguably be
             set aside.


         2.    Ground  3  complains  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  a
             submission that the SSHD was,  exceptionally,  bound  to  take
             steps to verify a document; but at  paragraph  23,  the  judge
             dealt with precisely that issue as it arose on  the  facts  of
             the case, gave  weight  to  the  fact  that  the  respondent's
             investigation was on a general rather than a  specific  basis,
             and found that "an inadequate attempt at rebuttal'.   He  then
             went on to decide the matter in context.  The grounds  do  not
             show that based on PJ, the appellant could have  expected  any
             more than that."

     Despite what he had written Judge Macleman stated  in  that  permission
    was granted.

20.  At the beginning of the hearing I stated that  I  believed  that  there
    had in fact been a typing error in Judge Macleman's  decision  in  that
    following the tenor of what he had written I  considered  that  he  had
    meant to refuse the application. However given that the  appellant  was
    represented before me I stated that I would hear from Ms Harris in  any
    event.

21.  Ms Harris asked me to consider the terms of paragraphs 30 to 32 of  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in PJ (Sri Lanka).  She stated that the
    fact that the respondent had previously sought an adjournment indicated
    the importance of the verification of the document and  that  I  should
    take into account the last sentence  of  paragraph  32  in  which  Lord
    Justice Fulford had stated:

         "If the court finds there was such an obligation and  that  it  was
         not discharged it must assess the consequences for  the  case"  (to
         verify the documents).

22.  She then referred to the criticism by the judge that the appellant  had
    not particularised the claim prior to March 2016 and asserted that that
    was unfair.  The appellant had been consistent and indeed  he  had  not
    been asked about earlier visits - that had not been put to him  nor  at
    interview, nor was it highlighted in the refusal letter.  It was  wrong
    therefore for the judge to have held that against him.   The  appellant
    had indeed referred to visits.  Moreover  she  stated  that  there  was
    Country Information Guidance which indicated the plausibility of  there
    being interest in the appellant after the new government was formed  in
    2015.  She said  that  the  appellant  would  be  of  interest  to  the
    authorities because he had signed a confession.  The reality  was  that
    there were 11,000 people who had had  to  pass  through  rehabilitation
    because of their previous support for the LTTE and it would  take  very
    little to indicate the appellant's involvement  and  he  was  therefore
    likely to be tortured.  The judge was wrong to second  guess  what  the
    Tamils who had been detained might  have  said  about  the  appellant's
    involvement.

23.  Turning to the letter from the attorney she said that  it   clearly  it
    showed that that lawyer had been involved in 2006  and  that  indicated
    that the appellant's story of what had happened at that time was  true.
    The lawyer's letter referred to an email and although it  was  not  the
    case that the letter from the appellant's solicitors in London had been
    submitted clearly they had written to the attorney which would  support
    the veracity of what he said.

24.  Mr Wilding in reply referred to correspondence from  the  British  High
    Commission in Colombo which  set  out  the  difficulties  in  obtaining
    verification  of  documents  because  of  the  very  large  numbers  of
    documents which were sent to  Colombo  for  verification  -  there  was
    simply not enough time to check them all.  The letter  stated  that  of
    277 police  and court  documents  which  had  been  sent  to  the  High
    Commission  where attempts had been made to verify  the  documents  91%
    had not been genuine.  The letter emphasised that  the  post  did   not
    have the capacity to  continue  to  assist  with  the  verification  of
    documents.

25.  He argued that the other grounds of appeal  were  really  disagreements
    with the judge's detailed assessment of the claim.  The judge had taken
    the constituent parts of the appellant's claim  and  examined  each  in
    detail and had reached findings  and  conclusions  thereon  which  were
    fully reasoned.  He had been entitled  to  comprehensively  reject  the
    content of the attorney's letter and had given reasons for that.

Discussion

26.  I repeat the  comments  of  Judge  Osborne  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Macleman.  Clearly this is  a  case  where  the  judge  very  carefully
    considered the evidence and reached findings and conclusions which were
    fully open to him thereon.   He  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant's claim was implausible and to place weight on the  delay  in
    claiming  asylum  particularly  given  the   very   large   number   of
    applications and appeals which  the  appellant  had  made.   The  judge
    properly applied the  principles  in  Tanveer  Ahmed  to  the  document
    received  from  the  attorney   in   Sri   Lanka.    He   pointed   out
    inconsistencies therein with regard to the  appellant's  evidence.   He
    was entitled to note that there was no evidence of the  correspondence,
    if any between the appellant's solicitors here and the attorney in  Sri
    Lanka and to place weight on the inconsistencies  and  the  appellant's
    evidence as to when the attorney was involved.  I would add that  I  do
    not consider that the judgment of the Court of Appeal in PJ (Sri Lanka)
    places any obligation on  the  respondent  to  attempt  to  verify  the
    documents.  Indeed the reality is  that  at  paragraph  30  Fulford  LJ
    writes:

         "Therefore, simply because the  relevant  document  is  potentially
         capable  of  being  verified  does  not  mean  that  the   national
         authorities have an obligation to take this step."

    And at paragraph 32:

         "Finally, in this context it is to be emphasised  that  the  courts
         are not required to order the Secretary  of  State  to  investigate
         particular areas of evidence or otherwise to direct her enquiries."

27.  There was clearly no obligation on the Secretary  of  State  to  verify
    the document, the Secretary of State gave good reasons as to why it was
    not possible to do so and moreover  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    ordered by the court to verify the documents.  The  Presenting  Officer
    at the first hearing who had been served with the document at the  last
    minute was entitled to ask for an adjournment and did so.  He  gave  no
    undertaking that the document would be verified nor was he  obliged  to
    have the document  verified  by  order  of  the  court.    I  therefore
    consider there is no merit in that point.  With regards  to  the  other
    points raised in the grounds of appeal these are, I  consider,  covered
    in the orders of Judge Osborne and Judge Macleman.

28.  While I take into  account  the  background  information  to  which  Ms
    Harris referred which she said indicated that there had been increasing
    interest since the change of government in Sri Lanka  in  2015  in  the
    activities of those who had taken part in subversive activities in  the
    past, the reality of course is that this appellant is not Tamil - he is
    Sinhalese - and had never  taken  part  in  any  separatist  activities
    whatsoever.  Although Ms  Harris  attempted  then  to  state  that  the
    appellant had signed a confession that  was  something  which  was  not
    accepted for good  reasons  by  the  judge.   I  consider  the  judge's
    findings that the appellant's claim was not credible were fully open to
    him.   I  find  that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and I therefore  dismiss
    this appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]                          Date  25 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
