
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/08248/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                    |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 9 February 2018                    |        On 14 February 2018          |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                 CO & OTHERS
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr M Moksud, instructed by IIAS
For the respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Herwald  promulgated  6.6.17,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  25.7.16,  to
    refuse his protection claim.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott Baker granted permission to  appeal  on
    25.9.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 9.2.18 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Basis of Protection Claim

 4. The protection claim was made on the basis of a  fear  of  mistreatment
    for having married someone from the Osu caste. The appellant's wife was
    allegedly abducted, beaten and raped and he was subjected to  hostility
    by members of his own family and others unknown.  He  received  threats
    and his shop windows were smashed. He also claims to fear his  daughter
    will be subjected to FGM on the family's return to Nigeria.

The First-tier Tribunal Findings

 5. In essence, the appeal was dismissed on credibility grounds.

 6. Judge Herwald found the appellant's claim of hostility arising from his
    marriage to someone from the Osu caste  largely  untruthful,  including
    the claimed attack on his wife. At [14(j)] the judge concluded  on  the
    evidence there relied on that the appellant and his family had come  to
    the UK with the intention to settle here and never return to Nigeria.

 7. In relation to the FGM claim, the  judge  noted  at  [13(e)]  that  the
    practice of FGM has been criminalised  and  that  there  is  a  greater
    degree of professionalism in the Nigerian Police  Force,  despite  some
    corruption. On the evidence, the judge did not accept that  that  there
    is a systemic or institutionalised unwillingness to  afford  protection
    to victims. At [14(o)] onwards, the judge considered the  claimed  fear
    of FGM, but was not satisfied that anyone who might  have  wished  them
    harm would be able to find  them  if  they  relocated  in  Nigeria  and
    rejected the appellant's claim that there was  "no  hiding  place"  for
    them. The Judge relied on the evidence that both the appellant and  his
    wife were strongly opposed to FGM. Taking into account the  sufficiency
    of protection, and the reasonableness of relocation, the judge was  not
    persuaded that there was any genuine risk of FGM and  that  this  claim
    had been 'bolted on' in an attempt to bolster an unmeritorious claim.

Error of Law

 8. For the reasons summarised below I found no material error  of  law  in
    the making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to
    require the decision of Judge Herwald to be set aside.

The Grounds of to Appeal

 9. Mr Moksud attempted to argue article 8 issues including Section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 best  interests  when
    this had not pleaded in the grounds and no permission had been granted.
    In fact,  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  hearing  it  had  been
    specifically stated by the appellant's representative  that  article  8
    was not relied on. In the circumstances, I  declined  to  hear  further
    submissions on this issue.

10. There is no merit in the pleaded submission in  the  grounds  that  the
    judge's findings were distorted by reliance on section 8 considerations
    at [15]. The section 8 consideration was entirely open to the judge and
    states only that it has been taken into consideration  in  the  overall
    credibility assessment; no error is disclosed.

11. The grounds allege that the judge erred in law in that almost  all  the
    reasons for rejecting credibility relate to the caste  issue  and  rape
    allegation and not the  FGM  claim.  Whilst  that  is  true,  it  would
    obviously be so, as the bulk of the appellant's factual  claim  relates
    to the assertions of hostility based on his wife's Osu caste and  rape.
    In the absence of any allegation of any specific threat  to  carry  out
    FGM made towards the appellant or any member of  his  family,  the  FGM
    claim has to be  largely  based  on  objective  evidence;  the  country
    background information. However, the judge was entitled to rely on  the
    overall credibility findings to determine whether the claimed  fear  of
    FGM was genuine, or whether, as the judge concluded, it  was  something
    added in an attempt to bolster an otherwise weak protection claim.

12. It is submitted in the grounds that the fears of FGM were  well-founded
    as the objective evidence confirms  the  continued  prevalence  of  the
    practice, despite its criminalisation. Mr Moksud submitted  that  there
    could be no guarantee that FGM would be  carried  out.  However,  those
    submissions ignored the specific findings of the judge as  to  why  the
    family would not be at risk, including the fact that the children would
    have the protection of both parents in the family unit, and  would,  as
    the judge found, be able to relocation away from those who  might  wish
    them harm.

13. It is clear that the judge did take into account the objective evidence
    referred to by Mr Moksud,  and  considered  issues  of  sufficiency  of
    protection, as well as reasonableness  of  relocation.  The  conclusion
    that there was no risk that anyone who might wish the family harm would
    be able to find them in Nigeria's 175  million-strong  population,  was
    open to the judge, particularly given the judge's  conclusions  on  the
    credibility of the claimed threats based on his wife's  Osu  caste  and
    rape. If those threats were not credible, as the judge found, there was
    nothing  to  specifically  suggest  that  there  was   any   particular
    motivation of family members to inflict FGM. More significantly, it was
    open to the judge to find that as both parents were strongly opposed to
    FGM, the risk was insufficient. Taking all those factors together,  the
    conclusion that there is no  well-founded  fear  of  FGM  was  entirely
    justified and open to the judge on the evidence. No  error  of  law  is
    disclosed.

14. The grounds also complain that whilst  the  judge  held  that  internal
    relocation was available, no finding was made as to whether that  would
    be reasonable. The test in fact is the Januzi as to whether it would be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect the  applicant  to relocate to
    another part of their country. The judge accepted  that  the  appellant
    had already relocated to Lagos but was not persuaded that he  would  be
    able to be located there by any person from his original home area  who
    might wish him ill. Further, there are other  large  cities  throughout
    Nigeria to which it would be reasonable to relocate.  The  judge  noted
    that the appellant had managed to relocate to the UK and thus could  do
    so in a country where he has spent almost all of his life.  Whilst  the
    judge does not spell out the conclusion that relocation  would  not  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh, and it would have  been  better  to  have
    done so, that conclusion is nevertheless obvious from the  findings  at
    [14(n)].

15. The finding at [14(p)] that the FGM  claim  had  been  bolted  onto  an
    already unmeritorious  asylum  claim  appears  at  first  sight  stark,
    without justifying reasoning at that point, but has to be read  in  the
    light of the findings and the decision as a whole. In any  event,  this
    particular finding is not material to the outcome of the claim and  the
    decision is justified and can stand independently of it.

16. In the circumstances, neither the grounds nor  the  submissions  of  Mr
    Moksud disclose any material error  of  law  such  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside and remade.

Decision:

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision stands and the appeal remains dismissed  on
                    all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup






Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. However, as children are involved I make an  anonymity
direction.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  responded.  Breach  of  this
direction may result in proceedings for contempt of court.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007. I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee  Awards
in Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


