
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08398/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 30th August 2019                  |On 11th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                            JOSELYNE YAMBA BOTULI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C John-Rose instructed by Broudie Jackson Canter
                    (Manchester)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Ms Botuli, a citizen of the DRC, sought  international  protection,
         such claim being refused by the respondent for reasons set out in a
         decision dated 20th June 2018. Her statutory  appeal  against  that
         decision was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy for reasons
         set out in a decision promulgated on 9th January 2019.

      2. Ms Botuli sought and was granted permission to appeal that decision
         by DUTJ Taylor on 24th June  2019.  The  appellant  relies  in  her
         grounds of appeal on a claimed failure by the  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge to have adequate regard to the medical evidence  in  reaching
         her assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  account
         particularly when considering lack of recall and/or lack of ability
         to provide explanations for particular issues

      3. In particular the appellant submits:

          a) The First-tier Tribunal judge failed  to  give  the  appellant
             "any benefit arising from her condition, despite acknowledging
             that [she] was to be treated as a vulnerable witness";

          b) The First-tier Tribunal judge failed to give any consideration
             to the impact of  PTSD  and  potential  vulnerability  on  her
             "inability to explain and her lack of recall";

          c) The First-tier Tribunal judge failed to give  adequate  weight
             to the medical report which she said, incorrectly was based on
             an acceptance of the appellant's account whereas  it  was,  on
             full and careful  reading  based  on  independent  factors  in
             addition to the appellant's account of her history;

          d)  That notwithstanding the  changed  political  landscape,  the
             First-tier Tribunal  judge  failed  to  take  account  of  the
             appellant's vulnerability and diagnosis in finding she was not
             at real risk on return.

      4. The grounds relied upon do not dispute the findings by  the  First-
         tier Tribunal judge that:

           . The appellant had failed to provide an explanation why she was
             unable to name the party her husband supported  in  April  but
             was able to in June;

           . The appellant claimed that the name she gave of the leader  of
             the party her husband supported was  mis  transcribed  by  the
             respondent; yet she gave  the  same  name  to  Dr  Ghosh;  and
             corrections made to her earlier evidence by her solicitors did
             not include that 'mis transcription';

           . That a group called the League of Youth does not exist;

           . That her accounts of her escape from prison were inconsistent;

           . That she initially claimed no-one in her family was  a  member
             of the army yet subsequently  said  her  father  was  an  army
             commander and that was why she was helped to escape.

      5. Dr Ghosh does not state that her mental health problems are such as
         would cause or be likely to result in or even could possibly result
         in loss of memory or inability to recall matters or  result  in  an
         inability to explain matters. Some of the  claimed  inconsistencies
         were apparent when Dr Ghosh prepared the report, yet  he  does  not
         address those in terms of his diagnosis; his instructing solicitors
         had, in their letter of 18th  June,  referred  to  the  appellant's
         medication and forgetfulness but he was not  asked  to  express  an
         opinion on this.

      6. The judge records accurately that Dr Ghosh did not  consider  other
         possible  causes  of  trauma.  The  judge  considers  whether   the
         appellant's mental health problems could have been as a  result  of
         separation from her family and a traumatic journey and accepts that
         these are  matters  that  could  cause  her  mental  health  to  be
         significantly affected. Thus,  although  the  judge  placed  little
         weight on the report by Dr  Ghosh  she  gave  full  weight  to  the
         diagnosis of mental health problems.

      7. Ms John-Rose submitted that there was  sufficient  evidence  before
         the judge which had been discounted by the judge in dismissing  the
         medical report, which would have affected the appellant's evidence.
         She drew attention to the appellant  referring  to  her  headaches,
         that she became upset and crying during the  substantive  interview
         with the respondent and that the  appellant's  solicitors  had,  in
         their letter dated 18th June 2018, referred to the appellant taking
         medication that made her forgetful and unable to  concentrate.  The
         medical  report  is  dated  26th  August  2018.  The   psychiatrist
         specifically addresses questions which he has  been  asked  by  the
         appellant's solicitors. He was not  asked,  and  did  not  give  an
         opinion, on whether the appellant's ability to  recall  information
         or provide an explanation for matters upon which she was questioned
         was impaired. Nor does the  psychiatrist  refer  to  the  appellant
         being on any medication, never mind medication  that  impaired  her
         ability to communicate in any way.

      8. The psychiatrist sets out in detail the account given to him by the
         appellant. He records the same name of the opposition leader as was
         given to the respondent, with the  same  spelling,  which  was  not
         corrected by the appellant's solicitors in  their  letter  of  18th
         June 2018. In the report the appellant says she cannot remember the
         name of the party her husband was with, as  was  the  case  in  her
         substantive interview, and yet in the letter  from  the  solicitors
         she is recorded as knowing the name of the party but she tells  the
         psychiatrist she cannot remember. No explanation  was  provided  by
         the appellant for these discrepancies and they are a point referred
         to by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  as  one  of  a  number  of
         significant issues.

      9. The judge did not place weight upon the report,  referring  to  the
         report having been produced on  the  basis  that  the  psychiatrist
         accepted the account given by the appellant rather than considering
         whether there were other causes for her PTSD and/or depression.  Ms
         John-Rose  referred  to  the  reference  in  the  report   to   the
         appellant's separation from her children and family. It is  correct
         that there is reference to  the  appellant's  separation  from  her
         family. It was however open to the judge to conclude,  having  read
         the report fully and carefully, that she was not prepared to  place
         weight upon the report because it  did  not  question  the  account
         given by the appellant or investigate whether there could have been
         other causes.

     10. Ms John-Rose submitted that there  were  no  discrepancies  in  the
         appellant's evidence regarding  her  father's  involvement  in  the
         army. This was not pleaded in the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
         appeal. There was  no  application  for  permission  to  amend  the
         pleaded grounds.

     11. Ms John-Rose submitted that  the  lack  of  weight  placed  on  the
         medical evidence resulted in the judge failing  to  place  adequate
         weight on the appellant's evidence as  to  her  arrest  and  escape
         given the lack of discrepancies. Not only was this not pleaded  but
         it does not follow that even had the  judge  specifically  accepted
         that  the  appellant  was  suffering  from  PTSD,  that  could  not
         necessarily result in a finding that the appellant's account of her
         arrest and escape was credible. The judge  found,  irrespective  of
         the medical report that the appellant's account  was  not  credible
         because she did not know the name of the leader of the  opposition;
         she did not know the name of  the  party  her  husband  worked  for
         despite having undertaken work with him for many months; the League
         of Youth organisation as an umbrella organisation did not exist and
         given her claimed very low level of activity it  was  not  credible
         that she would have been arrested and detained as claimed. Ms John-
         Rose submitted that that the sound of the name  of  the  opposition
         leader was the same, it was the spelling that was different  -  yet
         that spelling was repeated by the psychiatrist and the spelling was
         not corrected by the solicitors. The findings reached by the  judge
         were open to her on the evidence before her,  irrespective  of  the
         psychiatrist's report which, even if  the  diagnosis  of  PTSD  and
         depression  had  been  accepted  specifically  by  the  judge,  are
         sustainable.

     12. The judge nevertheless went on to consider the appellant's position
         if she were a low-level participator in  opposition  politics.  Her
         conclusions regarding the elections,  that  political  events  have
         'moved on' cannot be faulted.

     13. The judge considered  whether  the  appellant's  medical  condition
         reached the high threshold required to find she would be at risk of
         an Article 3 breach. The grounds submit that the  judge  failed  to
         have consideration of  the  appellant's  vulnerability  -  that  is
         simply not the case. The judge found that the appellant had  family
         to return to and accepted she  was  suffering  from  mental  health
         problems. Such findings  are  inadequate  to  meet  the  Article  3
         threshold. Before me Ms John-Rose sought to persuade  me  that  the
         findings by the judge on Article 3 were  inadequate  and  that  the
         report by  the  psychiatrist  was  sufficient  to  reach  the  high
         threshold required to sustain such a claim, even  though  this  had
         not been pleaded in seeking permission to appeal.  That  is  simply
         not correct. The appellant has family to  return  to;  the  judge's
         findings that she is not  a  real  risk  of  being  persecuted  are
         sustainable and there are  medical  facilities  available  for  her
         treatment if required.

     14. The appellant had not sought to appeal the Article 8 decision;  the
         judge made no findings on Article 8 and this was not  raised  as  a
         ground of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set  aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing the appeal stands.


     Date 4th September 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
