
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08670/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5th March 2018                        |On 27th March 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   mr H J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Brocklesby-Weller (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Fowell, promulgated on 12th October 2017, following a hearing at Taylor
    House on 5th October 2017.  In the determination, the  judge  dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  [  ]
    1992.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State, dated 23rd August 2017, refusing his application for asylum  and
    for humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of HC 395  on  grounds
    that he had a well-founded fear of persecution on account of  the  fact
    that he was a member of a particular social group, namely, that he  was
    a gay man.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that, having arrived in the UK  as  a  student
    from Pakistan in February 2012, and with his visa expiring  in  October
    2014, he had remained in the UK, and had subsequently applied for leave
    to remain, relying on his private and family life rights.  He  had  put
    in a substantive asylum claim which was refused on  23rd  August  2017.
    The basis of the claim was that he was  gay.   His  case  was  that  he
    discovered his  sexuality  only  while  in  the  UK,  where  he  had  a
    relationship of some length with a man  called  Ahmed.   While  he  was
    studying, he was working at Papa John's Pizza Restaurant and sharing  a
    house with Ahmed as friends, when in August 2013 Ahmed told him he  was
    gay.   This  prompted  the  Appellant  himself  to  recognise  his  own
    sexuality and in May 2015 he confided in his  gay  sexuality  with  his
    friend, Ayesha.  He began a relationship with Ahmed in  July  and  they
    were together until  March  2016.   The  key  part  of  his  claim,  as
    identified by the judge (see paragraph 5) is that the  Appellant  feels
    that he would be pressured into an arranged marriage  in  Pakistan  and
    that his father would kill him if he saw him again and his mother  felt
    the same.  His uncle in the UK, on whom he had  claimed  to  have  been
    dependent, was more sympathetic (paragraph 5).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge set out the central part of the relevant judicial  authority,
    namely, HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC, at the outset of the determination  (see
    paragraphs 11 to 13) with  large  extracts  of  the  judgment  of  Lord
    Rodgers and of Lord Hope quoted.  He then also set out the Home  Office
    country guidance note from April 2016 in relation to Pakistan  and  the
    sexual orientation claims emanating from  that  country  (at  paragraph
    14).  He had regard to the documentary evidence before him  (paragraphs
    16 to 20).  Thereafter, he  considered  the  oral  evidence  at  length
    (paragraphs 21 to 32).

 5. The judge noted that a key part of the submissions of the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer was that there was a complete absence  of  a  threat
    from the Appellant's family in the evidence presented.  There  were  no
    text and no social media extracts the Appellant could point to.  It was
    also submitted that the only witness who  could  confirm  the  attitude
    that would be taken by the Appellant's family back in Pakistan, namely,
    his sympathetic uncle, did not turn up to give evidence (paragraph 36).
     It was also submitted by the Presenting Officer that  the  Appellant's
    homosexuality in the gay social scene in  Karachi  would  be  protected
    (paragraph 34).  Moreover, despite the evidence of his recent openness,
    the Appellant had only referred to one meaningful  relationship,  which
    was with Jawed, and this ended in 2016 (paragraph  35).  There  was  no
    further evidence.

 6. The judge concluded that the Appellant, on the evidence before him, was
    a person who was of a shy disposition (paragraph 44) and was  a  person
    who was "a naturally  reserved  person"  (paragraph  50).  Assuming  he
    wanted to  practice  his  sexuality,  he  was  not  a  person  who  was
    "needlessly open about his sexuality and will only reveal it in  places
    and with people with whom he feels at home  and  supported"  (paragraph
    50).  This being so, the judge concluded, that upon the application  of
    the Supreme Court decision in HJ (Iran) that he would not be  inhibited
    from expressing his sexuality  due  to  reasons  of  "social  pressure"
    because there was already evidence before the judge of "his long period
    in the UK essentially concealing his sexuality despite the  much  great
    freedoms he enjoys" (paragraph 51) in this country.  On the other hand,
    were the Appellant to be subjected to social pressure then  this  would
    certainly  be  enough  "to  dissuade  him  from  any  open  mention  of
    sexuality", although in his case the social pressure  in  itself  would
    not amount to persecution given his  inhibitions  that  the  judge  had
    noted (paragraph 51).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge misdirected himself  as
    to the law because he failed to  ask  whether  there  was  a  "material
    reason" for non-disclosure of the  Appellant's  sexuality  in  Pakistan
    that would amount to a fear of harm being  visited  on  the  Appellant.
    Social pressure in itself was not the full  story.   There  may  be  an
    additional feature to the Appellant's evidence which could be  that  he
    was also fearful of persecutory harm.  In  the  Appellant's  case,  his
    fear of disclosure was supported by evidence of attitudes and behaviour
    towards gays in Pakistan, which was well-known.

 9. Secondly, Judge Fowell had considered that the Appellant would not live
    openly as a gay man in Pakistan, but in doing so acted irrationally, by
    reliance upon previously closeted nature of the Appellant's  sexuality.
    This was because the Appellant was now "out" and the judge was bound to
    consider risk of harm to the Appellant as at the date of  the  hearing.
    The judge was simply wrong to assess risk on the  basis  of  previously
    stifled  expression  of  his  sexuality  until  quite   recently   (see
    paragraphs 49 to 50).  Third, the judge was wrong to say  that  it  was
    "not necessary to enter into a detailed examination of  the  background
    evidence" (paragraph 53) because this amounted to a  failure  to  apply
    "anxious scrutiny" which  was  a  feature  of  all  protection  claims.
    Fourth, the judge failed to give adequate  reasons  why  the  Appellant
    would not face a real risk of persecution as a gay  man  where  it  had
    been found that, "the restrictions on him would clearly be much less in
    his case then the majority of the gay community in Pakistan" (paragraph
    52), and that the Appellant would  "take  advantage  of  the  increased
    freedoms to be found in big cities" (paragraph 53).  This  was  because
    the COIS Report (2016) makes it clear that  "young  men  or  boys  that
    identify as gay typically face expulsion from the family home  if  they
    do not relinquish their  sexual  orientation"  (see  paragraph  6.2.1).
    Fifth, the  failure  to  enter  into  a  detailed  examination  of  the
    background evidence (set out at paragraph 7 of the  COIS  Report  2016)
    was a material factor  where  the  Appellant  lived  openly  in  a  gay
    relationship  and  had  been  found  to  be  someone  who  sought  such
    relationships (paragraph 49 of the determination).  Sixth, the  finding
    that the Appellant was a sufficiently wealthy person, from  a  well-off
    family so as to enable him to  face  lesser  restrictions  was  neither
    supported by evidence and nor did  that  equate  to  a  sufficiency  of
    protection.  Seventh, the judge speculated about the Appellant's former
    partner,  Ahmed,  having  returned  to  Pakistan   because   his   life
    circumstances would be immaterial to those of the Appellant.   Finally,
    the judge failed to give adequate reasons in general.

10. On 15th December 2017 permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that the judge's recital of the principle  in  HJ  (Iran)  was  "unduly
    restrictive" given that the Appellant was  living  now  an  openly  gay
    lifestyle.  He was, after all, accepted as having  a  shy  disposition.
    Further scrutiny was required of the  background  material.   This  was
    also a case where the Appellant was now "out" as  a  homosexual  person
    which was not previously the case.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me, Mr Gilbert, of Counsel, relied  fundamentally
    upon the detailed grounds of application. He began by emphasising  that
    it was accepted by the judge that the Appellant was gay, had been in  a
    gay relationship for a reasonably long period of time with a man by the
    name of Ahmed, and that he was  now  "out".   However,  the  judge  had
    applied the wrong test in HJ (Iran) by making it unduly restrictive  in
    relation to someone who was of a shy disposition but was  also  at  the
    same time now "out".  For a proper explanation of the  case  law  there
    had to be an enquiry into what other material factors may  prevent  the
    Appellant from living his sexuality openly  in  Pakistan,  quite  aside
    from the "social pressures" that the judge had already noted.

12. Second, on  the  question  of  how  the  Appellant  would  behave,  the
    Appellant had already said that he was now an openly gay  man,  and  it
    was therefore wrong to review his position from that of stifled  sexual
    expression, which was his previous condition.

13. Third, the judge was wrong to have stated that he was not  required  to
    necessarily  "embark  on  a  detailed  examination  of  the  background
    evidence".

14. Finally, an undue importance was attached by the judge to the fact that
    the Appellant came from a family which  was  "relatively  affluent  and
    live in Lahore" (paragraph 52).  This did not necessarily mean that the
    Appellant would be able to find means available  to  him  in  order  to
    exercise his sexuality  in  more  liberal  and  an  uninhibited  social
    environment.

15. In making these submissions of Mr Gilbert  of  Counsel,  who  had  also
    appeared before Judge  Fowell  below,  relied  upon  his  well-prepared
    skeleton argument of 21 pages (paragraphs 36 to 37) which I have  taken
    into account.

16. For her part, Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the judge's statement
    of the law, emanating from HJ (Iran), could not have been misunderstood
    if it was seen for  the  nuanced  manner  in  which  it  was  given  at
    paragraph 51.  Before the judge recited the  principle  there,  he  had
    noted that the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  was  now  "overt  in  his
    enjoyment of the gay club scene" was to be treated with scepticism, and
    the judge rejected that the Appellant would  live  openly  in  Pakistan
    (paragraph  43).   Similarly  the  fact  that  it  was  recognised  (at
    paragraph 44) that "Mr Jawed is essentially a shy person" meant that he
    would not on account of his own human nature, be impelled to  celebrate
    his sexuality openly, regardless of whether or not  there  were  social
    pressures.  This was not how he behaved as a person.   The  reason  for
    this  quite  simply  was  because  he  was  a  shy  person  by  nature.
    Furthermore, the judge rejected the Appellant's account, that  when  he
    came to the UK, he had not realised that homosexuality was  legal,  and
    remained unaware of it for over a year, "despite mixing  with  numerous
    people of his own age at university in London".   As  the  judge  said,
    this claim could not be accepted, "even to the lower standard,  and  it
    follows that knowing that sexuality was at least a known feature of  UK
    life, he did nothing to explore it" (paragraph 45).

17. It was, submitted Ms Brocklesby-Weller, in these circumstances that the
    judge referred to what would be the applicable principle deducible from
    HJ (Iran).  The judge made reference to the Appellant's evidence  given
    "with unusual clarity", which confirmed, "his long  period  in  the  UK
    essentially concealing his sexuality despite the much greater  freedoms
    he enjoys" (paragraph 51).  It was for this reason, that the judge held
    that given, "his innate privacy, which  appears  to  have  stifled  any
    expression of his sexuality until quite recently, without  encountering
    any social pressure" (paragraph 51) the Appellant would  not  encounter
    an infringement of his fundamental rights.

18. In short, submitted Ms Brocklesby-Weller, whatever the situation is  in
    Pakistan, it would not infringe upon the way  in  which  the  Appellant
    expresses his sexuality.  He is a naturally shy  person.   He  did  not
    express this sexuality overtly, (despite maintaining  so  in  a  manner
    which was rejected by the judge below), and all that one had was simply
    the "social pressure" which he could evade, in much the same way as  he
    evaded it in the UK.

19. In reply, Mr Gilbert submitted that at heart here was the  question  of
    whether  the  judge  could  properly  have  rejected  the   Appellant's
    credibility.  The judge had rejected the Appellant's evidence  that  he
    was being forced into a marriage by his conservative  thinking  family,
    and required corroborating evidence, but this was unnecessary.  Much of
    the  judge's  conclusion  in  this  respect  was  speculative  and  the
    Appellant's evidence should have been taken at face value,  given  what
    we know about Pakistan.

No Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law such that I should set
    aside the decision (under Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007)  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

21. First,  in  what  is  a  closely  reasoned  and  carefully  constructed
    determination, the judge highlights two aspects of this  appeal,  which
    have so far not been mentioned.  First, whether the Appellant ever told
    his parents about  his  sexuality.   He  observed  that  there  was  no
    evidence whatsoever of any written contact with the family.  Even  more
    significantly, his uncle, upon whom  he  depended  for  his  day-to-day
    support, did not attend the hearing to give  evidence.   There  is  not
    even a line of support from either of his sisters to  confirm  that  he
    was fearful of his parent's attitude.  As against this,  the  Appellant
    was putting forward a claim that his family was simply setting  out  to
    arrange a marriage for him, select a date, and expecting him to attend,
    without ever there having been a meeting with his intended spouse,  and
    all of this without any written communications with him.  The judge was
    entitled to conclude that  this  was  intrinsically  improbable.   (See
    paragraph 41).

22. Second, it was no less significant that the Appellant, made his  asylum
    claim on the basis of his sexuality very late in the day, "over a  year
    after he says he found out about the possibility of asylum",  and  this
    despite the fact that "there were also two previous  applications,  one
    of  which  was  withdrawn,  and  one  (the  EEA  application)  refused"
    (paragraph 42).

23. In the  light  of  these  two  highly  significant  issues,  the  judge
    concluded that this was an Appellant who

         "Has attempted to graft his additional branch on to the central and
         truthful stem of his claim, that he is gay.  In the same way, I  am
         sceptical about his claims to be now very overt in his enjoyment of
         the gay club scene, and this touches  on  the  key  aspect  of  the
         appeal, whether he would live openly in Pakistan" (paragraph 43).

24. It is only after focusing on these serious reservations that the  judge
    has about the Appellant's claim, that he then goes on to  consider  the
    aspect of the Appellant's personality that he is an "essentially a  shy
    person" (paragraph 44).  Even then, the  judge  cannot  accept  how  it
    could be that the Appellant when, mixing with numerous  people  in  the
    university in London and having a room-mate, could say that he remained
    unaware of it for over  year  that  homosexuality  was  legal  in  this
    country (paragraph 45).

25. Third, that leaves the question about the judge having misconstrued the
    relevant legal principles in HJ (Iran).  This was not the case at  all.
    The judge refers to the Appellant's "innate privacy" (paragraph 51)  on
    account of which he had already held that the  Appellant  was  not  now
    going to set out to be "very overt in his enjoyment  of  the  gay  club
    scene", a claim which he found to be "sceptical"  (paragraph  43).   In
    these circumstances any existence of "social pressure"  was  irrelevant
    to the Appellant's  condition  (paragraph  51).   Moreover,  the  judge
    referred to the fact that the Appellant came from a relatively affluent
    family living in Lahore "so the restrictions on him  would  clearly  be
    much less in this case than for the majority of the  gay  community  in
    Pakistan" (paragraph 52).  It would seem to me that this inference  was
    entirely for the judge to draw from the objective evidence before  him.
    As for the statement that the judge felt that it was not necessary  for
    him "to enter into a detailed examination of the background  evidence",
    this overlooks the fact that this was only part of the  statement  that
    the judge made because he went on to say,

         "Since although it pointed to a contrast between  the  affluent  in
         major  cities  and  the  situation  generally,  the  contrast   was
         consistently described and there was in fact  little  disagreement.
         It appears to me that Mr Jawed would be in a position, by virtue of
         his youth, education and  background,  to  take  advantage  of  the
         increased freedoms to be found in the big cities, should he wish to
         do so".

  26. In fact the person that he had a claimed  relationship  with,  namely,
      Ahmed, was one, "who was clearly more open in his sexuality,  and  was
      happy simply to return to Pakistan" (paragraph 53).




  27. I do not accept Mr Gilbert's  submission  that  the  circumstances  of
      Ahmed are irrelevant to those of the Appellant.  The judge  is  simply
      stating that just as it was open to Ahmed to return,  who  prefers  to
      have a more open sexuality, it would have been open for the  Appellant
      to do so as well, particularly given the other findings that the judge
      had made.  For all these reasons, there was no error of  law  in  this
      determination.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 24th March 2018
