
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/08584/2018

                                          PA/08561/2018




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On 10 April 2019                    |           On 12 April 2019           |
|                                           |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                                    B H A
                                    S H A
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                              Appellants
                                     And

                  THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                     Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr. A. Janjua of counsel, instructed by
                  Aman Solicitors Advocates
For the Respondent:         Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellants are nationals of Iraq and come  from  Haji  Awa  in  the
    Iraqi Kurdistan Region ("IKR"). They left the IKR on 25  November  2017
    and arrived in the United Kingdom on 27 December 2017. They applied for
    asylum the next day on the basis that they were at risk of honour-based
    violence in the IKR on account of their relationship.
2.   It is the Appellants' case that they met in a shop in the IKR in  March
    2016 and that by June 2016 they had formed  a  relationship  with  each
    other.  They  continued  to  telephone  each  other  but   kept   their
    relationship a secret due to the cultural norms prevalent in  the  IKR.
    Subsequently, in September and October 2017, the 1st Appellant's family
    visited the 2nd Appellant's family to propose that they marry. However,
    the 2nd Appellant's family rejected the proposal as they wished her  to
    marry a cousin.

3.   It was also their case that the 1st Appellant was attacked by  the  2nd
    Appellant's brother and uncles two days later and,  as  a  consequence,
    his knee was injured and he required an operation.  On 22 November 2017
    the Appellants fled to Erbil with the assistance  of  one  of  the  1st
    Appellant's cousins and they entered into an Islamic marriage the  next
    day, prior to fleeing from Iraq. In addition, shortly after  they  left
    the IKR, the 1st Appellant's mother was attacked and threatened by  the
    2nd Appellant's family and had to flee to Erbil.

4.   Their applications were refused on  24  June  2018  and  they  appealed
    against these decisions on 9 July 2018.

5.   Their appeals came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman  on  7
    August 2018 and he dismissed their appeals in a decision promulgated on
    16 August 2018.  The  Appellants  were  granted  permission  to  appeal
    against these decisions by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mailer  on  17
    September 2018 on the basis that it was arguable  that  the  Judge  may
    have given inadequate reasons for some of his findings, which  affected
    his assessment of the credibility of their claims.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING
6.   Counsel for the Appellant  submitted  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chapman has not provided  sufficient  reasoning  for  his  findings  of
    inconsistency in  paragraph  48  of  his  decision.  He  also  drew  my
    attention to a number of  inaccuracies  in  that  paragraph.  The  Home
    Office Presenting Officer relied on the  Rule  24  Response,  dated  22
    October 2018.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION
7.   The Respondent accepted that the Appellants are from the ILR  and  that
    "honour-based violence is widespread and common in Iraq, that the  laws
    there against honour-based violence are not sufficiently implemented or
    enforced and that their claim raises a potential Convention based  fear
    of persecution".  In paragraph 43 of his decision, First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Chapman accepted that the objective evidence showed that  honour-
    based violence was prevalent in the IKR. In paragraph 44 he also  found
    that the evidence showed that the  Kurdish  authorities  are  able  but
    unwilling to promote effective protection to those at  risk  of  honour
    crimes.

8.   In paragraph 46  of  the  decision,  the  Judge  also  found  that  the
    Appellants were in a genuine and subsisting relationship and that  they
    were in such a relationship when they left Iraq.

9.   In paragraph 50 of his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman
    stated that he had carefully considered all the evidence in  the  round
    and referred to the inconsistencies he had previously identified.  This
    was in paragraph 48 of his decision.

10.  In paragraph 50 of his decision, he took into account  the  passage  of
    time since the events in question and the fact that two people may give
    slightly  different   versions   of   events,   which   may   lead   to
    inconsistencies. But he then found that "due to the significance of the
    events in their lives, [he found] it reasonable  to  expect  that  they
    would recall the events in greater  detail  and  consistency  than  the
    Appellants have demonstrated". There was no psychological  evidence  to
    show that this was necessarily the case.

11.  In paragraph 51of his decision, he also found that, in the  context  of
    the inconsistencies identified in paragraph 48, the  account  given  by
    the  Appellants  was  not  credible.  However,   when   assessing   the
    Appellants' evidence he did not consider  it  in  the  context  of  the
    objective evidence relating  to  the  social  and  cultural  norms  for
    relationships between men and women in the IKR and  the  prevalence  of
    honour killings.  This in itself amounted to an error of law.

12.  Furthermore, some of the findings  in  paragraph  48  of  the  decision
    contained assumptions  which  were  not  based  on  any  evidence.  For
    example, in sub-paragraph 48 3) he assumed  that  the  2nd  Appellant's
    mother would have had both a landline and a mobile without  having  any
    evidence on which to base this assumption and when  the  2nd  Appellant
    had explained in her oral evidence that  her  mother  used  her  mobile
    phone as it if was a land line telephone as they did not  have  a  land
    line. In addition, he assumed that the 2nd Appellant would have to  buy
    new sim cards for her mother's mobile phone to disguise the  fact  that
    she had been using it without taking into account that  "missed  calls"
    did not deplete "air time" and that sim cards could be topped  up  with
    further credit. In sub-paragraph 48 5) he assumed that  the  Appellants
    could have been discovered at the  farm/orchard  at  any  time  without
    taking into their own account which was that no one lived at the  house
    on the land and that when they met there their emotions took over.

13.  There were also a number  of  findings  which  had  been  made  without
    giving the Appellants the opportunity to meet the case that  was  being
    made against them. For example, in reply to question 57 of  his  asylum
    interview the 1st Appellant stated that after his marriage proposal was
    refused he asked his cousin to help them and he agreed  to  do  so.  In
    response to question 58 he explained that  there  had  been  sufficient
    time to then put him on notice of  when  the  2nd  Appellant's  parents
    would not be at home with her.

14.  It is also arguable that the inconsistencies noted  in  48  1)  and  7)
    could not reasonably be categorised as inconsistencies at all.

15.  For all these reasons, I find that the decision reached  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chapman contained errors of law in that he did not  take
    all relevant evidence into account and failed to give adequate  reasons
    for his findings.

 DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Chapman or Mailer.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 10 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


