
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08565/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgation      |
|on 5 March 2018                       |on 8 March 2018                      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                   DAT [N]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Knox, of Katani & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge J
    C Grant-Hutchison, promulgated on 19 October 2017.

 2. The grounds refer to MS (Trafficking - Tribunal's Powers - Art. 4 ECHR)
    Pakistan [2016] UKUT 00226 (IAC), which is headnoted thus:

          i) Having regard to the decision of the ECtHR in Rantsev v Cyprus
             and Russia [2010] 51 EHRR 1, Article  4  ECHR,  which  outlaws
             slavery,  servitude   and   forced   or   compulsory   labour,
             encompasses also human trafficking.


         ii) Trafficking decisions are not immigration decisions within the
             compass of the 2002 Act, with the result that judicial  review
             provides the appropriate mechanism for direct challenge.


        iii) Tribunals must take into account, where relevant,  a  decision
             that an appellant has been a victim of trafficking.


         iv) Where  satisfied  that  a  negative  trafficking  decision  is
             perverse, Tribunals are empowered to make their  own  decision
             on whether an appellant was a victim of trafficking.


          v) Tribunals are also empowered to review a trafficking  decision
             on the ground that it  has  been  reached  in  breach  of  the
             Secretary of State's policy guidance.


         vi)  While,  in  principle  it  seems  that   other   public   law
             misdemeanours can also be considered by Tribunals, this  issue
             does not arise for determination in the present appeal.


        vii) Tribunals may well  be  better  equipped  than  the  Competent
             Authority to make pertinent findings relating to trafficking.


       viii) The procedural obligations inherent  in  Article  4  ECHR  are
             linked to  those  enshrined  in  the  Trafficking  Convention,
             Articles 10(2) and 18 in particular.


         ix) Any attempt to remove a trafficking  victim  from  the  United
             Kingdom in circumstances where the said procedural obligations
             have not been discharged will normally be unlawful.


 3. The grounds say that the judge erred at paragraph  12  by  refusing  to
    entertain any assessment of whether the appellant has been a victim  of
    human trafficking or forced exploitation for commercial gain, which was
    the entire basis of the appellant's claim.

 4. Mr Knox accepted that the judge's reminder to herself at  paragraph  12
    that the NRM decision was not one against which there  is  a  right  of
    appeal to the FtT is correct, and  that  it  is  followed  by  a  self-
    direction that it was for the appellant to establish his  human  rights
    case to the lower standard of proof.  However,  he  submitted  that  in
    effect she had treated the NRM decision as unassailable, but went on to
    make irreconcilable statements.

 5. At paragraph 13 the judge said, "By the appellant's own account he  was
    never trafficked it in any shape or form when  he  lived  in  Vietnam".
    However, his evidence recorded at paragraph 14 was an account of  being
    duped into trafficking.

 6. At paragraph 20 the judge evaluated the  risk  of  re-trafficking,  and
    whether the appellant would fall again for a ruse, apparently accepting
    that he was trafficked in the first place.

 7. Mr Knox submitted that the judge was unclear about  her  jurisdictional
    starting  point,  and  from  there  fell  into   making   unclear   and
    inconsistent findings.

 8. Mr  Diwyncz  said  that  the  decision,  uncharacteristically,  was  as
    described by Mr Knox.  He observed that the judge would not  have  been
    helped by the fact that no presenting officer had appeared to  put  the
    SSHD's case on the status of the NRM decision and the  approach  to  be
    adopted.

 9. At the next hearing in the FtT, parties must clarify their positions on
    how the NRM decision regarding this appellant should  impact  upon  the
    FtT's fact-finding process; the extent of their  factual  dispute;  and
    where there is a contest, exactly what findings  of  fact  the  FtT  is
    invited to make.

10. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

11. The nature of the case is such that  it  is  appropriate  in  terms  of
    section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice  Statement  7.2  to
    remit the case to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

12. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge J C Grant-Hutchison.

13. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            6 March 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




