
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: PA/08242/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On  29 JANUARY 2018                           |On 30 JANUARY 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                    [D J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Nizami, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, [DJ], was born on [ ] 1981 and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Jamaica. He  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Rowlands)
    against a decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  17  May  2016  to
    deport him from the United  Kingdom  under  section  32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007. The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on
    19 October 2017, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. We find that the appeal should be allowed. The Secretary of  State  has
    responded to the grant of permission by filing a statement  under  Rule
    24 indicating that she does not oppose the appeal. It is apparent  from
    our reading of the First-tier Tribunal  decision  that  the  judge  has
    wholly failed to deliver a thorough and properly structured analysis of
    the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds. There has been  no  consideration
    of paragraphs 398 and 399 of HC 395 (as amended) or of section 117C  of
    the 2002 Act (as amended). The judge has failed to make any  assessment
    of the best interests of the children concerned in the appeal  pursuant
    to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  In
    consequence the judge's decision  is  vitiated  and  will  need  to  be
    remade.

 3. We discussed the disposal of the appeal with  the  advocates.  Although
    the primary errors in the decision concern the judge's failure to apply
    the law, we accept that the findings of fact are, as a  consequence  of
    that failure, incomplete.  We  find  that  we  should  set  aside  such
    findings of fact as the judge has made and that a de novo assessment of
    the evidence is now required. That is a task better undertaken  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal to  which  the  appeal  is  now  returned  for  the
    remaking of the decision. We raised with Mr Tufan the accuracy  of  the
    criminal record of the appellant, in particular an offence in 2006; the
    record before us indicated (improbably) that the appellant had received
    a 30 month sentence from a Magistrates Court. That record, in turn, may
    have influenced the submission made to the First-tier Tribunal (but not
    contained in the refusal letter) that the  appellant  is  a  persistent
    offender. We are sure that the Secretary of State  will  address  these
    matters prior to the next hearing.


Signed                              Date 29 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

