
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/08225/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5 September 2017                   |On 14 September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                 Ahmad Zamir
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell, instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iran.  He appealed to  a  panel  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  of  28
    July 2016 refusing to grant asylum.  The appellant  claimed  to  be  at
    risk on return from the Taliban and from the Afghan authorities as  the
    son of a Taliban member.

2.   The panel of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  find  the  appellant's
    claim to be credible.  He had been studying in the United  Kingdom  and
    went back to Afghanistan for a short visit in late 2015.  He  was  told
    that his father had rejoined the Taliban, his brother had been  stabbed
    and had then disappeared and that he himself was also  in  danger  from
    his father.  The Tribunal at paragraph 41 of its determination  pointed
    to problems in the timeline provided by the appellant  with  regard  to
    the events  that  he  said  had  occurred.   The  panel  noted  further
    inconsistencies at paragraph 43 with regard to the medical records  and
    what  the  appellant  said  had  happened  to  his  brother.    Further
    inconsistencies were identified at paragraph 44 concerning, on the  one
    hand an offer by the authorities to protect  the  family,  and  on  the
    other hand their attempt to seek  to  arrest  the  appellant,  and  the
    apparent failure of the authorities to go  to  the  appellant's  friend
    Elias' house to find the appellant, rather writing to Elias to  ask  if
    the appellant was there.  It was also not accepted  that  a  letter  to
    check whether the appellant was at a particular address would have been
    sent.  The Tribunal considered that the appellant had  embroidered  his
    case as he went along and did not accept his credibility.

3.   The Tribunal also remarked that the security  situation  in  Kabul  was
    such that the  conditions  there  did  not  breach  the  Article  15(c)
    threshold.  It had  earlier  noted  reference  in  the  course  of  the
    appellant's representative's submissions to risk to men of fighting age
    which was clear from the UNHCR  Guidelines.   The  Tribunal  considered
    that a failed asylum seeker was  not  at  risk  per  se  and  that  the
    appellant was a young healthy male who had shown an ability  to  obtain
    work in a foreign country and would be able to find  accommodation  and
    work on return.  The appeal was accordingly dismissed.

4.   The judge who granted permission to appeal on the  appellant's  grounds
    noted that there was no challenge  to  the  findings  relating  to  the
    credibility of the appellant's core account of events,  but  considered
    that there were arguable issues  concerning  the  contention  that  the
    panel had failed to consider whether the appellant would be at risk  of
    forced recruitment and potential risk as  a  "western"  returnee.   She
    made the point that it was not clear that these matters had  even  been
    argued before the First-tier Tribunal but it was nevertheless necessary
    to conduct a holistic assessment of risk on return.  Although the panel
    was unarguably entitled to take into account the  most  recent  country
    guidance the current situation had to be considered including what  was
    said in the UNHCR Guidance.

5.   In his submissions Mr Blundell accepted the reasoning  with  regard  to
    credibility on the part of the panel.  The matters of challenge related
    to what was said at paragraphs 51 to 54 in particular.  There had  been
    a failure to have regard to risk to the appellant from the Taliban as a
    young man of potential fighting age and also whether as  part  of  that
    there was an extra risk on account of him being westernised and  having
    lived in the United Kingdom for a while.

6.   It was clear from paragraph 37 which summarised  the  submissions  that
    the issue of risk to men of fighting age,  as  set  out  in  the  UNHCR
    Guidelines, had been put to the judge.  The point seemed  not  to  have
    been considered at all.  The focus was rather, for example at paragraph
    53, on the actual account given by the appellant.  There was  therefore
    an error and the question was whether that was material.

7.   In this regard there had been country guidance  on  forced  recruitment
    in HK [2010] UKUT 378 (IAC) at paragraphs 29 to 39  in  particular,  as
    summarised at paragraph 2 of the headnote which said as follows:

         "2.    While  forcible  recruitment  by  the  Taliban  cannot  be
             discounted as a risk, particularly in areas of  high  militant
             activity or militant control, evidence  is  required  to  show
             that it is a real risk for the particular child concerned  and
             not a mere possibility."

    It was unclear whether HK had been  cited  to  the  judge  but  it  was
    relevant.

8.   In  addition  to  background  material  there  was  the  report  of  Dr
    Giustozzi which in particular, at pages 11 and 12 at paragraphs  4  and
    5, dealt with the issue, but concluded, as can be seen from  the  point
    at paragraph 4(d):

         "Young boys and unmarried men are usually told by their fathers  or
         by their elder male in the family what  their  political  alignment
         should be; a household  will  usually  make  its  own  decision  to
         contribute a young man to the army or to the insurgency."


    That was the risk which had been rejected by the judge in this case.

9.    Mr  Blundell  therefore  accepted  that  that  did   not   support   a
    freestanding risk to the appellant of forced recruitment independent of
    his claim to be at risk from his father.

10.  Also before the judge  however  had  been  the  UNHCR  Guidelines,  the
    relevant sections being at page 41 and pages 44 to 47 of the  document.
    In essence therefore, because of a lack of assistance from the  expert,
    the ground of challenge was on the basis that the panel had  failed  to
    consider those two sections of the UNCHR Guidelines.

11.  In his submissions Mr Clarke argued that there was no error of  law  in
    the decision.  Mr Blundell had based his case on risk to the  appellant
    on account of being a man of fighting age, but it was  clear  that  the
    case advanced by the appellant had been on the basis of risk  from  his
    father and that was clear from the papers  and  the  panel's  decision.
    For example this could be seen from paragraph 12 onwards with regard to
    the claim about the letter  received  telling  the  appellant  and  his
    brother to join their father which had led to the brother being stabbed
    and also at paragraph 16 when men were sent by his father  to  get  the
    appellant and reference again at paragraph 18 to risk from his  father.
    On a proper construction of the skeleton argument, with regard  to  the
    UNHCR Guidelines, this was in support of risk from a family member  and
    that was the basis of the expert's instruction.  The case was therefore
    not based on risk per se of recruitment but  in  any  event  could  not
    succeed.  It was clear from HK that the appellant had to  show  a  real
    risk.  The judge had found the appellant could return  to  Kabul.   The
    UNCHR Guidelines did not go beyond what had been decided in HK.   There
    could be a risk but there was no reference to evidence of risk  per  se
    just on the basis of being in Kabul.  The panel had made a  finding  of
    fact at paragraph 18 that there were no other problems  in  Afghanistan
    for the appellant so it was hard to see how the decision  could  depart
    from HK.

12.  Mr Blundell had no points to make by way of reply.

13.  I reserved my determination.

14.  I am grateful to both representatives  for  their  helpful  submissions
    and in particular to Mr  Blundell  for  clarifying  the  ambit  of  the
    grounds especially in light of the limited relevance on the  particular
    point of Dr Giustozzi's report and the fact that risk on  that  account
    was ruled out by the panel.  As a consequence, as Mr Blundell says, the
    matter comes down to whether there was a material error of law  by  the
    panel in  failing  to  address  the  relevant  sections  of  the  UNHCR
    Guidelines for 2016.

15.  The first reference is at page 41 of that report.   There  it  is  said
    that AGEs reportedly target  individuals  who  are  perceived  to  have
    adopted values and/or appearances associated  with  western  countries,
    due to their imputed support for the government and  the  international
    community.  There are reports of individuals who  return  from  western
    countries having been tortured or killed by AGEs on  the  grounds  that
    they had become "foreigners" or that they  were  spies  for  a  western
    country.  Individuals falling under other profiles might  similarly  be
    accused by AGEs of having adopted values and/or appearances  associated
    with western countries and may be targeted for that reason.

16.  With regard to men of fighting age  and  children  in  the  context  of
    underage and forced recruitment, it is relevant to bear  in  mind  that
    the appellant was born in August 1993 and was therefore aged 23 at  the
    date of the hearing.  The focus would therefore be on the issue of  men
    of fighting age rather than children.  With regard to the former it  is
    said in  the  UNHCR  Guidelines  that  in  areas  where  AGEs  exercise
    effective control over territory in the population they are reported to
    use a variety of mechanisms to recruit fighters, including  recruitment
    mechanisms based on coercive strategies.  People who resist recruitment
    and their family members are reportedly at  risk  of  being  killed  or
    punished.  It is also said that pro-government armed groups  have  also
    been reported to force locals to send  young  men  to  join  the  fight
    against the Taliban and other AGEs.

17.  Also to be factored into the issue of the materiality  of  the  failure
    to mention the UNCHR Guidelines is what was said in  HK  which  I  have
    quoted above with regard to forcible recruitment.   That  again  though
    has to be seen in the context of the age of the appellant who is not  a
    child and was not a child in 2015 when the events in question occurred.



18.  Bringing these matters together I do not consider  it  has  been  shown
    that the panel erred in law in any material way in failing to refer  to
    the UNCHR Guidelines.  As Mr Clarke argued, the essential focus of  the
    appeal was risk from  the  appellant's  father  rather  than  from  the
    Taliban per se as people who  might  have  an  interest  in  him  as  a
    potential victim of forced recruitment.  It is clear from HK, at  least
    in the context of risk  with  regard  to  a  child,  that  evidence  is
    required to show that forcible recruitment  is  a  real  risk  for  the
    particular child concerned and not a mere possibility, and that must in
    my view equally apply for an adult who is said to be at risk of  forced
    recruitment.  I do not consider it was shown  to  the  panel  that  the
    appellant was a person who faced a real risk of forced  recruitment  by
    the Taliban.  It is clear that forced recruitment occurs, but  it  does
    not follow from that  that  there  is  a  real  risk  to  a  particular
    individual.  In light of the appellant's history and the way  in  which
    the appeal was argued, I consider it has not been shown that there  was
    a material error of law in failing to  address  the  reference  in  the
    UNCHR Guidelines to forced recruitment and accordingly the decision  of
    the panel dismissing this appeal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.




[pic]


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              8 September 2017

