
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/08615/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2017                           |On 16 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                      Peththa Thanthri Dinushka Ishara
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, of Counsel instructed by Messrs MTC &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Fox, who in a determination promulgated  on  24
    April 2017 dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse asylum.

2.   The appeal relates solely to a procedural matter  which  was  that  the
    appellant had employed solicitors against  whom  the  Law  Society  had
    intervened.  He therefore instructed new solicitors who were unable  to
    obtain the appellant's papers from  the  first  solicitors  instructed.
    They therefore asked for an adjournment  of  the  hearing  until  those
    papers were received.  That  application  was  refused  and  they  then
    instructed a Counsel to appear at the hearing.

3.   On the day of the hearing the Counsel who was duly instructed  went  to
    the wrong hearing centre and the appellant's solicitors then instructed
    another Counsel who was unable to arrive at the  hearing  centre  until
    12:55 pm.  The judge notes the arrival of that Counsel, Mr  Sharma  and
    then states that he was released.

4.   The appellant had attended the hearing and had been there at 10 a.m.

5.    Although  it  appears  that  the  appellant  was  cross-examined   the
    narrative relating to the evidence given by  the  appellant  is  short.
    The judge dismissed the appeal and an application was made to appeal to
    the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  there  had  been  procedural
    unfairness.

6.   Taking into account the fact that the appellant attended  the  hearing,
    that Counsel who as initially  instructed,  through  no  fault  of  the
    appellant,  did not attend but the second  Counsel  Mr  Sharma  applied
    late,   I consider that the judge was in error in  not  adjourning  the
    appeal.   I  am  fortified  in  this  decision  when  I  consider   the
    determination of the Tribunal in MM (unfairness; E  &  R  Sudan  [2014]
    UKUT 00105 (IAC).  I therefore, having found an error of law set  aside
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and direct that this
    appeal proceed to a hearing afresh in the First-tier.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Judge is set aside.

Directions

I direct that the appeal proceed to a hearing afresh at Hatton Cross  before
a judge other than Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Fox;  time  estimate
three hours, Tamil interpreter.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]                      Date: 10 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
