
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08955/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2019                   |On 25 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   Yu [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Latimer, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of China.   The  basis  of  her  claim  for
    asylum was that she had been a victim of trafficking who  had  come  to
    the UK aged 6 or 7 and then been enslaved by a couple  for  some  15-20
    years.  Shortly after she claimed asylum, her claim to be a  victim  of
    trafficking was adjudicated on by the NRM who concluded on 15 June 2018
    that she was not a victim of human trafficking or slavery, servitude or
    forced labour.  On 28 June 2018 the respondent decided  to  refuse  her
    claim for asylum.  Her appeal against this decision came  before  Judge
    Trevaskis of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) who, in a decision sent on 9
    November 2018, dismissed it, finding that she had not given a  credible
    account and would not be at risk on return.

2.    At  the  outset  of  the  hearing  before  me,  Ms  Latimer   detailed
    unsuccessful attempts  she  and  her  firm  had  made  to  contact  the
    appellant since permission to appeal had been granted.  She  confirmed,
    however, that her firm had lodged the application  for  permission  and
    that she was prepared to represent in relation to this application.  As
    this was an error of law hearing I did not consider there  was  a  need
    for the appellant to be present in any event.

3.   The appellant's grounds were essentially twofold, arguing that:

    1)   the  judge  perversely  relied  on  a  country  guidance  case  on
         trafficked women - HC and RC (Trafficked women)  China  CG  [2009]
         UKAIT 00027 to support his assessment that the appellant simply  as
         a lone woman returning to China would not be denied basic  services
         or left to fall into destitution; and

    2)   the judge erred in failing to engage with the submission that even
         though  not  a  victim  of  trafficking  the  appellant  would   be
         trafficked on return on account of her vulnerability.

4.   In the grant of permission Judge Shaerf added that it was  arguable  in
    the light of ES (s.82 NIAA 2002,  Negative  NRM)  Albania  [2018]  UKUT
    00335 (IAC)  that  the  judge  had  not  adequately  engaged  with  the
    reasonable grounds decision of the Competent Authority.

5.    I  record  my  thanks  to  the  representatives  for  their  pertinent
    submissions.  I shall take the last point first.

6.   The appellant's written  grounds  do  not  raise  a  challenge  to  the
    judge's adverse credibility findings and  it  is  somewhat  surprising,
    therefore, that Judge Shaerf should have identified a point as arguable
    that was not argued.  Ms Latimer did not  seek  to  pursue  it  at  the
    hearing, but in any event, I find this point  lacks  merit.   The  main
    point addressed in ES is that judges dealing with asylum appellants who
    have already  received  an  NRM  decision  should  decide  whether  the
    question of whether they are victim of trafficking on  its  own  merits
    and ensure in doing so that they recognise that the standard  of  proof
    they apply is different to and lower than the civil standard applied by
    the NRM.  But the judge's assessment accorded with both  these  points.
    At paragraphs 45-47 the judge stated:

         "45. Although there has been an adverse credibility finding made by
             the competent authority regarding the appellant's  trafficking
             claim, I  am  entitled  to  make  my  own  assessment  of  the
             credibility of the appellant in the context of this appeal.

         46.  I have considered the reasons  for  the  negative  credibility
             findings, which are largely based upon the  inability  of  the
             appellant to provide more detail of her life, which she claims
             to have been over 20 years duration, living in  the  house  of
             her alleged traffickers. I  have  considered  the  counselling
             report,  which  offers  a  possible   explanation   based   on
             disassociation. Unfortunately, the report is no  more  than  a
             recommendation of further evaluation  of  the  appellant,  and
             therefore does not provide a  diagnosis  to  which  evidential
             weight can be attached.

         47.  The appellant has added nothing to her earlier accounts  which
             provide any corroborative detail of her earlier accounts. I am
             therefore  considering  the  same  level  of  detail  as   was
             considered by the  competent  authority  and  by  the  police.
             I find their reasons for rejecting the appellant's claims  to
             be sound, and therefore I reach the same  conclusions,  namely
             that the appellant has not shown to the required standard that
             she has been a victim of trafficking or modern slavery."

7.   Even though the appellant's representatives (Ms Latimer) stated at  the
    hearing before the judge that the appellant's appeal was not brought on
    either asylum or humanitarian protection grounds  and  only  referenced
    Article 8, ECHR, the judge properly  recognised  that  the  appellant's
    case raised an issue of risk on  return  and  accordingly  applied  the
    standard applicable in Article 3 ECHR cases - substantial "grounds  for
    believing" or "real risk" (see paragraph 3).

8.   This standard equates to the lower standard of proof in  asylum  cases:
    see Bagdonavicius [2005] UKHL38.  There  is  nothing  anywhere  in  the
    judge's decision to suggest the  judge  applied  the  NRM  standard  of
    balance of probabilities.

9.   Turning to ground (1), I find  it  to  be  devoid  of  arguable  merit.
    Certainly the country guidance of the AIT in HC and RC is  confined  to
    the issue of trafficked women, but its head note frames its guidance by
    reference to the general situation in China for its  citizens  and  for
    Chinese women - its guidance moves. from the general to the particular.
     That is well-illustrated by paragraph 3 of the head note which  states
    that "the Chinese state has an obligation to  house  the  homeless  and
    will  not  allow  their  citizens  to  starve.   Therefore  a  returned
    trafficked woman without family support will  not  be  allowed  by  the
    Authorities to fall into a state of destitution".  Further,  this  case
    drew upon a wide body  of  background  evidence  for  its  conclusions.
    Accordingly the judge was entitled to rely on it  as  support  for  his
    findings of fact regarding the situation the appellant  would  face  on
    return as a lone woman.

10.  Ground (2) fails for very similar reasons.  The judge relied on HC  and
    RC and this case held, inter alia, that "women and girls  in  China  do
    not in general face a real  risk  of  serious  harm  from  traffickers"
    (paragraph 2 of head note).  Whilst this case  went  on  to  accept  it
    might be possible in a given case for a woman to establish she might be
    at risk from traffickers, on the judge's findings in the  instant  case
    the appellant had wholly failed to substantiate her claim.

11.  The judge noted at paragraph 50:

         "50. According to the appellant, she first remembers being taken in
             by the Cantonese speaking couple when she was approximately  6
             years old, and spending 15 - 20 years in  their  home,  before
             being told to leave. The credibility of her  account  has  not
             been accepted by the competent authority or the decision maker
             in respect of her asylum claim. Given the lack of detail  that
             the  appellant  has  been  able  to  provide  in  her  various
             interviews or witness statements, and the lack  of  assistance
             that  she  was  able  to  give  to   the   police   in   their
             investigation, this leads me to doubt the truth of  her  claim
             to have lived in the United Kingdom for at least 20 years. Her
             first encounter with the  authorities  took  place  after  she
             claims to  have  left  the  home  of  her  captors,  and  this
             encounter does not therefore corroborate  her  claim  to  have
             lived here for over 20 years. Whatever  the  circumstances  of
             her life in the United Kingdom over that period, I do not find
             it credible that she is unable  to  provide  any  information,
             beyond that which she has provided, corroborating that  amount
             of time spent in this country, including, on her own  account,
             visits to shops and a dentist."

12.  Ms Latimer highlighted the point that on the judge's own  findings  the
    appellant was a vulnerable person.  That is true to the extent that the
    judge was satisfied she stood to be treated  as  a  vulnerable  witness
    under the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 (see  paragraph
    42).  However, the judge clearly considered that the appellant had  not
    established that her vulnerability was severe enough  to  cross  either
    the Article2 or 8 thresholds applicable  in  health  cases,  noting  at
    paragraph 57 that:

         "57. In this case, the appellant has not provided any  evidence  of
             medical  diagnosis  of  mental  or   physical   illness.   The
             counselling report refers to the  need  for  assessment  as  a
             vulnerable adult and for disassociation, and  offers  no  more
             than speculation as to the consequences of such an assessment.
             I am  not  satisfied  on  the  evidence  before  me  that  the
             appellant has shown  sufficiently  strong  grounds  to  engage
             articles 3 and/or 8 in relation to her mental health."

13.  Against this background the judge was entitled  to  consider  that  the
    appellant would not face very significant obstacles on return to  China
    (pursuant to Article 8)  or,  a  fortiori,  ill-treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3.

14.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly his decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
    is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date: 23 February 2019
              [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

