
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08413/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 March 2019                     |On 2 April 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     J A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Jackson, Counsel, instructed by Law Dale
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I make an anonymity direction (see below) in respect of this decision
and that of the First-tier Tribunal where anonymity was not originally
ordered.

2.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Judge Twydell,
promulgated on 20 September 2018.  The appellant is a citizen of
Bangladesh. His appeal was dismissed on asylum grounds, humanitarian
protection grounds and under human rights considerations, both within and
outside the Immigration Rules.

3.   The grounds of appeal seeking permission were expansively drawn and
initially permission was refused.  On a renewed application Upper Tribunal
Judge Chalkley granted permission but on the limited basis identified by
reference to paragraph 6 of the Grounds. This concerned a substantial
corpus of background evidence that had been placed before the First-tier
Tribunal, albeit none was referred to by the judge.

4.   A skeleton argument was prepared by Ms Jackson of Counsel, who now
acts of the appellant.  This developed, in a rather more coherent and
attractive way, the matter for determination in this appeal, helpfully
setting out the background together with an analysis of the approach
adopted by the judge.  It also identified the documentary material which
was before the First-tier Tribunal dealing with the social and political
situation in Bangladesh.  The skeleton argument took as its main focus the
single ground on which permission was granted but, perhaps inevitably,
ventured a little further, for which I make no criticism.

5.   Ms Cunha, who acts for the Secretary of State, accepts that the
decision was inadequate in that it failed to make reference to any of the
background material that had been before the First-tier Tribunal. She
contends, however, that although that may have been an error of law, it did
not infect credibility assessment and findings of fact which could
nonetheless be preserved.

6.   This is not a submission which I can accept.  First, the judge seemed
to regard the appellant's evidence as inherently implausible, in part
because it was not analysed in the context of, and by reference to, the
background country material.  In the circumstances, I cannot be satisfied
that the appellant's evidence was subject to proper judicial analysis when
the credibility assessment was made.

7.   Secondly, as one proceeds through the decision, taking it sequentially
in terms of the judge making findings as to what involvement the appellant
may or may not have had with the authorities in Bangladesh, the failure to
engage with the background country material renders all subsequent
conclusions questionable and incapable of being sustained. Anxious scrutiny
is lacking throughout.

8.   It would not be just or appropriate to preserve any part of the
judge's findings, when there has a fundamental error regarding background
country material, going to the heart of this decision.

9.   This is inevitably a case, regrettable though the additional delay
will be, that needs to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard
afresh by another judge. In the circumstances, having found an error of
law, I set aside the decision and I remit the appeal for a rehearing.

Notice of Decision

      1) An error of law having been found, the decision of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal is set aside.

      2) The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard
         afresh by judge other than Judge Twydell.

      3) No findings of fact are preserved.

      4) An anonymity direction is made as follows.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Mark Hill                 Date     27 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

