
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08761/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for Business)|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 July 2020                              |On 10 August 2020             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              EHSANULLAH UMARZI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr S Bass, Caseworker at Duncan Lewis Solicitors

This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of  which  there  has  not
objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by video (V),  the
platform was Skype for Business. A  face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department (appellant)  appeals
         against the decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  S  Aziz
         (the judge) who, in a decision  promulgated  on  1  November  2017,
         allowed the appeal of Mr Ehsanullah Umarzi (the respondent) against
         the  respondent's  decision  of  31  August  2017  to  refuse   his
         protection and  human  rights  claim  following  the  making  of  a
         deportation order on 30 August 2017.

Background

      2. The respondent is a national  of  Afghanistan  hailing  from  Tagab
         District in Kapisa Province. His  date  of  birth  is  given  as  1
         January 1993. He has a mother and sister who remain in Afghanistan.
         He entered the UK on 4 March 2008  as  a  15-year-old  and  claimed
         asylum on the same day. The respondent claimed his father had  been
         killed by the Taliban who believed he was an American spy, and that
         the Taliban were now targeting him based on  an  imputed  political
         opinion stemming from the  familial  relationship.  The  respondent
         also claimed to face a real risk of  persecution  from  the  Afghan
         authorities based on his father's involvement  with  the  Communist
         PDPA government. The appellant refused the asylum  application  but
         granted the respondent Discretionary Leave until 30 June 2010.  The
         respondent made an in-time application for Further Leave to  Remain
         but this was refused on 24 November 2010 and an appeal dismissed on
         17 January 2011 by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Jones.  Judge
         Jones found the respondent to have given an incredible  account  of
         his claimed fear of ill-treatment from the Taliban and  the  Afghan
         authorities.

      3. The respondent asserts that he travelled to France in late 2014  or
         early 2015. He was arrested on 9 November 2016 whilst attempting to
         enter the UK from France using the  identity  document  of  another
         person. On 8 December 2016 he was convicted  of  possession/control
         of  identity  documents  with  the  intention  of  gaining   access
         illegally to the UK. He was sentenced to 12 months imprisonment. In
         response to a Notice of Decision to make a  Deportation  Order  the
         respondent claimed his life would be in danger  in  Afghanistan  on
         essentially  the  same  factual  basis  as   his   earlier   asylum
         application. In refusing the respondent's new asylum  claim  on  31
         August 2017 the appellant considered there  were  no  reasons  from
         departing from the findings of Judge  Jones,  that  the  respondent
         could relocate to Kabul, and that there was no real risk of serious
         harm to him pursuant to Article 3 ECHR or under  article  15(c)  of
         the Qualification Directive such as to entitle him to  a  grant  of
         Humanitarian Protection.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      4. The respondent advanced 3 separate grounds at his  appeal  hearing.
         He maintained that he had a well-founded fear from the Taliban  due
         to his father's political activities,  and  that  the  humanitarian
         situation had deteriorated since the  publication  of  AK  (Article
         15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) such that he was  now
         entitled to a grant of Humanitarian Protection.  His  third  ground
         was that he would be targeted on return to Afghanistan  because  he
         would be seen as being 'Westernised'.

      5. The judge heard oral evidence from the respondent through a  Pashtu
         interpreter, although the respondent was able to speak English  and
         saw himself as being fluent. In  cross-examination  the  respondent
         claimed that the way in which he spoke had changed  and  that  this
         would bring him to the attention of people in Afghanistan.  He  now
         used English words when speaking Pashtu and it would be apparent to
         anyone in Afghanistan that he had lived in the West. The respondent
         also claimed to be Westernised in his dress sense. Even if he could
         wear Afghan clothing it would still be obvious from the way that he
         spoke that he was from the West. His behaviour and  mannerisms  had
         also changed. He claimed it was normal within Afghan culture for  2
         men who hold hands whilst speaking and if he failed to do  this  he
         would be seen as being different. Although he was  a  Sunni  Muslim
         the respondent did not practice his religion  very  much  and  this
         would be an issue for people in Afghanistan

      6. The judge was not satisfied that the respondent's claimed  fear  of
         the Taliban was materially different from  the  account  previously
         rejected by Judge Jones, or that there was sufficient  evidence  to
         entitle him to depart from the Country Guidance case in AK. I  need
         say no more about these findings as they have not been the  subject
         of a cross appeal.

      7. The judge did however find that the respondent would  be  perceived
         as being Westernised if returned  to  Kabul  and  that  this  would
         expose him to a real risk of  persecutory  treatment.  The  judge's
         findings in relation to the respondent's  perceived  Westernisation
         are contained at [66] to [71]. At [66] the  judge  noted  that  the
         respondent entered the UK as a 15-year-old and that, other  than  a
         period of upwards of 2 years spent in France, he had resided in the
         UK for some of his childhood and the entirety of  his  adult  life.
         The judge  noted  that  the  respondent  spent  some  of  the  most
         formative years of his life in the West. The judge stated,

             "It is reasonable to assume that given the  age  at  which  he
             entered the United Kingdom and having lived in  the  West  for
             such a lengthy period, that  he  would  have  picked  up  many
             aspects of Western culture.  Likewise,  it  is  reasonable  to
             conclude that his absence from Afghanistan for such a  lengthy
             period and the fact that he left the country  when  he  was  a
             minor would result in him losing or being unfamiliar with some
             cultural traits/norms within Afghan culture and society."

      8. At [67] the judge accepted that the respondent was  able  to  speak
         English although he found that the respondent had  exaggerated  his
         claim that he would find it difficult to speak Pashtu  if  returned
         to Afghanistan. At [68] the judge stated,

             "Nevertheless, I do accept his evidence that having  lived  in
             the United Kingdom for such a  lengthy  period,  that  he  has
             begun  to  incorporate  the  occasional  English  word   while
             speaking Pashto and that this will be picked up by the  native
             Pashto speaker in Afghanistan. I find this to be much more  of
             a relevant factor than the [respondent's] example  of  someone
             who will be noticed as being from the West because he will not
             hold hands with another man, as is common in Afghanistan. I do
             not accept the [respondent's] evidence that on every  or  most
             occasions that men in Afghanistan meet, that  they  will  hold
             hands when speaking to each other."

      9. At [69] the judge accepted the  respondent's  evidence  that  since
         arriving 2008 he had adopted a Western dress code. Relying upon the
         principles established in HJ (Iran) v SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  1024
         (and indeed reinforced in RT (Zimbabwe) and others (Respondents)  v
         SSHD  (Appellant)  [2012]  UKSC  38)  the  judge   expressed   some
         discomfort  from  the  Presenting  Officer's  argument   that   the
         respondent could avoid being  perceived  as  being  Westernised  by
         modifying his behaviour  and  wearing  traditional  Afghan  attire.
         Although the judge indicated that he was not suggesting there was a
         parity between an individual's sexual orientation and  dress  code,
         he was uncomfortable with the argument that the  respondent  should
         change an aspect of his lifestyle in order to avoid falling into  a
         category of  a  person  who  is  potentially  at  risk  of  adverse
         attention.

     10. At [70] the judge accepted the respondent's evidence that he was  a
         'lapsed Muslim'. The judge was "not quite" persuaded that  being  a
         non-practising would  now  bring  the  respondent  to  any  adverse
         attention in Kabul, but he accepted that the argument could be made
         that this was one additional  factor  increasing  the  respondent's
         risk of being seen as someone who had become Westernised.

     11. At [71] the judge drew together all his findings and concluded that
         the respondent would be perceived as being  Westernised  by  virtue
         of,

             "a) his length of residence in the West, b) the adoption of  a
             number of aspects of Western culture such  as  Western  dress-
             wear and the occasional use of  English  words  when  speaking
             Pashtu, c) the fact that he  is  a  lapsed  Muslim,  who  only
             occasionally practices religion and d) the fact  that  he  may
             well show ignorance of Afghan culture having  been  away  from
             the country for such a lengthy period and having never resided
             there since he was a child."

     12. At [72] the judge then considered whether the respondent's fear was
         objectively well-founded. He referred to section 8.9.1 of  'Country
         Policy and Information Note Afghanistan:  Fear  of  anti-government
         elements (AGE's)  -  December  2016.'  This  referenced  the  UNHCR
         Eligibility Guidelines of April 2016, which indicated that:

             'AGEs reportedly target individuals who are perceived to  have
             adopted values  and/or  appearances  associated  with  Western
             countries, due to their imputed support for the Government and
             the international community. There are reports of  individuals
             who returned from Western countries having  been  tortured  or
             killed  by  AGEs  on  the  grounds  that   they   had   become
             "foreigners" or that they were spies for a Western country.'

     13. Based on the Eligibility Guidelines  the  judge  found  that  anti-
         government elements in Afghanistan targeted  individuals  who  were
         perceived as  having  adopted  values/appearances  associated  with
         Western countries and  that  such  individuals  were  perceived  to
         supportive  of  the  Afghan  government   and   the   international
         community. The judge stated,

             "Furthermore, the UNHCR has confirmed reports  of  individuals
             having returned from Western countries who  have  gone  to  be
             tortured and killed by anti-government elements on the grounds
             that they had become foreigners or spies for a Western country
             due to the fact that they were perceived as 'Westernised'."

     14. In light of his finding that the respondent would be  perceived  as
         being Westernised, and applying the lower standard  of  proof,  the
         judge concluded that  the  appellant  would  be  at  real  risk  of
         persecution and/or that he was entitled to Humanitarian  Protection
         as his removal would constitute a real risk of a breach of  Article
         3 ECHR.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     15. The appellant lodged  an  in-time  application  for  permission  to
         appeal. The application was  unfortunately  not  processed  by  the
         First-tier Tribunal until around November 2019. In a decision dated
         7 November 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Martin, sitting as a judge  of
         the First-tier Tribunal, granted permission to appeal.

     16. The grounds, amplified in the skeleton argument of  Mr  C  Howells,
         Senior Presenting Officer, dated 13 January 2020, and in  the  oral
         submissions of  Mr  Melvin,  contend  that  the  judge  "attributed
         significant weight" to the UNHCR Eligibility  Guidelines  but  that
         the UNHCR applied a lower  threshold  than  that  required  by  the
         Tribunal. The judge had been selective; he should have referred  to
         paragraphs 8.9.2 and 8.9.3 of the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines  and
         his failure to do so meant that he failed to resolve the "potential
         conflict between the different sections of the same document as  to
         why more  weight  should  be  afforded  to  paragraph  8.9.1."  The
         respondent's  fear  of  ill-treatment  based   on   his   perceived
         Westernisation was not well-founded and the judge was not  entitled
         to find that it was.

     17. Paragraphs 8.9.2 and 8.9.3 of the Eligibility Guidelines  reads  as
         follows:

             '8.9.2 In its assessment of the treatment of  returnees,  DFAT
             noted in its February 2016 report that:

             'Returnees  from  western  countries  are  almost  exclusively
             returned to Kabul. While  some  families  are  returned,  most
             returnees tend to be single men travelling alone. While men of
             working  age  are  more  likely  to  be  able  to  return  and
             reintegrate  successfully   than   unaccompanied   women   and
             children, the lack of family networks for single men can  also
             impact on their ability to reintegrate into Afghan  community.
             The relatively better economic  opportunities  available  mean
             returnees often choose  to  remain  in  Kabul.  There  are  no
             tracking mechanisms for these returnees, so it is difficult to
             assess the conditions they  face.  There  are  plausible,  but
             anecdotal, reports of returnees from western countries turning
             up in drug communities. DFAT assesses that, because of Kabul's
             size  and  diversity,  returnees  would  be  unlikely  to   be
             discriminated against or subject to violence on the  basis  of
             ethnicity or religion.'

             8.9.3 DFAT also noted in its 2015 report that it was:

             '... aware of occasional reports  of  returnees  from  western
             countries alleging  they  have  been  kidnapped  or  otherwise
             targeted on the basis  of  having  spent  time  in  a  western
             country. While this Country Information Report does not make a
             judgement on the veracity of individual cases, in general DFAT
             assesses  that  returnees  from  western  countries  are   not
             specifically targeted on  the  basis  of  their  being  failed
             asylum-seekers. ...  people  who  are  identifiable  as  being
             associated with foreign (particularly western)  countries  may
             be targeted by insurgent groups such as the Taliban. Returnees
             from western countries, however, face a similar level of  risk
             to other people in Afghanistan who are associated with support
             for the government or the international community.  People  in
             this  situation  often  take   measures   to   conceal   their
             association, such as not travelling with documents or  symbols
             that may link them to the Afghan government, the international
             community based in  Afghanistan  or  western  countries.  DFAT
             assesses that returnees from western countries who maintain  a
             low  profile  such  as  by  taking  steps  to  conceal   their
             association with the country from which they have returned  do
             not  face  a  significantly  higher  risk   of   violence   or
             discrimination than do other  people  in  Afghanistan  with  a
             similar ethnic and religious profile.'

     18. The respondent would be returned as an ordinary civilian  and  that
         there was no determinative evidence that he would be at risk due to
         his claimed Westernisation. Reliance  was  placed  in  Mr  Howell's
         skeleton argument and in Mr Melvin's submissions on the findings of
         the Upper Tribunal in AS (Safety of Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  [2018]
         UKUT 00118 (IAC) promulgated after the  judge's  decision,  and  in
         particular at [90] to [[94] and [187],  where  the  Upper  Tribunal
         considered an EASO  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report  dated
         December 2017 and evidence from Dr L Shuster and concluded  that  a
         person on return to Kabul would not be at  risk  on  the  basis  of
         Westernisation.

     19. The grounds additionally took issue with the judge's  finding  that
         the  respondent  may  be  identified  as  being  Westernised.   The
         respondent's use of occasional English words whilst speaking Pashtu
         was said to be speculative and had no basis in fact. The manner  in
         which the respondent dressed was a matter for him and would largely
         depend on what was available in Kabul, and  he  would  be  able  to
         reduce any perceived risk by moderating  his  clothing.  The  judge
         found that being  a  non-practising  Muslim  would  not  bring  the
         respondent to any adverse attention in Kabul  and  so  was  not  in
         reality a factor that needed consideration. The judge also made  no
         findings on the assistance the respondent's family could provide in
         helping him readjust to life in Afghanistan.

Discussion

     20. I  will  first  consider  the  challenge  to  the  judge's  factual
         conclusion that the respondent was at real risk of being identified
         as being Westernised. In making  his  factual  findings  the  judge
         properly directed himself in relation to the burden  of  proof  and
         the lower standard of proof [53]  having  observed  the  respondent
         giving evidence in both examination-in-chief and cross-examination.



     21. There has been no specific challenge to the judge's  finding  that,
         as the respondent lived some of the formative years of his life  in
         the West as well as his adult life, he "... would  have  picked  up
         many aspects of Western  culture",  and  that  his  departure  from
         Afghanistan when a minor "... would result in him losing  or  being
         unfamiliar with some cultural traits/norms  within  Afghan  culture
         and society" ([66], [70]). The judge was plainly entitled  to  this
         finding for the reasons given. I reject the  appellant's  assertion
         that the judge's finding that the  respondent  used  English  words
         whilst speaking Pashtu had no basis in fact.  The  judge's  finding
         was  based  on  the  respondent's  own  evidence  which  the  judge
         carefully evaluated, and which he considered in the context of  the
         respondent having lived outside Afghanistan for almost 10 years  at
         the date of the decision. This is not a situation where  the  judge
         blindly accepted assertions made by the  respondent.  For  example,
         the judge rejected the respondent's claim that he had been targeted
         by the Taliban and the Afghan authorities, and he  found  that  the
         respondent embellished other aspects of his evidence, most  notably
         the respondent's claim that he would find  it  difficult  to  speak
         Pashtu if returned to Afghanistan [67]. The judge's finding at [68]
         was one rationally open to him on the evidence considered  and  for
         the reasons he gave.

     22. At [69] the judge was correct in observing that there was no parity
         between an  individual's  sexual  orientation  and  dress  code.  A
         modification of a person's  clothing  in  order  to  avoid  drawing
         adverse attention, in the absence of compelling evidence, does  not
         fall within the ambit of any of the Refugee Convention reasons. The
         judge  was  nevertheless  entitled  to  take  into  account,  as  a
         potential factor increasing the risk that the respondent  would  be
         perceived as being Westernised, his adoption  of  a  Western  dress
         code and his desire to wear Western clothes. Whilst the  judge  was
         "not quite persuaded" that  being  a  non-practising  Muslim  would
         bring the respondent to any adverse  attention  in  Kabul,  he  did
         find, at [70] and [71], that being a lapsed Muslim was nevertheless
         a factor, in combination with the other  factors  identified,  that
         may, cumulatively, give rise to a perception  that  the  respondent
         was Westernised. This was  a  conclusion  reasonably  open  to  the
         judge. Being  seen  as  somebody  who  only  rarely  practiced  his
         religion may not, of itself, give rise to a risk of  ill-treatment,
         but when considered with other factors  such  as  the  respondent's
         incorporation of English words in his conversational Pashtu and his
         unfamiliarity with Afghan culture and customs, it was sufficient to
         entitle the judge to reach the finding that the  respondent's  lack
         of religious observation was nevertheless relevant when considering
         whether he would be perceived as being Westernised.

     23. The grounds contend that the judge failed to take into account  the
         assistance that could be provided by the  respondent's  family  who
         still lived in Afghanistan in helping him to readjust  to  life  in
         that  country.  Any  such  assistance  would  however  have  little
         bearing, at least in the short to mid-term, on the perception  that
         other people may have of the respondent based on his  conduct,  his
         mode of speaking and his  appearance.  Any  assistance  that  could
         eventually be provided by  the  respondent's  family  to  help  him
         readjust to life in Afghanistan would therefore be of very  limited
         value when determining whether, when he was returned, he  would  be
         at real risk of being perceived as being Westernised.

     24. The judge's factual  conclusions  were  reached  after  a  detailed
         consideration  of  the  evidence  and  was  based  on  a   holistic
         assessment of several material factors. It cannot be said that  his
         conclusions were not rationally open to him on the evidence that he
         considered and for the reasons that he gave.

     25. I will now consider  whether,  having  found  that  the  judge  was
         entitled to conclude that the respondent was at real risk of  being
         perceived to be Westernised, he was then entitled to conclude  that
         the respondent would be  at  real  risk  of  serious  ill-treatment
         because of his perceived Westernisation. In determining whether the
         judge's decision involved the making of an error on a point of  law
         I must consider the evidence that was before the judge when he made
         his decision. In this regard, the subsequent findings of the  Upper
         Tribunal in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018]  UKUT  00118
         (IAC) have limited relevance. The Upper  Tribunal's  assessment  at
         [90] to [94], and its conclusion at [187], was  based  on  evidence
         (the EASO Country of Origin Information Report of December 2017 and
         the written and oral evidence of Dr Shuster) that  was  not  before
         the judge, and could not reasonably have been before him given  the
         date of the EASO report and given that Dr  Shuster's  evidence  was
         created for the Country Guidance case.

     26. The judge's assessment was based  on  an  extract  from  the  UNHCR
         Eligibility Guidelines of April 2016 set out at 8.9.1 of  the  CPIN
         report dated December 2016. The extract, the material part of which
         is set out at [12] above, referred to reports  of  individuals  who
         returned from Western countries who were tortured or killed on  the
         grounds that they had become  'foreigners'  or  because  they  were
         perceived  as  being  spies  for  a  Western  country,   and   that
         individuals  who  were  perceived  as  having  adopted  values   or
         appearances associated with Western countries had  been  reportedly
         targeted by anti-government elements due to their  imputed  support
         for the government and the international community. The  source  of
         the extract,  the  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines,  will  typically
         command considerable weight because of the organisation's expertise
         and its reputation for independence, reliability  and  objectivity,
         although the weight that is ultimately accorded to  its  guidelines
         will depend on the intrinsic quality of the  particular  guidelines
         (see AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT  00130  (IAC),
         at [176]). I am satisfied that the judge  was  entitled  to  attach
         weight to the extract at 8.9.1 of the appellant's own  CPIN  report
         and that it established a legitimate basis for his conclusion that,
         on the lower standard of proof, there was  a  real  risk  that  the
         respondent would be targeted by anti-governmental elements  because
         of his perceived Westernisation.

     27. The grounds contend that the judge failed  to  consider  8.9.2  and
         8.9.3 of the same CPIN and that in so doing he failed to resolve  a
         "potential  conflict"  between  the  sections  in  respect  of  the
         targeting of those perceived to be Westernised. I  have  considered
         8.9.2 and 8.9.3, which are set out above at [17], in  some  detail.
         8.9.2 and 8.9.3 contain two extracts from a February 2016 report by
         DFAT (the Australian government's Department of Foreign Affairs and
         Trade). The extract at  8.9.2  refers  to  returnees  from  Western
         countries to Kabul, particularly single  men,  and  the  conditions
         they face. It assesses that, because of Kabul's size and diversity,
         returnees  would  be  unlikely  to  be  discriminated  against   or
         subjected to violence on the basis of ethnicity or  religion.  This
         does not speak to the issue of perceived  Westernisation.  It  does
         not undermine the indication of the UNHCR at 8.9.1.

     28. The extract at 8.9.3 indicates that DFAT  is  aware  of  occasional
         reports of returnees from Western countries alleging they have been
         kidnapped or otherwise targeted on the basis of having  spent  some
         time in the West. DFAT then assesses that  returnees  from  Western
         countries are not specifically  targeted  on  the  basis  of  being
         failed asylum-seekers. There is however  a  distinction  between  a
         person being targeted, on the one hand, on the basis that they  are
         a failed asylum-seeker, and on the one hand, on the basis that they
         are perceived as being Westernised. A failed asylum-seeker  from  a
         Western country may not exhibit any conduct or behaviour that would
         associate that person with the West. This is recognised in the DFAT
         extract itself. Immediately after the assessment relating to failed
         asylum-seekers, DFAT states that people  who  are  identifiable  as
         being  associated  with  Western  countries  may  be  targeted   by
         insurgent groups such as the Taliban. Although DFAT concludes  that
         returnees from Western countries face a similar level  of  risk  to
         other people in Afghanistan who are associated with support for the
         government or the  international  community,  and  that  those  who
         maintain a low profile by concealing  their  association  with  the
         Western country do not face a significantly higher risk of violence
         than  other  people  in  Afghanistan  with  a  similar  ethnic  and
         religious profile, this does not take into account those who may be
         unable to conceal their associate because of the  way  they  speak,
         their use, such as the respondent, of English words  when  speaking
         Pashtu, and their unfamiliarity with cultural and societal norms. I
         do not consequently find that 8.9.2 and 8.9.3 are in conflict  with
         8.9.1, or that they judge's failure to expressly refer to 8.9.2 and
         8.9.3 undermines the sustainability of his reliance  on  the  UNHCR
         Eligibility Guidelines, or the  sustainability  of  his  conclusion
         that the appellant would face a real risk of serious  ill-treatment
         based on his perceived Westernisation. I am consequently  satisfied
         that the judge's decision, based on the evidence  that  was  before
         him at the time, does not contain an error on a point of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision did not involve the  making
of an error on a  point  of  law.  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department's appeal is dismissed.


D.Blum

Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum              Date: 3/8/2020


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email


