
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08801/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 7th June 2017                      |On 9th June 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     BM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
     by way of Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.
Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

 2. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify her or any member of her  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who in a determination promulgated on 9th  January
    2017 dismissed her claim for protection.  The  Appellant's  immigration
    history is set out within the determination at paragraph [1] and in the
    decision letter issued by the Secretary of State.  It can be summarised
    briefly as follows.  The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 6th
    October 2010 on a visa as a student  valid  until  2011.   A  grant  of
    further leave to remain was made in 2012, but a further  extension  was
    refused.  She, however, made a subsequent  application  in  April  2012
    which was granted which gave her leave until 30th January 2014.  Whilst
    the determination refers to a return to her home country  in  September
    2014, it appears that this is a typing error  and  that  the  Appellant
    went to Spain, returning to the United Kingdom  in  or  about  December
    2014.  Her leave had been cancelled on 23rd September 2014.   That  led
    to an appeal which was dismissed.  It is recorded that  on  3rd  August
    2015 she became appeal rights exhausted.   On  8th  February  2016  the
    Appellant made her application  for  protection  which  resulted  in  a
    substantive interview and a decision letter issued by the Secretary  of
    State dated 5th August 2016 in which her  application  for  asylum  was
    refused.

 4. The basis of the  Appellant's  protection  claim  is  recorded  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs [2] to [7]  which  is
    also referred to in the detailed reasons for refusal at paragraph  [3].
    Her claim for protection related to fear on return  to  Pakistan  as  a
    result of her membership of a particular social group, namely  that  of
    sexual orientation based on her relationship with  another  woman  whom
    she had met in the  United  Kingdom.   There  was  no  dispute  in  the
    decision letter that an applicant in her position was capable of  being
    a member of a particular social group for  the  purposes  of  the  1951
    Convention.  It was accepted that her claim that she  had  a  same  sex
    partner and that she would face persecution  in  Pakistan  due  to  her
    sexuality did give rise to the basis for  a  claim  for  asylum  for  a
    Convention reason, namely that which I have set out,  membership  of  a
    particular social group.  However, as the decision letter  went  on  to
    consider at paragraphs [13] to [24] the Secretary of State, taking into
    account the available  evidence  provided,  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant had given a consistent account of her sexuality, thus it  was
    not accepted that she either had any problems in Pakistan previously as
    a result of her sexuality or on return (see paragraphs [24] and  [29]).
    Thus, as to assessment  of  future  fear  set  out  at  paragraph  [30]
    onwards, as the Secretary of State did not accept her claim to be in  a
    same sex relationship it was considered that she had failed to meet the
    test set out in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.  In  the  alternative,
    at paragraphs [32] to [36] the Secretary of State considered that  even
    if it were accepted that the Appellant  was  "interested  in  same  sex
    relationships", the Secretary of State did not accept that she would be
    at risk upon return  on  the  basis  that  she  would  choose  to  live
    discreetly.

 5. Consideration was also given to risk on return as a  single  female  at
    [35]  and  also  in  relation  to  Article  8  and   consideration   of
    discretionary leave based on medical grounds (see  paragraphs  [52]  to
    [71]).

 6. The Appellant exercised her right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 1st December 2016.  It is
    common ground between the parties and as set  out  in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal settled by Counsel that the Home Office was not  represented  at
    the appeal hearing, thus the judge considered the appeal in the absence
    of the Presenting Officer and on the material that was presented to the
    Tribunal.  There is also no  dispute  that  the  Appellant  provided  a
    bundle of documents including witness statements from both herself  and
    her partner and  a  number  of  other  documents  that  were  provided,
    including a summons and a letter from a friend  in  Pakistan.   Earlier
    documents had been set out in the Respondent's bundle.

 7.  It is recorded in the determination at paragraphs [9] to [13] that the
    Appellant gave evidence  by  adopting  her  written  statement  in  the
    Respondent's bundle and also the statement in  the  indexed  bundle  to
    which I have referred.  There is no reference to any questions asked by
    Counsel, although Mr Paramjorthy makes reference in his submissions  to
    this Tribunal that there were some additional questions asked in-chief.
     The judge does record responses made by  the  Appellant  to  questions
    asked by the judge at paragraphs [10] to [11].  At paragraph  [12]  the
    judge records  that  the  second  witness  to  give  evidence  was  the
    Appellant's partner who adopted her statement as evidence-in-chief.  It
    appears to be common  ground  that  no  questions  were  asked  of  the
    Appellant's partner who had provided a witness statement at pages 6  to
    12 of the indexed bundle.  The judge heard  detailed  submissions  from
    the Appellant's Counsel (see paragraph [13]).

 8. The judge set out his findings at paragraphs [17] to [46] and made  the
    point that whilst the Secretary of State had accepted that  homosexuals
    in Pakistan would constitute a social group, the issue was whether  the
    Appellant had demonstrated from the evidence that she was at risk as  a
    result of her sexuality.  At paragraph [20] of  the  determination  the
    judge made reference to the difficulties an applicant would have  being
    able to provide direct evidence of it, and that   "whether  or  not  an
    applicant is homosexual is largely one of considering indirect evidence
    from which inferences will be drawn as  to  whether  the  Appellant  is
    indeed a homosexual."  The judge went on to state:-

         "When  assessing  indirect  evidence,  the   credibility   of   the
         individual concerned plays a crucial role.  If  the  individual  is
         found to be lacking in credibility, then it will become  very  hard
         for them to satisfy a Tribunal of the truth of their claims."

 9. The judge then went on to make reference to Section 8 of the  2004  Act
    relating to assessment of credibility and made a number of findings  of
    fact which were adverse to the Appellant.  In summary the judge at [26]
    concluded that he did not find the Appellant to be a witness  of  truth
    and that she had not been able to satisfy the judge that her  sexuality
    was such as to put her life and liberty  at  jeopardy  if  returned  to
    Pakistan (see [26]).  The judge also did not  find  the  Appellant  had
    been truthful with regard to the claim that she was previously  married
    in Pakistan against her will.  The judge  rejected  the  court  summons
    (see paragraphs [40] to [43]) and at paragraph [46] the judge  rejected
    her account as to her sexuality.  In reaching this conclusion  at  [44]
    the judge made reference to the Appellant's partner but found  that  it
    was more likely than not that she had "agreed to assist  the  Appellant
    in pursuing her asylum claim".   Thus  the  claim  for  protection  was
    dismissed on all grounds.

10. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and the grounds
    are set out in the papers dated 23rd January 2017.   In  essence  those
    grounds make reference to the  well-known  Surendran  guidelines  which
    apply to procedures adopted by the Tribunal  in  the  absence  of  Home
    Office representation (see MMN v SSHD (OO/TH/02423)  [2000]  INLR  576.
    The grounds in summary submit that the guidelines set out in that  case
    were not followed and that matters that went to the core of the  appeal
    and the findings of fact were not put to the Appellant, which therefore
    amounted to an error of law.  The points  that  were  not  put  to  the
    Appellant but which were relied upon to support findings  of  fact  are
    then set out in those grounds.  In particular, at  paragraph  [14]  the
    grounds make reference to the lack of consideration of  the  supporting
    witness's written evidence which was set  out  in  a  lengthy  detailed
    witness statement at pages 6 to 12 of the bundle.

11. At the hearing before this Tribunal Mr Paramjorthy, who represented the
    Appellant in the First-tier Tribunal, relied upon the grounds that were
    before the Tribunal.  He relied upon the grounds as pleaded taking  the
    Tribunal through those grounds by reference to  the  determination  and
    where necessary by reference to the decision letter.  In  doing  so  he
    identified the areas in the findings of fact which were not  raised  in
    the refusal letter and thus, he submitted, it  was  necessary  for  the
    judge to raise matters in evidence before making an adverse credibility
    finding.  By not doing so, he submitted, was procedurally wrong and did
    not give the Appellant the opportunity to provide any explanation.

12. Within those submissions he made reference to  paragraph  [44]  of  the
    judge's determination.  In that paragraph the judge made  reference  to
    the supporting evidence of the Appellant's partner and the photographic
    evidence that had been produced.  The judge recorded in that  paragraph
    the following:-

         "Whilst I do not totally discount them,  set  against  the  adverse
         findings  I  have  made,  they  do  not  assist  the  Appellant  in
         persuading me that she is in fact  in  a  homosexual  relationship.
         The photographs show the Appellant and her  partner  in  situations
         which do  not  self-evidently  demonstrate  that  they  are  in  an
         intimate relationship.  In my view, it is  quite  likely  that  the
         Appellant's  claimed  partner  is   practically   and   emotionally
         dependent on her ... It is more likely than not, that xxx agreed to
         assist the Appellant in pursuing her asylum claim."

13. In respect of that paragraph Mr Paramjorthy referred  the  Tribunal  to
    the decision letter at paragraph [23] which  made  reference  to  there
    being two statements from the Appellant's partner.   It  recorded  that
    the account could not be considered to  be  an  "objective  account  of
    events surrounding your sexuality".  The Secretary  of  State  gave  no
    weight to that document.  The submission made was that the evidence  of
    the Appellant's partner went to the core of her account concerning  her
    sexuality and her relationship in the United Kingdom.  This was further
    relevant to  the  issues  set  out  in  the  refusal  letter  but  were
    considered in the alternative by the Secretary of State  at  paragraphs
    [30] to [36].  It was submitted that  the  witness  had  been  tendered
    before the court and if  there  were  any  questions  relating  to  her
    account that they ought to have been asked of the witness.  However, no
    questions were asked of  any  kind.   He  further  submitted  that  the
    closing comments made at paragraph [44]  gave  the  appearance  of  the
    judge, in polite  terms,  suggesting  that  the  witness  had  given  a
    statement solely to assist her in pursuing her claim; the inference  he
    submits was that this was "an allegation of fraud" ( see  paragraph  14
    of the written grounds).  He submits that the judge attached no  weight
    to the detailed account of their relationship in reaching  findings  of
    fact on the core issue and rejected the evidence on the  basis  of  the
    previous  adverse  findings  that  had  been  made  in  the   preceding
    paragraphs.  Mr Paramjorthy submitted that the case had  been  advanced
    on the basis of the Appellant being a member  of  a  particular  social
    group which had been accepted by the Secretary of State  at  paragraphs
    [19] and [20] of the decision letter, thus the  corroborative  evidence
    from the Appellant's partner was pivotal and  central  to  the  overall
    credibility of the claim that the judge had not given consideration  to
    it, and when making a self-direction at paragraph [20] as to assessment
    of evidence, the evidence of her partner formed a central role  in  the
    overall finding.  Thus he submitted that was both an error of law which
    went to the core of the claim.

14. Mr Norton by way of response made reference to the difficulties that  a
    judge faces in a protection appeal of this kind when the  Secretary  of
    State was not represented before the First-tier Tribunal.  He submitted
    that credibility of both the Appellant and the Appellant's partner  was
    central to the overall findings that were made and in this context,  in
    the light of the Secretary of State not being represented, it was  open
    to the judge to consider  the  issues  raised  in  the  refusal  letter
    alongside the evidence given by way of rebuttal.   However,  whilst  he
    submitted  that  there  were  adverse  credibility  points  which  were
    properly made by the judge, some of those did not go to the core of the
    claim.  However, significantly, he submitted that the core part of  her
    claim as to her sexuality and the supporting evidence  of  her  witness
    had not been properly considered by certain matters not  being  put  to
    the appellant, and as this went to the core of the claim that it was an
    error of law and that  the  determination  should  be  set  aside.   He
    reiterated that there was no criticism of the judge who was  having  to
    decide a protection appeal  without  the  assistance  of  a  Presenting
    Officer.  Nonetheless, he considered that there was a material error of
    law and that in those circumstances he  invited  the  Tribunal  to  set
    aside the decision and for the appeal to be reheard so that all  issues
    relating to credibility could be considered.

15. In the light of that concession made by  Mr  Norton  that  there  is  a
    material error of law in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    it is the case that both parties agree that  the  determination  cannot
    stand and  must  be  set  aside.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  central
    submission made on behalf  of  the  Appellant  to  which  I  have  made
    reference to which concerns the core issue relating to the  Appellant's
    sexuality and the  evidence  of  her  partner  was  such  that  it  was
    necessary for the judge to give full regard to  the  evidence  in  that
    witness statement which had been adopted as the witness's  evidence-in-
    chief.  It was a substantial witness statement that  went  into  detail
    about their relationship and made reference to the Appellant  receiving
    threatening calls via the telephone (see page 11).  As set out earlier,
    the core of the Appellant's claim related to her sexuality, and  whilst
    the decision letter appeared to reject the  witness's  account  on  the
    basis that it  could  not  be  seen  as  "an  objective  account"  (see
    paragraph [23]) which was reflected in the findings at paragraph  [44],
    it is difficult to see how  evidence  from  a  partner  relevant  to  a
    relationship could ever be considered if such evidence is discounted as
    not being "objective"  or  "self-serving".    Mr  Norton  is  right  to
    observe that there were some adverse credibility findings made  by  the
    judge which were  not  challenged  in  the  grounds,  for  example  the
    findings set out at paragraph [36] which made direct reference to other
    documentation that was before the Secretary of State.   However,  I  am
    satisfied for the reasons given by both  advocates,  that  the  central
    issue relating to the Appellant's sexuality was not considered  in  the
    light of all of  the  evidence  which  included,  and  importantly  the
    Appellant's partner, in the light of the evidence that had been  given.
    Thus the decision cannot stand and will be set aside.

16. As to the remaking of the decision, both advocates submitted  that  the
    correct course to adopt in a case of  this  nature  would  be  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  it  would
    enable the judge to consider the Appellant's evidence and that  of  her
    partner; this is a case in which the adverse credibility  findings  are
    therefore  unsafe  and  cannot  be  preserved  although  as  Mr  Norton
    submitted the determination is a record of the evidence  given  by  the
    appellant at that time.

17. In the light of those submissions, I am  satisfied  that  this  is  the
    correct course to take and therefore I set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and it will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to hear afresh.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family.  The direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.
 Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Signed[pic]                             Date: 8/6/2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

