

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: PA/08378/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At    Royal Courts of Justice                 |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On    22.01.2018                              |On 30.01.2018                |


Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                                    [L K]
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Admas Habteslasie (counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co)
For the respondent: Mr Paul Duffy

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Alan Baldwin), sitting at Harmondsworth on  22  August,
    to  an asylum appeal by a citizen of Georgia, born 1985. The  appellant
    claimed to have a well-founded fear of persecution by way  of  lack  of
    protection from a ruling party politician called Isako, or more  likely
    Irako Tshipurishvili, as a result of incidents he said had taken  place
    leading up to elections in 2008 and on 8 October 2016.  Permission  was
    given on the basis that the judge had arguably failed to  take  account
    of background evidence about Tshipurishvili which was before  him.  The
    ruling party  had  changed  between  the  two  elections;  but  so  had
    Tshipurishvili.

 2. The appellant did not give a date for the 2016 incident:  he  said  (in
    his first statement, paragraph 11) it had happened "... near  the  date
    of the Parliamentary Election ..."; but a supporting  statement  (taken
    in Georgian, and translated) said it had been in the  spring;  then  he
    had gone for safety to the capital Tbilisi. However on 21 July 2016  he
    had applied for a business visit visa, granted on the  29th  and  valid
    till 29 January 2017,  on  which  he  arrived  in  this  country  on  4
    September.

 3. On 20 June 2017 the appellant was found working  illegally  at  a  car-
    wash, in possession of a false Romanian driving licence. After refusing
    to answer questions about that, he was detained for removal, but on the
    22nd claimed asylum. Following interview and  his  first  statement  (8
    August) that was refused on the 14th.  Up to that point, the  appellant
    hadn't named Tshipurishvili, saying he feared for his family if he  did
    so; but in a further statement (15 September), he did. He said  he  had
    heard about continuing threats from Tshipurishvili when he spoke to his
    father in December 2016; but his father had died on the 30th.

 4. On appeal the judge set out the background evidence and the appellant's
    in some detail. At 20 he noted that the appellant was already  31  when
    he left Georgia, and had completed  three  years  of  a  five-year  law
    degree. He noted that he was not required (see s. 8 of the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004) to make a  finding
    on delay without considering the 'country evidence'. After disposing of
    two ancillary points, one raised by the  respondent,  and  one  by  the
    appellant, he went on at 21 to do so.

 5. At 21 the judge reviewed the evidence as to what happened in  connexion
    with what was claimed to have  been  a  vote-rigging  incident  at  the
    polling station in Lagodekhi, eastern Georgia, where the appellant  was
    retained as a 'short-term adviser' to an NGO in the electoral field  in
    2008. The crux of the appellant's claim was that, because of  what  had
    happened then, he  took  Tshipurishvili's  threats  in  2016  seriously
    enough to flee, first to Tbilisi (the national capital, once  known  in
    this country by its more pronounceable Turkish name of Tiflis,  in  the
    centre of the country). As the judge said, if he was  not  telling  the
    truth about what happened in 2008, it was hard to see how he  could  be
    doing so as to events in 2016.  The  judge  went  on  to  consider  the
    reasons for the appellant's striking delay in making his asylum claim.

 6. At 22, the judge made appropriate allowances for any fear the appellant
    might have been under in 2016, so that he felt obliged to  put  himself
    forward as a genuine business visitor in order to make his way  out  of
    Georgia. What he did note was that the appellant, having got  his  visa
    on 29 July, apparently felt  no  need  to  leave  the  country  till  4
    September. As the judge pointed out, that meant his visa ran  out  just
    under five months later, on 29 January. Yet he had done nothing by that
    time to claim asylum, or put together any evidence to  support  such  a
    claim, and in the end did not make  it  till  two  days  after  he  was
    detained the following June.

 7. Subject to the complaints made in the grounds, the judge  was  entitled
    to describe the appellant as a 'highly educated man', even on the basis
    of  a  partially-completed  law  degree,  and   to   draw   appropriate
    conclusions from that. He went on to find that, even if he  were  wrong
    about that, the appellant would have been able to solve his problems by
    way of internal relocation on return: I shall deal with that point only
    if I find I need to.

 8. The complaints made in the grounds are first, what is described as mis-
    application of the standard of proof.  Permission  to  appeal  was  not
    granted on that point, and there is nothing in it. At 19, the judge set
    the standard correctly as that of 'real risk', and there is nothing  at
    all to show that he did not apply it. Second, two points are made about
    what is said to have been the judge's failure to deal properly with the
    evidence before him, in connexion with a finding he made at 21.

 9. Having already made a number of findings  against  the  appellant,  the
    judge went on

       Furthermore it would appear from the information provided about Radio
       Hereti that when [Tshipurishvili] tried to  bribe  and  persuade  the
       Station that they should stop broadcasting anti-Ruling  Party  ideas,
       he was told to 'leave and mind his own business'. [The discussion was
       both broadcast and reported to various government  bodies,  including
       the Public Defender's Office]. Such a response hardly  suggests  that
       [Tshipurishvili] was a dangerous man who should be feared.

10. The complaint in the grounds is that, in making this finding, the judge
    failed to deal with two significant  sources  of  evidence  which  were
    cited to him. The first in time was a 2003 'report'  (in  fact  a  news
    article) about Tshipurishvili, by someone called Giga  Chikhladze.  The
    grounds point out that the article was in the appellant's bundle (at 48
    - 52): this is true, but, considering that  there  were  644  pages  of
    evidence in  the  bundle,  the  judge  could  not  be  blamed  for  not
    considering anything to which he was not specifically referred.

11. While the grounds (neither  by  Mr  Habteslasie,  nor  by  counsel  who
    appeared for the  appellant  before  the  judge)  assert  that  he  was
    referred to the Chikhladze article in the course  of  the  hearing,  it
    does not appear in the appellant's skeleton argument before the  judge,
    or in the judge's very detailed decision.  I  cannot  accept  that  the
    judge made any error of law in not dealing with it. The article in  any
    case did no  more  than  relate  local  rumours,  to  the  effect  that
    Tshipurishvili  had  been  responsible  for  unsolved  murders  in  the
    Lagodekhi area: while this might have been of  some  relevance  to  any
    subjective fear on the appellant's part,  it  could  not  show  it  was
    objectively justified.

12. The other source, referred to in the skeleton argument before the judge
    at p 13, is a statement by the Georgian Public Defender of  3  February
    2009. It refers to Tshipurishvili coming into a polling station on  May
    21 2008, an election day, and complains that he "... used foul language
    against  a  young  journalist,  assaulted  her  and  crashed  her  tape
    recorder". Although  neither  the  anonymous  author  of  the  skeleton
    argument, nor counsel who  drafted  the  grounds  of  appeal  took  the
    trouble to provide a reference for that, Mr Habteslasie did, and it can
    be seen at [AB 106]. Since it was there in the  skeleton  argument,  it
    would have been a good thing for the judge to have dealt  with  it,  no
    doubt asking for a proper reference so he could do that.

13. Whether failure to do so amounted to a material error of law, in  other
    words one which affected the  result  reached  by  the  judge,  may  be
    another matter. There are two main points to be considered. First,  the
    judge introduced the point under challenge  "Furthermore  ...",  hardly
    suggesting that he regarded it as crucial to his findings as  a  whole.
    Even on the basis that it was of some importance, the judge's point was
    not that Tshipurishvili was a well-behaved peaceful citizen,  but  that
    the radio station had felt able to answer  his  threats  and  proffered
    bribes in the way they did. Apparently  their  reports  to  the  Public
    Defender had included the threat made to their journalist.



14. I do not regard the judge's failure to deal with the complaint from the
    radio station as a material error of  law,  even  taking  his  findings
    about events in Georgia on their own. However, as I pointed out to  the
    parties when I had heard them about that part of the  case,  the  judge
    was not required or entitled to approach the case on that basis.  S.  8
    of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act  2004,
    so far as relevant, says this

       (1) In determining whether to believe  a  statement  made  by  or  on
       behalf of a person who makes an asylum claim or a human rights claim,
       a deciding authority shall take account, as damaging  the  claimant's
       credibility, of any behaviour to which this section applies. ...

15. That was considered in SM (Section  8:  Judge's  process)  Iran  [2005]
    UKAIT 00116, later approved in JT (Cameroon) [2008] EWCA Civ 878.  Pill
    LJ set out the following principles (leaving out the inessential):

    1. Section 8 can, in my judgment, be construed in a way which  does  not
       offend  against  constitutional  principles.  It  plainly   has   its
       dangers, first, if it is read as a direction as to  how  fact-finding
       should be conducted, which in my judgment it  is  not,  and,  in  any
       event,  in  distorting  the  fact-finding  exercise   by   an   undue
       concentration on minutiae which may arise under the  section  at  the
       expense of,  and  as  a  distraction  from,  an  overall  assessment.
       Decision-makers should guard against that.  A  global  assessment  of
       credibility is required ...

    1. I am not prepared to read the word  "shall"  as  meaning  "may".  The
       section  8  factors  shall  be  taken  into  account   in   assessing
       credibility, and are capable of damaging it,  but  the  section  does
       not dictate that relevant damage to credibility  inevitably  results.
       Telling lies does damage credibility and  the  wording  was  adopted,
       probably with that in mind, by way of  explanation.  However,  it  is
       the "behaviour" of which "account" shall be taken  and,  in  context,
       the qualifying word "potentially" can be  read  into  an  explanatory
       clause  which  reads:  "as  damaging  the  claimant's   credibility".
       Alternatively,  the  explanatory  clause  may  be  read   as:   "when
       assessing any damage to the claimant's credibility". The form of  the
       sub-section and Parliament's assumed  regard  for  the  principle  of
       legality permit that construction.

    1.  Section  8  can  thus  be  construed  as   not   offending   against
       constitutional principles. It is no more than  a  reminder  to  fact-
       finding tribunals that conduct coming within  the  categories  stated
       in section 8 shall be taken into account  in  assessing  credibility.
       If there was a tendency for tribunals simply to ignore these  matters
       when assessing credibility, they were in error. It  is  necessary  to
       take account of them. However, at one  end  of  the  spectrum,  there
       may, unusually, be cases in which conduct of the kind  identified  in
       section 8  is  held  to  carry  no  weight  at  all  in  the  overall
       assessment of credibility on the particular facts. I do not  consider
       the section prevents that finding in an appropriate case.  ...  Where
       section 8 matters are held to be entitled to some weight, the  weight
       to be given to them is entirely a matter for the fact-finder.

16. I invited submissions from the parties on the  effect  of  the  judge's
    credibility findings on the appellant's delay in claiming asylum. There
    was no suggestion that he had not decided the question for himself in a
    properly independent way, and the challenges remained limited to  those
    already dealt with.





17. In my view the  judge  had  fully  complied  with  what  JT  (Cameroon)
    required him to do.  He  had  not  regarded  the  basis  on  which  the
    appellant arrived in this country as fatal to his case,  and  had  made
    proper allowance for the fact that he might have needed to spin a  tale
    to get a visa, if he really had been in fear.  However,  he  was  fully
    entitled to note that, even after the appellant  got  his  visa  on  29
    July, he had not felt it necessary  to  leave  Georgia  on  it  till  4
    September. The judge was also entitled to find that the appellant, with
    the education he had, and the advantage of four or five months  in  the
    capital, must have known of the existence of the asylum system.

18. The judge went  on  to  note,  in  the  appellant's  favour,  that  his
    reluctance to return to Georgia, even for his father's  funeral,  might
    have shown he was afraid to do so. However, he then considered what had
    actually made him stay here. He had  not  used  the  time  between  his
    father's phone call in December 2016, or his death on the 30th, and the
    expiry of his own visa on 29 January 2017, to do anything to regularize
    his own position. He had on the other  hand  equipped  himself  with  a
    false Romanian driving licence, on which he had disappeared  from  view
    in pursuit of employment till 20  June;  and  even  then  only  claimed
    asylum two days later.

19. The judge did consider events in Georgia with some care; but,  even  if
    he had been wrong in his approach to the  background  evidence,  in  my
    view he was fully entitled to regard the facts on the appellant's delay
    in this particular case  as  effectively  overwhelming.  There  was  no
    material error of law on his part.

Appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
