
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
pa/08424/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th November 2017                  |       On 28th November 2017         |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                                    kpud
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Rourke promulgated on  16th  February  2017.   At  the
    appeal hearing before the Upper Tribunal the Appellant  is  represented
    by Ms Anzani, Counsel and the Respondent is represented by Mr Melvin, a
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

 2. Judge O'Rourke in his decision dated 6th February 2017, but promulgated
    on 16th February rejected the Appellant's asylum appeal, in respect  of
    his claim that he is at risk upon  return  to  Sri  Lanka  due  to  his
    imputed political opinion as an alleged supporter  of  the  LTTE.   His
    claim is that he will be subject  to  persecution  upon  return,  as  a
    result of him having been involved in the coaching of young  cricketers
    from the Tamil north and Jaffna area.

 3. There are three Grounds  of  Appeal  in  this  case  and  I  note  that
    permission to appeal has been granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on
    15th September 2017 who found that it was arguable, as asserted  within
    the grounds, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  basing  adverse
    credibility findings  on  inconsistencies  and  contradictions  without
    identifying them.  It is also arguable, she found, that the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in rejecting the documents  for  reasons  given,  namely
    that they may not be genuine.

 4. In considering this appeal  I  have  taken  into  account  of  all  the
    evidence submitted including the original decision of  the  judge,  the
    Grounds of Appeal and the Rule 24 reply, all of the papers before Judge
    O'Rourke,  together  with  the  oral  submissions  of  both  the  legal
    representatives before me.

 5. Within the Grounds of Appeal the first Ground  of  Appeal  argues  that
    Tribunal Judge O'Rourke failed to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  the
    finding at paragraph 21 that the Appellant's account of  police  visits
    to his house was contradictory and inconsistent.

 6. At paragraph 21 in respect  of  the  findings  in  that  regard,  Judge
    O'Rourke has simply stated at subparagraph (ii) "his account of  police
    visits to his house was contradictory and inconsistent" and  has  given
    no further specific findings at that  point.   However  I  do  in  that
    regard accept the submission of Mr Melvin that the judge  had  actually
    previously made findings in respect of the Appellant's case in  respect
    of police viits when considering his evidence at paragraph  13  of  the
    judgment at page 4, when Judge O'Rourke stated:

         "He said the police had been  to  his  family's  house  on  several
         occasions over the years since and had shown his mother  an  arrest
         warrant.  In interview he said that the visits took place  in  2008
         to 2010, ceased, but then started again in 2015.  In his  statement
         the final reference to such visits is one in  February  2015,  when
         the police shouted and screamed at his mother, asking where he was,
         but in cross-examination he said that they had also called  at  the
         end of 2016 and routinely did so twice a year.  As far as he  knows
         the two Tamil boys have disappeared or are missing and he fears the
         same fate for him if he returns."

 7. The Secretary of State in the Rule 24 reply  relies  specifically  upon
    the case of Budhathoki (reasons for decision) [2014] UKUT 341 in  which
    the Upper Tribunal observed at paragraph 14 of  the  judgment  that  in
    giving judgments the judges do not have to set out the entirety of  the
    evidence presented and it is not necessary to rehearse every detail  or
    issue raised, but the judge has to give clear  and  brief  reasons  for
    preferring one case to the other, so the parties  understand  why  they
    have won or lost  and  to  identify  and  resolve  key  issues  in  the
    evidence.  Although  clearly  it  would  have  been  better  had  Judge
    O'Rourke set out the inconsistencies relied upon at paragraph  21  when
    finding that the police visits  to  the  house  were  inconsistent  and
    contradictory, I do  find  that  he  actually  has  made  adequate  and
    sufficient findings previously in that regard  regarding  at  paragraph
    13.

 8. Although Ms Anzani makes  the  point  that  the  cross-examination  and
    statement postdated the interview, clearly the evidence that the  judge
    set out at paragraph 13 in terms of the fact that in  cross-examination
    he said that they called in 2016 and routinely did so twice a year  the
    Judge  found  was  inconsistent,  with  the  judge  pointing   to   the
    inconsistencies between what he said in the statement that  the  visits
    took place between 2008 to 2010 and ceased and started again  in  2015.
    I do therefore find that in fact  the  judge  has  given  adequate  and
    sufficient reasons for his findings in that regard.

 9. In respect of the second Ground of Appeal it is argued by the Appellant
    that the judge has erred in his assessment of the documents produced by
    the Appellant and it  is  said  that  the  Appellant  produced  several
    documents in support of the asylum claim, including what is said within
    the Grounds of Appeal to be most notably  a  certified  copy  of  a  Mt
    Lavinia Magistrates' Court  file  in  his  name,  including  an  arrest
    warrant and a letter from  a  Sri  Lankan  Attorney,  Ms  Meenu  Aparna
    Aramathunga, which is said to confirm the existence of the  court  file
    and the  existence  of  the  outstanding  proceedings  and  the  arrest
    warrant.

10. Criticism is made  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  of  Judge  O'Rourke's
    findings in respect of the analysis of that evidence and in  particular
    at paragraph 22(iii)(a) where Judge O'Rourke noted and found:

         "While I note that they have been apparently  obtained  via  a  Sri
         Lankan lawyer, by request from his solicitors  that  does  not,  of
         itself, satisfy me as to their provenance.  There will no doubt  be
         lawyers in Sri Lanka, as also  sometimes  in  the  UK,  willing  to
         participate, for payment, in activities that are dishonest and this
         is at least a possibility in this case."

11. Judge O'Rourke went on to criticise  the  tardiness  with  which  those
    documents had been produced. I am told by  Ms  Anzani  that  they  were
    actually produced on 2nd February prior to the hearing on 6th  February
    rather than being actually produced at the hearing itself, but that was
    only four days prior to the hearing and  therefore  not  in  accordance
    with the court directions. The judge found that  the  Respondent  would
    not have been able to verify them in that short  time.   The  judge  at
    subparagraph  (c)  also  stated  that  they  make  no  mention  of  the
    Appellant's partner, Mr  P  but  the  police  report  apparently  cites
    extensive enquiries on their part including mention of two other  Tamil
    persons but failed to mention any reference to Mr P.  The  judge  found
    it is highly unlikely having mentioned the cricketing charity in  their
    report  and  having,  as  the  Appellant  claims,  taken  the  relevant
    documents from his house, that the police would not have been aware  of
    Mr P's involvement  and  also  sought  to  make  enquiry  of  him.   In
    subparagraph (d) the judge finds that the late production  of  all  the
    documents, the police  records  and  the  court  records,  the  charity
    certificate and the  cricketing  records  undermined  their  provenance
    generally.

12. The point  made  by  Ms  Anzani  in  the  grounds,  but  also  in  oral
    submissions in respect of the lack of mention of  Mr  P,  is  that  the
    Appellant was not saying that the police did not know about Mr  P,  but
    the Appellant's case was that he lost contact with him and  his  friend
    had disappeared.

13. What is clear is that the evidence before Judge O'Rourke was  a  letter
    from Ms Amarathunga dated 18th January 2017 in which she says that  she
    is aware of the circumstances which  her  client,  the  Appellant,  had
    undergone and that he sought legal assistance from her when  he  wanted
    to obtain court documents for his immigration matter in the UK and that
    he had been summonsed to appear before a court.  She says that by  then
    he had been left the country and  the  court  had  issued  the  warrant
    against him and that she obtained those documents and  posted  them  to
    the Appellant's solicitors in  London,  together  with  a  letter.  She
    stated there was a warrant for his arrest and if he tried  to  re-enter
    the country he would be arrested at the airport.  She also submitted  a
    photocopy of her Bar Association of Sri Lanka card, which is at page 10
    of the Appellant's bundle, together with a list of the Bar  Association
    of Sri Lanka members at page 11 which details her name  and  practising
    address, together with the original  and  English  translation  of  the
    report reported by the Sri Lankan police to the magistrate at page  15,
    the order by the magistrate for issue of the warrant, copy  of  English
    translation which is at page 20 and also the arrest warrant  itself,  a
    copy of which is at page 21 and the English translation at  page  22  .
    "Aiding and abetting terrorists" as stated on the arrest warrant as the
    particulars of the offence.

14. Although Judge O'Rourke clearly was entitled to consider  the  lateness
    of the documentation and the fact that the Respondent had not  had  the
    opportunity to verify them, clearly it was open to  the  Respondent  in
    that regard, if she so wished, to  seek  an  adjournment  but  no  such
    request was made and  in  that  regard  the  submissions  made  by  the
    Respondent were simply in terms of the lateness of  the  documents  and
    the fact there was no requirement  for  the  Respondent  to  check  the
    validity of those documents.  What was not raised as  a  submission  by
    the Respondent at that time was any doubt regarding the  legitimacy  of
    the activities undertaken by Ms Amarathunga.  The judge's  finding  was
    that there "would no doubt be lawyers in Sri Lanka and sometimes the UK
    willing to participate, for payment, in activities that are dishonest."
     That finding was not actually based upon any submission  made  by  the
    Respondent. Indeed before the judge there was seemingly no evidence  to
    substantiate such a finding or even the possibility that in fact  these
    documents had been obtained for payment and  that  there  is  something
    dishonest about Ms Amarathunga's activities.  Clearly obviously  as  Mr
    Melvin submitted in his oral submissions there is concern as to whether
    or not the documents from Sri Lankan attorneys are genuine,  but  there
    was no actual  evidence  put  before  the  judge  in  that  regard  and
    seemingly no evidence upon which  the  judge  could  formulate  such  a
    finding.

15. When assessing the credibility overall there has to be consideration of
    all of the evidence and in that regard the findings  made  have  to  be
    based upon evidence rather than speculation on the part of  the  judge.
    I do find that in fact the finding that there  is  a  possibility  that
    these documents were obtained for payment by  dishonest  activities  is
    speculation and was not part of the  Respondent's  case.  There  is  no
    evidence to suggest that the lateness of the documentation itself meant
    that they were obtained by dishonesty and in that regard I do find that
    the judge has made a finding which was not  based  upon  the  evidence,
    when considering the genuineness of that documentation.

16. Whether or not there was actually a valid arrest warrant is clearly  in
    my  judgment  a  significant  feature  when  considering  the   overall
    corroboration of the Appellant's account and also the risk upon return.
     In that regard I therefore do find although the judge has given  other
    reasons regarding the tardiness of the documentation for rejecting  the
    documentation, the fact that the  judge  has  taken  account  and  made
    findings at least partially based upon speculation,  I  do  find  is  a
    material error of law. Although other reasons have been given, I cannot
    say the judge would necessary have reached the same conclusion had that
    error not been made.

17. It is also relevant in that if there was a  valid  and  genuine  arrest
    warrant then, as Mr Melvin properly concedes, there is  also  merit  in
    respect of what is said in the third Ground of Appeal.

18. The judge went on to find in paragraph 23 that even  if  there  was  an
    arrest warrant for the Appellant's arrest that would not actually  mean
    that he was on a stop list  and  that  therefore  the  Appellant  would
    necessarily be at risk on return.  In that regard, looking at paragraph
    7 of the head note in the country guidance case of GJ &  Others  (post-
    civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319  and  subparagraph
    (7):

         "The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution  or
         serious harm on return  to  Sri  Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or
         otherwise do include:

         (d)  A person whose name appears  on  a  computerised  'stop'  list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against
             whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name  appears  on  a  'stop'  list  will  be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri
             Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant."

19. Clearly, as Mr Melvin quite properly concedes if there  was  an  extant
    arrest warrant that that would mean that  the  Appellant  was  at  risk
    given the fact his name would then be on a computerised stop  list  and
    the findings made by the judge in that regard  were  not  open  to  her
    regarding the assessment of the risk categories within subparagraph (7)
    of the heading of GJ.

20. Given the fact that I find that the judge's assessment of  reasons  for
    rejection of the evidence of the attorney regarding the court  file  is
    inadequate for the reasons set out above, I do find that  in  light  of
    the further error made by the judge regarding the potential risk  faced
    by the Appellant if his name was genuinely on  extant  court  order  or
    arrest warrant does mean that there is a material error of law in  this
    case.

21.  I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke in  its
    entirety given that credibility will need to be assessed  holistically.
    That is not a case where it is appropriate to retain  any  findings  of
    fact in this case and I therefore set aside the judgment of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Rourke in its entirety.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Rourke  does  contain  a
    material error of law and is set aside in its entirety.

     The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  rehearing
    before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Rourke.

Anonymity

    I do make an order in respect  of  anonymity  such  order  having  been
    sought by Ms Anzani given the circumstances of this Appellant's  asylum
    appeal.  In  such  circumstances  no  record  of  transcript  of  these
    proceedings may mention the Appellant  or  any  member  of  his  family
    either directly or indirectly by name.  This order applies both to  the
    Respondent and to the Appellant.  A breach of this order  may  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 27th November 2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty



