
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: PA/08902/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 November 2017                      |On 23 November 2017               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    H. A.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Boyle, Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq who entered the  UK  illegally.  He
      made an application  for  protection  on  1  February  2016,  and  the
      Respondent refused that protection application on 27  July  2016.  The
      Appellant's appeal to the First tier  Tribunal  ["FtT"]  against  that
      decision was heard on 22 March 2017,  and  it  was  dismissed  on  all
      grounds, in a decision promulgated on 24  April  2017  by  First  Tier
      Tribunal Judge Head-Rapson.
   2. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal  that  decision  on  25
      August 2017 by First tier Tribunal  Judge  Pedro.  The  challenge  was
      however limited to the decision to dismiss the humanitarian protection
      appeal. Permission was granted on the basis that it was  arguable  the
      Judge had either failed to follow current country guidance, or, failed
      to provide reasons for choosing not to do so, and, had arguably  erred
      in her approach to the issue of internal relocation to avoid the risks
      to the Appellant in his home area.
   3. The Respondent has filed no Rule 24 Notice in relation to the grant of
      permission, opposing it. Neither party has made formal application  to
      adduce further evidence. Thus the matter comes before me.


   Error of Law?


   4. Mr Boyle accepts that  the  Appellant  pursues  no  challenge  to  the
      dismissal of the asylum and human rights appeals.
   5. Following the confirmation and amendments made to the country guidance
      issued by the Upper Tribunal in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT
      544, the proper approach is set out by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AA
      (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944. The Judge did not have the benefit of this
      amended guidance which was only promulgated on 11 July 2017, after her
      own decision.
   6. Having dismissed  the  asylum  and  Article  3  appeals,  the  Judge's
      starting point for the humanitarian protection appeal was to  identify
      the Appellant's "home area" within his  country  of  origin,  and  the
      point of return. In this case the Appellant had identified  a  village
      in the province of Kirkuk at both interviews, and the  sole  point  of
      return  to  Iraq  remains  Baghdad.  The  province   of   Kirkuk   was
      acknowledged to be a "contested area" for the purposes of humanitarian
      protection in AA, and the Judge could not go behind that without clear
      evidence of a durable and significant change in circumstances. In fact
      in this appeal, there had been a formal concession by  the  Respondent
      to the effect that it was  (RFR  #26)  and  that  concession  was  not
      withdrawn at the hearing. Accordingly it was not open to the Judge  to
      find, as she did, that Kirkuk is no longer deemed to be  a  "contested
      area" [56].
   7. That concession required the Judge to analyse (in  the  light  of  the
      unchallenged findings of fact) whether it was reasonable to expect the
      Appellant, returned to Baghdad on a current or  expired  passport,  or
      laisser passer, to be able to relocate. (The Appellant's case was that
      he had in the past  been  issued  lawfully  with  a  legitimate  Iraqi
      passport, which he had used to leave Iraq lawfully  by  air,  but  had
      since lost [Q124]. This was therefore an individual who should be able
      to approach the Iraqi Embassy in London for  a  replacement  passport,
      since he ought to  be  able  to  supply  the  fingerprints  and  other
      biographical details that would allow that to occur  by  reference  to
      the centralised records of the passport office, without the  need  for
      recourse to the "family book" in Iraq.)
   8. That analysis needed to be undertaken in the light of the guidance  to
      be found in BA (returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18, and  since
      the Appellant had been found to be a Sunni Kurd, that analysis  needed
      to focus upon his ability to relocate to either Baghdad,  or,  to  the
      KRG. In turn that required a focus upon the issue identified in AA  as
      confirmed by the Court of Appeal;


          Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be  expected  to
              avoid  any  potential  undue  harshness  in  that   city   by
              travelling to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is  likely
              to involve an assessment of (a) the  practicality  of  travel
              from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Erbil by  air):  (b)  the
              likelihood of K's securing employment in the  IKR;  and,  (c)
              the availability of assistance from family and friends in the
              IKR.


   9. It is agreed before me that these steps were not undertaken, and  that
      as a result the Judge fell into error. A fact finding  analysis  needs
      to take place to consider, inter alia, whether upon  lawful  entry  to
      the KRG for twenty  days,  the  Appellant  would  be  able  to  secure
      employment and support himself, so that he would be able to extend his
      lawful status in the KRG. Again, given his evidence about his  ability
      to leave Iraq lawfully by  air,  and  his  extended  family  in  Iraq,
      consideration needed to be given to his ability to gain family support
      upon return to Iraq.
  10. In the circumstances the decision discloses a material  error  of  law
      that renders the dismissal of the appeal unsafe, and the decision must
      in the circumstances  be  set  aside  and  remade.  I  have  in  these
      circumstances considered with the parties whether or not to remit  the
      appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard, or whether  to
      proceed to remake it in the Upper Tribunal. In circumstances where  it
      would  appear  that  the  relevant  evidence  has  not  properly  been
      considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law
      has been to deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his  case  to
      be properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of
      the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover  the  extent  of
      the judicial fact finding exercise is such that having regard  to  the
      over-riding objective, it is appropriate that  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the  Practice
      Statement of 25 September 2012.
  11. Having reached that conclusion, with the agreement of  the  parties  I
      make the following directions;
     i) The decisions upon the asylum and human rights  grounds  of  appeal
        are confirmed.
    ii) The decision upon the humanitarian protection ground of  appeal  is
        set aside, and that ground of appeal is remitted to the First  Tier
        Tribunal for rehearing.
   iii) The findings of fact set  out  in  paragraphs  48,  and  51-55  are
        preserved.
    iv) The remitted appeal is not to be listed before Judge Head-Rapson.
     v) A Kurdish Sorani interpreter is required for  the  hearing  of  the
        appeal.
    vi) There is presently anticipated to be the  Appellant  and  no  other
        witness, and the time estimate is as a result, 2 hours.
   vii) It is not anticipated by the parties that either  has  any  further
        evidence to be filed.
  viii) The appeal may be listed at short notice as a filler on  the  first
        available date  at  the  North  Shields  hearing  centre  after  29
        November 2017.
    ix) No further  Directions  hearing  is  presently  anticipated  to  be
        necessary.  Should  either  party  anticipate  this  position  will
        change, they must inform the Tribunal immediately,  providing  full
        details of what (if any) further evidence they seek to rely upon.
     x) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.




Decision

  12. The decision promulgated on 24 April 2017 discloses no error of law in
      the decisions upon the asylum and human rights grounds of appeal,  and
      they are accordingly confirmed. The  decision  upon  the  humanitarian
      protection ground of appeal is however set aside, and that  ground  of
      appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing  with  the
      directions set out above.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 22 November 2017





