
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08432/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 March 2020                              |On 28 April 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                     T.A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Aziz, Solicitor, Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                             DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. This is an appeal  against  the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Malik ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 16  October  2019  by
   which the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  to
   grant him international protection was dismissed.

2. Upper Tribunal  Judge  Sheridan  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  all
   grounds.

Anonymity

3. The Judge issued an anonymity  direction  and  neither  party  before  me
   requested that it be set aside. I confirm the direction in order to avoid
   any likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant from the contents
   of his protection claim becoming known to the wider public. The direction
   is confirmed at the conclusion of this decision.

Background

4. The appellant is a national of Iran and an ethnic Kurd. He  is  presently
   aged 32. He is a civil engineering graduate and worked  at  his  cousin's
   mine before travelling to this country.

5. In January 2019 he was present with his cousin when they saw  an  injured
   man who they feared would die from his wounds if they did  not  aid  him.
   The injured man claimed to be a member of the  Kurdish  Democratic  Party
   ('KDP') and Peshmerga. They took the man to  the  cousin's  mine,  rather
   than to the village, as they feared that a report would be  made  to  the
   Iranian authorities. The appellant went to find help, whilst  his  cousin
   remained with the injured man. During a subsequent phone call between the
   relatives, the appellant heard a 'yelp' and then his cousin told  him  to
   run. The appellant hid in a relative's  orchard.  In  the  meantime,  the
   Iranian authorities attended his family home and questioned his sister as
   to his whereabouts.

6. The appellant left Iran by  car  on  5  January  2019  and  travelled  to
   Turkey. He flew from Istanbul to London, arriving on 20 January 2019, and
   claimed asylum on arrival.

7. Whilst in this country, the appellant  asserts  that  he  has  become  an
   outspoken critic of the Iranian government, placing anti-government posts
   on his Facebook page, which he states is open to the public. He has  also
   attended an KDP event in this country.

Hearing before the FtT

8. The appeal came before the Judge  sitting  in  Manchester  on  7  October
   2019. The Judge noted the respondent's acceptance that the appellant is a
   citizen of Iran and of Kurdish ethnicity. The Judge found  the  appellant
   to be incredible as to his personal history:

         21.The respondent accepts the appellant comes from Iran and  is  of
            Kurdish ethnicity. The respondent does not accept his account of
            being wanted by the authorities for assisting a  KDP  member  or
            that he is at risk for  having  exited  Iran  illegally.  Having
            considered the evidence, to the lower standard, in the round,  I
            too do not find the appellant's account reasonably likely to  be
            true for the following reasons:


             I.  The appellant did not actively or publicly participate  in
                supporting the KDP or their activities in Iran - nor was he
                involved in any other Kurdish parties as he says it  is  an
                offence/illegal.  This  causes  me  to  find  it   is   not
                reasonably  likely,  when  confronted   with   an   injured
                Peshmerga, the appellant would place his life  at  risk  by
                providing assistance. Whilst I accept the appellant,  given
                he is of  Kurdish  origin,  may  feel  sympathetic  to  the
                Kurdish cause, I do not find it reasonably  likely  he  and
                his cousin would have taken  the  risk  of  picking  up  an
                injured Peshmerga on the road and take  them  to  the  mine
                owned by his cousin and where the appellant worked, knowing
                the implications to them  both  if  caught  -  and  in  the
                circumstances  where  the  appellant  could  have  had   no
                expectation whatsoever that he could flee  to  the  UK  for
                protection.


             II.  The appellant says the person they helped was a member of
                the KDP at AIR Q31, but then at AIR Q32  that  he  did  not
                know he was a member. The appellant at AIR Q72 says the man
                took his coat off, he was bleeding and told them he  was  a
                Peshmerga for the KDP; the  appellant  says  this  man  was
                wearing Kurdish clothing  and  had  the  KDP  logo  on  his
                clothes. I do not find it reasonably likely that an injured
                Peshmerga and member  of  the  KDP  would,  if  dressed  in
                clothes that  would  immediately  identify  him  as  a  KDP
                Peshmerga, including a KDP logo, stand by the side  of  the
                road and flag down a random car, as this  individual  would
                not know who the occupants of the car were, if they were of
                Kurdish origin or supporters of the KDP,  but  the  Iranian
                authorities themselves - and even though the appellant  and
                his cousin are of Kurdish ethnicity, this individual  could
                not have known they would not notify the authorities.  This
                also causes me to  find  the  appellant's  account  is  not
                reasonably likely to be true.


             III. I  also  do  not  find  it  reasonably  likely  that  the
                appellant and his cousin would have considered it  safe  to
                take this individual back to the mine, if as the  appellant
                says, it was a remote area and the only  two  things  there
                were the village and the mine, as these would be  the  only
                two places then that the authorities would go  looking  for
                the injured Peshmerga. Further the appellant knew there was
                CCTV at the mine, together with the  security  guard;  this
                CCTV footage would implicate him and his  cousin  assisting
                an  injured  Peshmerga.  Whilst  the  appellant  speaks  of
                undertaking a humanitarian act, I do not find it reasonably
                likely he would  have  placed  himself  at  risk  from  the
                authorities  in  the  manner  as  described.  Further   the
                appellant says he left the injured Peshmerga  at  the  mine
                with his cousin and went to  get  help,  which  effectively
                amounted to him ringing a friend and then  making  his  way
                there. Yet there is no reasonable  explanation  as  to  why
                such phone call could not have been made from the mine  and
                this I find is an attempt by him to explain away why,  when
                he claims the injured Peshmerga and his cousin  were  found
                at the mine, that he was not there.


             IV. I also do not find it reasonably likely that the appellant
                or his cousin would not at the very least asked the injured
                Peshmerga how  he  had  come  to  be  injured.  Whilst  the
                appellant says the man was in a bad way, this man did  have
                the ability to tell them he was a Kurdish Peshmerga and had
                until the point the appellant claims they  picked  him  up,
                been able to stand by the  side  of  the  road.  Given  the
                enormity and the inevitable  risk  the  appellant  and  his
                cousin  were  placing  themselves  in  by  assisting   this
                individual and given the appellant would have been aware of
                the consequences, I do not find his account  credible  that
                he would not at the very least ascertain what had  happened
                as this would then inform both  him  and  his  cousin  what
                action they should take next.


             V. I also do not find it reasonably likely that the  timescale
                the appellant has provided of when he says they  picked  up
                the injured Peshmerga by the side of the road, the  claimed
                raid on his home and his  claim  to  have  then  left  Iran
                credible - even if as  the  appellant  now  claims  it  was
                midnight/1:00 am when he left Iran and not  10  p.m.  -  as
                whilst accepting the Iranian authorities would  have  taken
                swift action, I  do  not  find  it  reasonably  likely  his
                father's cousin would have been able  to  source  an  agent
                within hours and I find the appellant's departure from Iran
                has all the hallmarks of a pre-planned  trip  and  not  one
                made in haste to escape the authorities.


         22. Consequently, for all  the  reasons  given  above  I  find  the
            appellant's account of the reasons he claims to have  fled  Iran
            are not  reasonably  likely  to  be  true,  even  to  the  lower
            standard.'


9. As to the appellant's sur  place  activities  with  the  KDP,  the  Judge
   observed that the appellant had possessed no political profile whilst  he
   resided in Iran and determined that the appellant's  activities  in  this
   country did not give rise to a well-founded fear of persecution on return
   to Iran:

         '24. The appellant relies on an email of 18 September  2019  and  a
            'to whom it may concern' letter dated 10 September 2019  to  his
            representatives from the KDP Organisation Department. The  email
            says the letter is  sent  from  the  party's  main  organisation
            department in Kurdistan  (Iraq).  The  letter  itself  says  the
            appellant is a supporter of the party, cannot return home and if
            deported would be arrested and run the risk of being persecuted.
            Yet there is nothing to suggest in the letter that  any  enquiry
            has been made by the KDP organisation  department  to  ascertain
            the appellant's account of what he claims occurred in Iran.  The
            letter does not indicate one way or another that his account  is
            accepted as credible, merely that he is a supporter of the party
            - this being after one attendance at one  anniversary  event  in
            August  2017, as there is nothing to  suggest  from  the  letter
            that the author was aware  of  the  appellant's  Facebook  posts
            given he did not  start  posting  until  after  the  anniversary
            event. The appellant was not formally interviewed and this leads
            me to find the weight I can attach to this evidence is  low  and
            it does not of itself, even to the lower standard,  suggest  the
            appellant would be at risk on return to  Iran  for  any  of  his
            claimed reasons.


         25. There is no evidence before me, other than the appellant's  say
            so, as to who the individuals are  in  the  photographs  he  has
            posted on Facebook or any evidence to  suggest  his  account  is
            open to the public. Given the limited number of posts it  cannot
            be said the appellant is prolific on Facebook;  the  posts  were
            made after the date of the RFRL and this I find was  an  attempt
            to bolster his asylum claim. Nonetheless  the  onus  is  on  the
            appellant to establish his claim and I find  he  has  not  shown
            there to be a real risk his posts  have  or  will  come  to  the
            attention of the Iranian authorities, or are open to the public.
            The appellant would also be able  to  delete  his  posts  and/or
            close his account prior to  returning  to  Iran  and  I  do  not
            consider it unreasonable for him to do so.


         26. Further in BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return)  Iran
            CG [2011] UKUT 00036 (IAC) the Tribunal held that (i) Given  the
            large numbers of those who demonstrate here  and  the  publicity
            which demonstrators receive, for example on  Facebook,  combined
            with the inability of the  Iranian  Government  to  monitor  all
            returnees who have been involved in demonstrations here,  regard
            must be had to the level of involvement of the  individual  here
            as well as any political activity  which  the  individual  might
            have been involved in Iran before  seeking  asylum  in  Britain.
            Given his lack of involvement in Iran  and  minimal  involvement
            here, I find the likelihood of him coming to  the  attention  of
            the authorities in Iran is low  and  that  he  will  not  be  of
            interest or a priority for them.'

Grounds of appeal

10. The unsigned and undated grounds filed on behalf of  the  appellant  run
   to five pages. They are drafted in an  unhelpful  manner  but  have  been
   summarised by Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan  who  granted  permission  to
   appeal by a decision dated 11 January 2020:

         '2. The appellant is a Kurdish citizen of Iran who,  amongst  other
            things, claims that his risk from the authorities stems from  an
            incident in which he and his cousin assisted a KDP fighter  that
            they came across whilst driving home from work who had a gunshot
            wound. In his witness  statement  (paragraph  6)  the  appellant
            states that he and his cousin decided to help  the  man  because
            they are KDP sympathisers and because the man would likely  have
            bled out and died from the  wound  or  have  been  arrested  and
            killed  by  the  authorities.  He  also  stated  in  his  asylum
            interview (question 111)  that  the  man  reminded  him  of  his
            brother who had died in a car crash and who would probably  have
            survived if someone had  helped  him  half-an-hour  sooner.  The
            judge  found  that  it  was  not  reasonably  likely  that   the
            appellant, who had never been an active or public  supporter  of
            the KDP, would have taken the risk of assisting the injured  man
            given the implications of being caught. It is arguable that  the
            judge found it inherently implausible that the  appellant  would
            assist the injured man without taking  into  consideration  that
            the appellant's claim is that he believed that, absent his help,
            the man might die; and that, arguably, it is  plausible  that  a
            person (especially one who had lost a family  member  in  a  car
            accident) would put himself at risk to assist  someone  he  came
            across on the roadside who might die  in  the  absence  of  such
            assistance.


         3.  It is also arguable that the finding at paragraph 28 that there
            was nothing to suggest that the appellant's Facebook posts would
            come to the attention of  the  authorities  indicates  that  the
            judge may not have had adequate regard to the  country  guidance
            findings in HB (Kurds) about the extent of  the  sensitivity  of
            the authorities to Kurdish political activity  and  their  'hair
            trigger' approach.'

11. No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.

Decision

12. Before me Mr Aziz confirmed that three  grounds  of  appeal  were  being
   relied upon. Two concerned material errors of law, the first  being  that
   the Judge failed to lawfully consider the appellant's  evidence  and  the
   second that the Judge failed to lawfully  consider  evidence  as  to  the
   Facebook posts. The third ground is identified as the  Judge  not  having
   placed any or any sufficient weight on photographic evidence.

13. Mr McVeety informed  the  Tribunal  that  the  respondent  continued  to
   defend the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  but  candidly  accepted
   that there were  problems  as  to  the  Judge's  starting  point  of  her
   credibility assessment. At [21(I)]  the  Judge  determined,  'it  is  not
   reasonably  likely,  when  confronted  with  an  injured  Peshmerga,  the
   appellant would place his life at  risk  by  providing  assistance'.  Mr.
   McVeety acknowledged that no reasoning was provided within this paragraph
   as to why a fear of risk to life was the  only  rational  conclusion  the
   appellant and his cousin could have reached in  the  few  moments  before
   they made their decision to help. I observe that no reasons are given for
   rejecting the appellant's evidence that he acted, in part, for altruistic
   reasons, being mindful that a relative had died after  a  road  accident.
   Mr.  McVeety  further  accepted  that  the  Judge's  conclusion  strongly
   suggested  a  plausibility  assessment,  presented   as   a   credibility
   assessment: MM (DRC - plausibility) Democratic Republic of  Congo  [2005]
   UKIAT 00019; [2005] Imm. A.R. 198.

14. Whilst it was open to Mr. McVeety  to  argue  that  at  the  very  least
   certain elements of the claim may be difficult for a judge to accept when
   applying the correct standard and burden of proof, he accepted before  me
   that it could not be said that  no  judge  reasonably  directing  him  or
   herself could find that the appellant and his cousin would attend upon an
   injured man lying in  the  road.  In  such  circumstances,  the  lack  of
   adequate reasoning at the outset of the credibility  assessment  infected
   the whole of the assessment at [21] which was  built  upon  this  initial
   assessment of adverse credibility as to the appellant willingly  stopping
   to help an injured man.

15. Other elements of the appellant's  challenge  are  significantly  weaker
   and could be said to verge towards simple criticism of the Judge for  not
   accepting the appellant's case. However, in  the  circumstances  of  this
   matter I am satisfied that the approach  adopted  by  the  Judge  at  the
   outset of the credibility assessment contained a material  error  of  law
   and adversely flowed through considerations of this appeal as a whole.

16. In such circumstances I am satisfied that  the  decision  of  the  Judge
   must be set aside.



Remaking the Decision

17. Both representatives confirmed that if this  decision  were  to  be  set
   aside the most appropriate course  of  action  would  be  for  it  to  be
   remitted to the First-tier Tribunal because at this point in  time  there
   has been no fair consideration of the claim for international protection.



18. I agree that this is the appropriate course of action.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error
   on a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on  16
   October 2019 pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
   Enforcement Act 2007.

20. This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing
   before any Judge other than the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Malik.

21. No findings of fact are preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

22. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court  directs  otherwise  no  report  of
   these proceedings or any form of publication thereof  shall  directly  or
   indirectly identify the appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
   others, the appellant and the respondent. Any failure to comply with this
   direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 3 April 2020


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the  notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing  on  the  covering
letter or covering email
