
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/08104/2019 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at George House, Edinburgh              |Decision & Reasons           |
|by Skype for Business                         |Promulgated                  |
|on 9 December 2020                            |On 30 December 2020          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    L O T
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT Judge Komorowski dismissed the appellant's appeal for reasons given
    in his decision promulgated on 10 August 2020.

 2. The appellant's grounds of  appeal  to  the  UT  are  set  out  in  his
    application dated 24 August 2020.  It is narrated that the judge  found
    it reasonably likely that the appellant would face persecution  in  his
    former  home  outside  the  IKR  but  he  had  not   established   what
    difficulties he would face in that region and so could relocate  there;
    and that the grave hardship which many or most would face there was not
    determinative.

 3. The challenge is to the last sentence of [52], which says:

         That many or most will face grave hardship is not determinative  of
         whether  the  appellant   will   face   hardship   and   the   very
         unsatisfactory nature of the evidence regarding his own  particular
         circumstances leaves an important part of the equation blank.

 4. The grounds go on:

         [3] ... the judge left out of account the submission ...  that  the
         apparently genuine militia identity [which the appellant]  provided
         was a clear indication that when returned to Erbil  previously  the
         appellant had been unable or unwilling to live in the ... IKR ... a
         material matter ... in the assessment whether the  appellant  could
         be expected to safely and reasonably live in that region ...

         [4] ... the judge concluded that the appellant  had  not  displaced
         the possibility of obtaining assistance from  his  family  ...  the
         judge failed to provide adequate reasons why ... his  family  would
         be willing and able to provide ... support to an individual who has
         effectively abandoned them ...

         [5] ... the judge failed to provide ... reasons for his  conclusion
         that because an individual was able to provide him with  assistance
         a great many years ago the individual (Sirwan) would be able to  do
         so in 2020...

         [6]  Both  these  errors  undermine  the  judge's  conclusion   the
         appellant could take life up in the IKR and ...  of  the  appellant
         not facing  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  in  that
         region.

 5. FtT Judge Ford granted permission on 28 August 2020, on the  view  that
    the tribunal arguably failed to assess whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant  to  relocate  to  the  IKR,  given  his  accepted
    background of working as a chef for Hashd Al Shaabi  in  Tuz  Khurmatu,
    and having no history of living in the IKR.

 6. I was referred to, and have considered, the written submissions made by
    parties on 9 March, 28 May, and 29 June 2020.  However, these are parts
    of the case put to the FtT, not about error by the FtT in resolving it.

 7. Mr Caskie said that the FtT erred on  internal  flight,  but  that  the
    appeal turned on paragraph 276 ADE (vi) of the immigration rules.

 8. That sub-paragraph of the rules enables an appellant to show a right to
    remain on grounds of  private  life  if  there  are  "very  significant
    obstacles to [his] integration into the country to which he would  have
    to go if required to leave  the  UK".   This  provision  overlaps  with
    internal flight considerations, but it essentially raises the  question
    whether an appellant would be an "insider" or an "outsider" on  return.
    The appellant would plainly be an insider.  The sub-paragraph does  not
    provide an easier alternative to success on grounds of undue  harshness
    of internal flight, and I do not consider that reference to it tends to
    show any error  by  the  FtT.   If  the  evidence  did  not  show  that
    relocation would involve undue harshness, it  could  not  realistically
    lead to succeed on private life grounds.

 9. Mr  Caskie  in  submissions  stressed  these  points:  when  previously
    returned, the appellant did not remain in the IKR, but  promptly  left;
    there has been a massive influx there,  increasing  the  population  by
    1/3; 10% of the population depends  on  humanitarian  assistance,  with
    many living in tents; it is perfectly possible that a large  number  of
    people are unable to integrate; the appellant has family in  Iraq,  but
    not in the IKR; there was no  evidence  of  support  available  to  him
    there; there was no one to take him in, and no prospect of a  job.   He
    said there was no foundation for the finding that the  appellant  could
    live in the IKR, that assessment of the hardships he would  face  there
    under his particular circumstances  was  "simply  absent",  an  absence
    which "could not be laid at the door of the appellant".

10. Mr Avery pointed out that the grant  of  permission  was  made  on  the
    misapprehension that the appellant is  not  originally  from  the  IKR.
    That is correct, although it  leaves  the  issue  whether  the  grounds
    disclose any error on a point of law.

11. Having considered all that was said in support of the grounds, I  agree
    with the submission by Mr Avery that they are no more  than  insistence
    on the case which was put to the FtT and disagreement with the outcome.



12. The FtT's decision  is  notably  careful,  clear,  and  thorough.   The
    appellant's account was found reasonably likely in many  respects.   On
    matters such as  his  family  and  other  contacts  in  Iraq,  and  his
    documentation, however, the judge explained at [39] - [45] why  he  was
    unable to make any findings of fact in his favour.  No error  has  been
    suggested in any of that reasoning.  That is the foundation for stating
    at [52] that the FtT was unable to find that relocation would be unduly
    harsh, and for stating at [53] that there was no basis for finding very
    significant obstacles to integration.

13. The argument for the appellant amounts to placing the burden  of  proof
    on  the  respondent,  or  even  on  the  tribunal.   Contrary  to   the
    submission, the absence of a favourable assessment  does  lie  squarely
    with the appellant.  He  has  shown  no  error  of  law  in  the  FtT's
    conclusions, which simply followed from his failure  to  establish  the
    primary facts, even to the lower standard.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

15. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which is preserved.

      [pic]

      9 December 2020
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).


5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.

