
                                        [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08121/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 November 2018                            |On 26 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MKMR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr S Chelvan, counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing an appeal by  the  applicant  against  the
    decision of 15 June 2018 refusing her application for asylum.  In  this
    determination we will refer to the parties  as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal the applicant as the appellant and the Secretary of
    State as the respondent.  The First-tier Tribunal  judge  recorded  the
    appellant's wish to be referred to by the female pronoun and subject to
    occasional inadvertent lapses he did so in his decision.  We will  also
    refer to the appellant using the female pronoun, not  only  to  respect
    her wishes but also in the light of  the  judge'  s  finding  that  the
    appellant considered herself to be a woman.


Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 6  January  1992,  who
    entered the UK on 13 June 2012 with a  student  visa,  extended  to  30
    December 2015. However, on 3 July 2014 she was  arrested  when  working
    illegally.  A decision was made to remove her, but this was  challenged
    in judicial review proceedings and she applied for asylum on 6 November
    2014. Her application was refused, an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
    dismissed and permission to appeal further refused.  On 25 May 2018 the
    appellant made further submissions,  which  were  treated  as  a  fresh
    claim.

3.    The appellant claimed that she would be  at  risk  on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka by reason of her sexual identity.  The respondent  accepted  that
    the appellant was a Sri Lankan national but it was  not  accepted  that
    the appellant was a  homosexual  in  a  sexual  relationship  with  her
    claimed partner and, in any event, the background information  made  it
    clear that in general the treatment of gay men in  Sri  Lanka  did  not
    amount to persecution or serious harm and the appellant had  failed  to
    show why she was unable to relocate internally to another part  of  the
    country if necessary. The respondent's detailed reasons for refusal are
    set out in Annex A of the decision letter of 15 June 2018.


      The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal


4.    In the appellant's skeleton argument before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    it was submitted that in her asylum  claim  was  based  solely  on  her
    sexual identity as a gay man and gender identity and  expression  as  a
    trans person.  The judge summarised at [15] the core of the appellant's
    case: she was gay, she was  likely  to  be  persecuted  in  Sri  Lanka,
    engaged to be married to her partner, a Pakistani  national  recognised
    as a homosexual and granted asylum in the UK and they could not live as
    a married couple in Sri Lanka or Pakistan.


5.    The judge reminded himself of the guidelines set out  by  the  Supreme
    Court in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State [2010] UKSC 31 commenting  that
    they had been endorsed and  expanded  upon  in  A  (Advocate  General's
    Opinion) [2014] EUECJ C148/2013 to the effect  that  an  assessment  of
    whether refugee status should be granted in a  claim  based  on  sexual
    orientation  focus  on  whether  an  applicant  is  credible  and  that
    practices seeking to determine an individual's orientation should  play
    no part in the assessment process.  We  would  add  that  the  Advocate
    General's opinion was to a large  extent  adopted  by  the  CJEU  Grand
    Chamber in A, B and C v Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en Justitie, C-
    148/13, C-149/13 and 150/13, 2 December 2014.

6.    Having considered the evidence, the judge found on what  he  described
    as overwhelming  and  cogent  oral  evidence  that  the  appellant  did
    consider herself to be a  woman.   A  number  of  witnesses  had  given
    evidence on behalf of the appellant and he found those witnesses to  be
    truthful [30].  He said  that  the  company  the  appellant  kept  were
    members of the LGBT group largely and that it begged the  question,  if
    the appellant was not a member of that group, why he would  seek  their
    company [31].  He also accepted  that  the  appellant  lived  with  her
    partner in a sexual relationship [37].


7.    He went on to consider whether the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    serious harm on return to  Sri  Lanka.   He  referred  to  the  country
    guidance in LH and IP (gay men :  risk)  [2015]  UKUT   73  CG  and  in
    particular to the finding of the Upper Tribunal that gay men  in  civil
    partnerships in Sri Lanka did not constitute a particular social  group
    for the purposes of the Refugee Convention and that the failure of  the
    Sri Lankan government to take steps to recognise alternate  and  quasi-
    marriage statuses did not without more amount to a flagrant  breach  of
    core human rights. These passages  relate  primarily  to  a  subsidiary
    argument being put forward on behalf of the appellant that  his  rights
    under article 8 would be breached on return to Sri Lanka as his partner
    would not be able to obtain to obtain leave to enter as his spouse.

8.    It would be helpful to note at this point that the Tribunal in LH  and
    IP when considering the risk to individuals based on sexual and  gender
    identity found that there was a significant population  of  homosexuals
    and other LGBT individuals in Sri Lanka, in particular in Colombia, and
    whilst there was more risk for lesbian  and  bisexual  women  in  rural
    areas because of the control exercised by families on  unmarried  women
    and for transgender individuals and sex workers in the cities, it would
    be a question of fact whether a particular individual's  risk  breached
    the international protection standard and whether  it  extended  beyond
    their home area.

9.    The judge, however, had evidence before him which had not been  before
    the Tribunal in LH and IP: a judgment of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka
    in Galabada Wimalasiri v Officer in Charge,  Police  Station,  Maradana
    and Honourable Attorney General SC  Appeal  32/11,  30  November  2016,
    ("Galabada"). The Sri Lankan Supreme Court dismissed an appeal  by  the
    appellant against a conviction for an offence of gross indecency  under
    s.365A of the Sri Lankan Penal Code. The appellant had  been  sentenced
    to a one year term of imprisonment but this was set aside and  replaced
    a sentence of two years rigorous imprisonment suspended for five  years
    on the basis that the offenders should have an opportunity of reforming
    themselves.

10.   The judge held that the judgement in  Galabada  was  fundamentally  at
    odds with the decision in LH and IP.  The Sri Lankan Supreme Court  had
    endorsed a conviction of two men of  homosexuality  and  increased  the
    sentence of imprisonment of one year to two years but suspended to give
    the appellants the opportunity to reform [40].  He commented  that  the
    respondent had not challenged the authenticity or the veracity  of  the
    judgment in Galabada and the judge said that he had to  accept  it  and
    act on it.  He found, in the light of the judgment, that the  appellant
    was at risk of being imprisoned on the grounds of sexuality and offered
    the opportunity of reform and would not be able to  live  openly  as  a
    homosexual [41].

11.   He went on to say that if  he  was  wrong  about  the  correctness  of
    relying on Galabada, in the context of whether the  appellant  and  her
    partner could enjoy family life in Sri Lanka, although  the  respondent
    had not provided any evidence that the appellant's partner  was  likely
    to secure entry clearance  to  enter  Sri  Lanka  as  her  spouse,  the
    appellant bore the legal burden of proving every element  of  her  case
    and he had failed to do so [42].

12.   In the light of his findings, the judge allowed the appeal  on  asylum
    grounds, humanitarian protection grounds and under articles 2 and 3  of
    the Human Rights Convention.  He also declined to make  a  costs  order
    because the  evidence  relied  on  was  markedly  different  from  that
    presented to the respondent  in  support  of  the  appellant's  further
    submissions and he was not satisfied that Galabada  had  been  included
    with those submissions and, if it had, the  respondent  may  well  have
    come to a different decision


The Grounds of Appeal

13.   In the respondent's grounds of appeal, it is  submitted  firstly  that
    the judge was wrong to rely on the judgment of the Sri  Lankan  Supreme
    Court and to regard it as determinative when assessing the  appeal  and
    that this was a piece of legislation based on its own facts relating to
    a criminal conviction for a criminal activity.   The  case  was  not  a
    precedent on  country  conditions  and  did  not  seek  to  provide  an
    objective overview of the country conditions in Sri Lanka but the judge
    had treated it as just that and it is submitted that this was wrong.

14.   It is submitted secondly that the judge had not  considered  the  case
    in any wider context. Sri Lanka had a large population of gay  men  and
    there was no evidence before the Tribunal that Galabada was a precedent
    that was used by the authorities to prosecute or persecute gay men.


15.   Thirdly, it is submitted that the judge's approach to the findings  in
    this case are syllogistic: just because two  gay  men  indulged  in  an
    incident that breached public order and were  prosecuted,  it  did  not
    mean that all gay men in Sri Lanka would receive  the  same  treatment.
    This was not an HJ (Iran) breach: if a similar offence had occurred  in
    the UK it would most likely have led to criminal prosecution and such a
    prosecution did not mean that the UK authorities  were  persecutory  to
    gay men.  If a heterosexual couple behaved in a similar way,  they  too
    would face similar treatment.  There was no evidence to show  that  the
    terms of the conviction were disproportionate. Finally, it is submitted
    there was no reason for the judge to deviate from the country  guidance
    and that he should have applied LH and IP.  Had he done  so,  he  would
    have dismissed the appeal.


Further Applications

16.   The appellant's representatives made an application to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for  permission  to  cross-appeal  the  decision  but  as  the
    procedure rules made no provision for such applications and  there  was
    no authority on the issue, they requested that this point of  procedure
    be decided by the Upper Tribunal.


17.   UTJ Gill gave directions ton 12 October 2018 that the  parties  should
    be prepared not only to deal with this issue but also all other  issues
    in the case including whether the First-tier  decision  should  be  set
    aside in whole or in part and to address the Tribunal on re-making  the
    decision unless the Tribunal decided to adjourn part-heard to a resumed
    hearing on a later date.


18.   At the hearing before us Mr Chelvan relied on his written  submissions
    dated 10 October 2018 covering the application for permission to appeal
    out of time, an application to submit further evidence  in  his  cross-
    appeal under article 8, his Rule 24 on  the  protection  appeal  and  a
    request for reported guidance on gender identity and expression.

19.   We took the view that the most sensible way to  proceed  would  be  to
    consider first whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and, if
    so, then to consider as necessary  or  appropriate,  the  other  issues
    raised in Mr Chelvan's written submissions.


Consideration of Whether the First-tier Tribunal Erred in law.


20.   Ms Kenny adopted the respondent's grounds and submitted  that  nothing
    had changed so far as the country guidance was concerned as a result of
    the Sri Lankan Supreme Court judgment in Galabada  which,  she  argued,
    had no direct relevance to the appellant's circumstances.  In  Galabada
    the accused had been convicted of what was in substance a public  order
    offence and it was one isolated incident.  Each  case,  she  submitted,
    needed to be looked at on its own individual merits and the  judge  had
    failed to carry out this exercise.


21.   The Rule 24 reply submits that the Sri Lankan  legislation  considered
    by the Sri Lankan Supreme Court sought to penalise any person who in  a
    public or private place committed any act of gross indecency.  The  Sri
    Lankan courts had affirmed in Galabada that this law remained very much
    part of Sri  Lankan  law  and  indicated  that  anti-sodomy  and  gross
    indecency laws were enforced and enforceable in Sri Lanka and that even
    for a consensual offence which was a first offence committed some  time
    ago, a sentence of  two  years  rigorous  imprisonment  was  considered
    appropriate and, more significantly, this was to give an opportunity to
    the accused to reform which, arguably, was equivalent to requiring  gay
    cure therapy.   This  was,  therefore,  not  a  case  where  there  was
    unenforced legislation on the statute book. There  was  no  error,  let
    alone any material error  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision.   We
    indicated that we did not need to hear further from Mr Chelvan  on  the
    error of law issue.

22.   The issue before us is whether the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.  The country guidance  case
    dealing with the risk to gay  men  in  Sri  Lanka  is  LH  and  IP  was
    published in 2015.  By para 12.2 of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Direction that decision is authoritative on the issues identified based
    on the evidence before that Tribunal  and  Tribunals  are  required  to
    follow them unless very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence are
    adduced which justify not doing so.  We must therefore consider whether
    there was cogent evidence justifying such a course.

23.   The country guidance in  LH  and  IP  confirmed  that  it  will  be  a
    question of fact in each individual case whether the risk  based  on  a
    claim of sexual identity reaches the international protection standard.
     It was aware of the fact that homosexual activity  was  illegal  under
    the penal code of Sri Lanka but at [16] noted that there  had  been  no
    prosecution since independence  and  in  [106]  the  Tribunal  reminded
    itself, applying the decision of the CJEU in X,Y and Z that, while  the
    existence of laws criminalising homosexual activity supported a finding
    that homosexuals formed a particular social group, such laws did not by
    themselves  constitute  persecution,  unless  criminal  sanctions  were
    actually applied.

24.   At [110] the tribunal said the risk for gay men was not at  the  level
    of persecution or serious harm in Sri Lanka as a  whole  and  that  the
    evidence suggested that such risks as there were applied more  to  some
    homosexual men than to others.   The  examples  cited  in  the  general
    opinion of the experts centred on transgender persons,  commercial  sex
    workers, and visitors to cruising  areas  or  other  homosexual  pickup
    venues.

25.   The country guidance in LH  and  IP  as  set  out  in  the  italicised
    headnote is as follows;

           (1)    Having regard to the provisions of articles 365 and 365A
           of the Sri Lankan Penal Code, gay men in Sri Lanka constitute  a
           particular social group.


           (2)    'Gay men in civil partnerships'  in  Sri  Lanka  do  not
           constitute a particular social group for  the  purposes  of  the
           Refugee Convention. The  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  failure  to
           recognise alternative marital and quasi-marital statuses such as
           civil partnership or homosexual marriage which are available  in
           other countries of the world does not, without more, amount to a
           flagrant breach of core human rights.


           (3)      Applying the test set out by Lord Rodger in the Supreme
           Court judgment in HJ (Iran) & HT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State
           for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31, in general the treatment
           of gay  men  in  Sri  Lanka  does  not  reach  the  standard  of
           persecution or serious harm.


           (4)       There is a significant population of homosexuals  and
           other LGBT individuals in Sri Lanka, in particular  in  Colombo.
           While there is more risk for lesbian and bisexual women in rural
           areas, because of the control exercised by families on unmarried
           women, and for transgender individuals and sex  workers  in  the
           cities, it will be a question of fact whether for  a  particular
           individual  the  risk  reaches  the   international   protection
           standard, and in particular, whether  it  extends  beyond  their
           home area.


           (5)     Where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in an
           appellant's home area,  there  may  be  an  internal  relocation
           option, particularly for individuals returning via Colombo  from
           the United Kingdom.


26.   The judge had to consider the impact on this guidance  of  Sri  Lankan
    Supreme Court decision in Galabada upholding a  conviction  under  para
    365A of the Sri Lankan Penal Code which reads as follows:

         Any person who, in public or private, commits, or is a party to the
         commission of, or procures or attempts to procure the commission by
         any person of, any act of  gross  indecency  with  another  person,
         shall  be  guilty  of  an  offence,  and  shall  be  punished  with
         imprisonment of either description, for a term which may extend  to
         two years or with fine or  with  both  and  where  the  offence  is
         committed by a person over eighteen years of age in respect of  any
         person under sixteen years of age shall be punished  with  rigorous
         imprisonment for a term not less than ten years and  not  exceeding
         twenty years and with  fine  and  shall  also  be  ordered  to  pay
         compensation of an amount determined by the court to the person  in
         respect of whom the offence was committed for the  injuries  caused
         to such person.

27.   The Sri Lankan Supreme Court concluded its judgment by saying:

         "The contemporary thinking,  that  consensual  sex  between  adults
         should not be policed by the state nor should  it  be  grounds  for
         criminalisation appears to have developed over the years and may be
         the rationale that led to the repealing of  the  offence  of  gross
         indecency and buggery in England.


         The offence however remains very much part of our  law.   There  is
         nothing to say that the appellant has had previous convictions or a
         criminal history.  Hence to visit the offence with a custodial term
         of imprisonment  does  not  appear  to  be  commensurate  with  the
         offence, considering the fact that  the  act  was  consensual,  and
         absence of criminal history on the part of  the  other  accused  as
         well.  In my view this is a fit instance where the offenders should
         be afforded an opportunity to reform themselves.


         In view of the above I am of the view  that  imposing  a  custodial
         sentence is not warranted in the instant  case.   Furthermore,  the
         incident had taken place more than 13 years ago.


Considering the above I set aside the sentence of the one year term of
imprisonment and substitute the same with the sentence of two years
rigorous imprisonment and acting under section 303 (1) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Act, suspend the operation of the term of imprisonment
for a period of five years effective from the date the sentence is
pronounced by the learned Magistrate."

28.   The respondent's grounds argue that Galabada is  not  a  precedent  on
    country conditions and does not seek to provide an  objective  overview
    of the country conditions in Sri Lanka.  This misses the point: it does
    not purport to do either. Neither is it a piece of legislation based on
    its own facts. It is a case dealing with a prosecution  under  the  Sri
    Lankan Penal Code.  It shows at the very least  that  contrary  to  the
    basis on which the Tribunal proceeded in LH and IP  at  [16]  that  the
    criminal law has been used in Sri Lanka, if only once  but  nonetheless
    recently and in a judgment of the Sri Lankan Supreme Court.

29.   It is argued that the judge did not consider  Galabada  in  any  wider
    context and that there was no evidence that it was a  precedent  to  be
    used by the authorities to prosecute or persecute gay men. But the fact
    remains that this was the prosecution of two men engaging in  same  sex
    activities treated as gross  indecency  and  leading  to  an  immediate
    prison sentence varied on appeal to a longer sentence but suspended  to
    give an opportunity to reform.

30.   The grounds further argue that such behaviour  in  public  would  most
    likely have led to criminal prosecution in the UK.  This  may  well  be
    the case, but the fact  remains  that  the  law  used  covered  actions
    committed in private or in public.  The prosecution was not of a public
    order offence but of a sexual offence.

31.   The argument in the grounds that the judge approached the  case  on  a
    syllogistic basis, that  just  because  two  gay  men  indulged  in  an
    incident that breached public order, it did not mean that all  gay  men
    in Sri Lanka will receive the same  treatment  does  not  stand  up  to
    analysis. This is not what the judge said.  He considered  whether  the
    appellant would be at risk and found that he would.

32.   The grounds argue that the judge was wrong not to follow  the  country
    guidance in LH and IP.  We are satisfied that  in  the  light  of  that
    judgment it was open to the judge to take the  view  that  judgment  in
    Galabada was cogent evidence providing strong grounds for not following
    LH and IP and to find that there was a reasonable degree of  likelihood
    that the appellant would be at risk of persecution on return.  We  also
    note  that  in  LH  and  IP  the  Tribunal  accepted  that  transgender
    individuals might be more at risk than other gay men and in the present
    case the appellant is seeking to transition to female.

33.   It is not for us to speculate on how other judges might  have  decided
    the appeal. The issue for us is whether this judge erred on  the  basis
    of the evidence before him. We are satisfied that on the basis of  that
    evidence, the judge did not err  in  law  and  he  reached  a  decision
    properly open to him.

34.   In these circumstances we need deal no further with the issues  raised
    by Mr Chelvan. He sought a ruling on whether there was a provision  for
    cross appeals.  The position seems to us to be clear. By s.11(2) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, any party to a case  has  a
    right of appeal and there  is  no  reason  to  exclude  cross  appeals.
    However, we have not full argument and this issue can be resolved in  a
    case in which it has a bearing on the outcome. Mr Chelvan's concern  in
    this appeal related to the judge's findings in relation to article 8 at
    [42] on whether the family life of the appellant and his partner  would
    be affected if his partner is unable to enter Sri Lanka as his  spouse.
    However, as the appeal has been allowed on  asylum  grounds  and  under
    article 3 this issue is academic as it has no bearing on the  practical
    outcome of this appeal.


35.   Mr Chelvan also raised the  issue  of  whether  this  case  should  be
    reported but this is a matter for the Tribunal  not  the  parties.   He
    also sought guidance on cases involving gender identity and expression,
    but that kind of guidance should be given on the basis of full argument
    in a case in which it directly arises.

36.   Finally, we do  note  that  there  are  some  errors  in  the  judge's
    decision in that he  allowed  the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds when he was not entitled to do as the appeal had  been  allowed
    on asylum grounds.  We also set aside the Fee Award decision as no  fee
    had been paid as this is an asylum appeal.


Decision

37.   The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law save that for  the  reasons
    we have  given  the  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds was erroneous in law.  The  decision  to  allow  the
    appeal on asylum and article 2 and 3 grounds stands.

38.   The Fee Award decision is set aside.

39.   The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal remains  in  force
    until further order.




Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
                 Dated: 21 November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
