
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08590/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1st November 2018                     |On 30th November 2018              |
|                                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                     M Z
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tann (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    M Davies, promulgated on 23rd  August  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 17th  August  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iran, and was born on  13th  June
    2002.  He appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 22nd June
    2018,  refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and  for   humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to Section 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he lived with  his  father
    in Iran, and his mother had died when he was still very young.  At  the
    age of around 15 he started working with his father as  a  smuggler  of
    alcohol, accompanying him on various smuggling trips, whilst  smuggling
    alcohol from Iraq to Iran.  For the last three months of the  smuggling
    trips a man would give the Appellant's father a box to  take  to  Iran.
    The father told him that the  contents  of  the  box  were  secret  and
    contained things relating to the political group of  the  KDPI.   After
    accompanying his father on a final smuggling trip,  the  Appellant  was
    dropped off at his friend's house.  His father returned  home  and  was
    arrested in possession of alcohol and the box containing the  political
    information.  The Appellant  was  still  at  the  friend's  house  when
    another friend called Jilal, rang to  say  that  the  family  had  been
    raided by Etelaat.  The Appellant called his uncle.   He  went  to  his
    uncle's house.  He stayed until arrangements were made for him to leave
    Iran.  Then two days later, the Appellant  was  smuggled  out  of  Iran
    following his father's arrest.  The Appellant now claims that if he  is
    returned to Iran he will be executed by the Iranian authorities because
    he believes that his father  is  under  suspicion  of  having  smuggled
    alcohol and items to the KDPI.   These  matters  were  referred  to  in
    detail by the judge (at paragraphs 12 to 22).

The Judge's Decision

 4. The judge comprehensively disbelieved the Appellant.  He held that  the
    Appellant did not mention in his interview that he had been encountered
    by Etelaat in Iran several times  previous  to  the  incident  that  he
    complained  about.   There  had  been  two  encounters   with   Etelaat
    previously.  He had done many trips with his father.  Yet, he had  said
    at question 7 of the interview that he had carried  out  two  or  three
    trips, when his father did  seven  to  eight  trips  a  month  and  the
    Appellant  accompanied  him  on  four  to  five  occasions  each  month
    (paragraph 34).  The Appellant also did not call his father when he was
    informed by Jilal that Etelaat had raided his family home because Jilal
    had said that his father had been detained (paragraph 35).

 5. The judge's conclusion was that,  assessing  the  claim  on  the  lower
    standard the Appellant "has been an untruthful witness and that he  has
    fabricated completely his claim to be at risk of  persecution  in  Iran
    for the reasons he puts forward" (paragraph 54).  The  Appellant  would
    not be at risk (paragraph 55).  He had  failed  to  give  any  detailed
    account of his activity (paragraph 56).  It was not  credible  that  he
    would have been spirited out of Iran just two days after  his  father's
    arrest with the assistance of his uncle (paragraph 57).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in  a  number  of
    respects.  First, he misdirected himself in respect of Section 8 of the
    2004 Act because the Appellant was simply a child of 15 and  could  not
    be expected to remember the details that he  was  found  deficient  in.
    Second, there was an improper requirement  for  corroboration.   Third,
    that there was a material misdirection in respect of  the  plausibility
    of the Appellant's account.

 8. On 17th  September  2018  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the
    Tribunal.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 1st November 2018, Mr Greer,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, went through the grounds  of  application  and
    argued that one must not forget that the Appellant was a  15  year  old
    boy who had been helping his dad  with  smuggling  alcohol  across  the
    border.  His father was arrested.  His uncle then whisked  him  out  of
    the country.  He was 16 when he arrived.  He was immediately  taken  to
    the care of social services.  It is simply not correct to say that, for
    someone who regularly is engaged in smuggling across the  border,  that
    his uncle, who would have known smugglers himself, would not have  been
    able to arrange for his departure so quickly from Iran.   In  the  same
    way, it was wrong to ask for corroboration of the Appellant's  account,
    because in an asylum claim, which is assessed on  the  lower  standard,
    such a requirement is completely misplaced.  In fact, the judge  failed
    to give reasons for why he so comprehensively rejected the  Appellant's
    claim.

10. For his part, Mr Tann relied upon the fact that the judge had not found
    the Appellant to be a truthful witness because he had failed to give  a
    detailed account of the activity that he was  engaged  in.   The  judge
    accepts that "he has given varying accounts of the number of  trips  he
    accompanied his father on smuggling excursions.  I do  not  believe  on
    account of his age that would explain those inconsistencies.  I do  not
    believe there is any credible evidence to indicate that his father  was
    involved in the KDPI and that his father was arrested by the Etelaat on
    the basis of political activity or on the basis  of  smuggling  alcohol
    (paragraph 56).  The judge had also explained that it was not  credible
    that the Appellant would have been spirited out of  Iran  in  just  two
    days thereafter (paragraph 57).  Mr Tann then went on to say  that,  "I
    accept there is not a list of inconsistencies  which  the  judge  could
    refer to" but the reasons for the refusal were still there.

11. In reply, Mr Greer submitted that it was not clear what aspects of  the
    evidence the judge was taking exception to.  There is far too much that
    one needs to read into the determination  to  be  able  to  find  those
    precise reasons.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

13. First, the judge did not take into account the Appellant's age in  that
    he was a child, when the judge assessed whether there was a failure  by
    him to claim asylum in another European country, which  is  the  reason
    why the judge held that Section 8 of the 2004 Act stood to  be  applied
    to him.   The  Appellant  was,  after  all,  placed  into  foster  care
    immediately upon his arrival in the  UK.   The  judge  was  accordingly
    wrong to have said that "it is reasonably likely that the Appellant had
    every opportunity to  claim  international  protection  in  a  European
    country before arriving in the United Kingdom" (paragraph 61).

14. Second, the judge held that the Appellant failed to contact his  father
    and uncle in Iran for corroboration.  The judge held that,

         "the Appellant and his representatives have had  every  opportunity
         to attempt to contact his father and uncle in Iran.  The fact  that
         they have not done so and the fact that we have  no  evidence  from
         the Appellant's uncle further damages the  Appellant's  credibility
         ..." (paragraph 59).

15. This is a requirement for corroboration.  It is wrong to apply it in  a
    case such as the present, involving a child who was  15  when  he  left
    Iran to come to the UK.  It has to be borne in mind, moreover, that the
    Appellant's father was imprisoned by the authorities, as claimed by the
    Appellant, and this would  be  another  reason  why  a  requirement  of
    corroboration by the father was improper.




16. Third, the reason for disbelieving the Appellant on the ground that  he
    was "spirited out of Iran in two days with the assistance of his uncle"
    (paragraph 57) is unsustainable  in  circumstances  where  this  was  a
    family involved in smuggling goods across the border.   It  would  have
    been otherwise if there had been a delay of several months  before  the
    Appellant left Iran.


17. Finally, it would appear that the claim as put by the Appellant has not
    been properly comprehended.  The claim was not  that  "his  father  was
    involved in the KDPI and that his father was arrested by the Etelaat on
    the basis of political activity" (paragraph 56).  He  may  or  may  not
    have been involved with the KDPI.  The claim was that he was  asked  to
    take a box to Iran which was given to the Appellant's father by another
    man and all that the father knew was the  "contents  of  the  box  were
    secret and it contained things relating to the political group  of  the
    KDPI"  (paragraph  61).   That  does  not  necessarily  demonstrate   a
    political involvement with the KDPI.


18. In any event, the rejection of the claim in  such  broad  terms  as  to
    cover a range of matters, without giving proper reasons for each one of
    them, is unsustainable when the judge states that, "I  do  not  believe
    there is any credible evidence to indicate that his father was involved
    in the KDPI and that his father was arrested  by  the  Etelaat  on  the
    basis of political activity or  on  the  basis  of  smuggling  alcohol"
    (paragraph 56).  It begs the question  as  to  what  further  "credible
    evidence" the judge required.


19. I have accordingly remade the decision on the  basis  of  the  evidence
    before the judge, his decision, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  This appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
    determined by a judge other than Judge M Davies  pursuant  to  practice
    Statement 7.2(a) of the Practice Directions.

20. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd November 2018





