
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08061/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Birmingham Civil Justice   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On: 18th February 2019               |22 February 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MAA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Bedford, Counsel instructed by Sultan Lloyd
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Somalia born in 1999. On the  2nd  March
    2017 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Juss)  dismissed  his  protection
    appeal. The First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper  Tribunal  successively
    refused permission to appeal against that decision. By its order  dated
    the 12th September 2018 the High Court (HH Judge Wall QC)  quashed  the
    decision to refuse permission, pursuant to the 'unless' order  made  by
    HHJ Bird dated the 14th March 2018.  Judge Bird had granted  permission
    finding the grounds as  argued  in  the  Cart  judicial  review  to  be
    arguable; in particular the Court  considered  it  arguable  that  both
    First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal had erred in  failing  to  treat
    the Appellant, still only 17 at the date of his appeal  hearing,  as  a
    vulnerable  witness  per  the  practice  directions  and   presidential
    guidance note. Reliance had been placed upon the decision of the  Court
    of Appeal in AM  (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123.


 2. Before me the Respondent accepted that if the High Court  regarded  the
    decisions below it to have been vitiated for AM (Afghanistan) failings,
    I should proceed on the basis that the alleged error of  law  has  been
    made out. For the avoidance  of  doubt  I  find  that  another  of  the
    Appellant's grounds was also  made  out,  namely  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination contains no finding on  the  material  issue  of
    which clan he might be from.

 3. The parties and Tribunal are in agreement  that  this  appeal  must  be
    reheard de novo, and that the most appropriate forum for that would  be
    in the First-tier Tribunal. I therefore set the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal aside and so order.


      Decisions

 4. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains  material  errors
    of law and it is set aside.  The decision in the appeal is to be remade
    following de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Having regard to the fact that this is a protection claim I am prepared
    to make the following direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders.


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
        Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
        contempt of court proceedings".







                            Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce



                          Dated 18th February 2019
