
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/08348/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |          Decision and Reasons       |
|                                     |Promulgated                          |
|On Friday 20 April 2018              |            On Wednesday 25 April    |
|                                     |2018                                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                    R F A
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss M Benitez, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is appropriate to make that order.   Unless
and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family. This  direction  applies,  amongst
others, to both parties. Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead
to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

1.    The Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Freer promulgated on 20 December 2017 ("the Decision").   By  the
    Decision, the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision dated 15 August 2017 refusing his protection  and
    human rights claims.

2.    The Appellant is a national of Uganda.  He came to the UK  in  October
    2009 with leave as a student valid to 30 September 2010.  Thereafter he
    overstayed.  When he was  encountered  working  illegally,  he  claimed
    asylum, initially based on  his  political  opinion.   That  claim  was
    refused on 20 July 2011 and he did not appeal.

3.    The Appellant then made  further  submissions  on  24  February  2017,
    raising  for  the  first  time  his  sexuality.   He  claims  to  be  a
    homosexual.

4.    The Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal of that  claim
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer on 6 December 2017.  In the
    Decision, the Judge accepted the Appellant's claim to be  a  homosexual
    but did not accept that this gave rise to a risk on  return  to  Uganda
    because the Judge appeared to find that the Appellant would, by choice,
    live discreetly in his home country.

5.    The Appellant appeals on three grounds.  First, he argues  that  there
    is a fundamental inconsistency between the Judge's  finding  about  his
    profile in the UK and the finding that he would  behave  discreetly  if
    returned, out  of  choice.   Second,  the  Appellant  argues  that  the
    findings about risk on return are flawed for failure to take account of
    background country evidence regarding the treatment of  homosexuals  in
    Uganda.  Third, the Appellant submits that the  Judge's  assessment  of
    the Appellant's ability to relocate within Uganda is  affected  by  the
    Judge's flawed finding that the Appellant would  behave  discreetly  on
    return.

6.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  McClure
    on 22 January 2018 in the following terms so far as relevant:-

         "...

         [2]      The Judge found that the appellant  was  a  gay  man  from
         Uganda (see paragraph 38) and that  the  evidence  here  of  sexual
         proclivity was unusually strong (see paragraph 39).  The judge also
         describes  vociferous  support  by  other  gay  activists  for  the
         appellant's claims  and  evidence  of  years  of  weekly  activity.
         However the judge then goes on to find that the appellant would act
         discreetly if returned to Uganda and could  live  in  Uganda  as  a
         widower.  It is arguable in the light of the case of HJ  Iran  that
         the judge has failed to consider whether the appellant is  expected
         to alter his conduct for fear that  he  will  be  persecuted.   The
         expectation that the appellant should amend his behaviour may  give
         rise to the issues specifically considered in HJ Iran 2010 UKSC 31.
          The grounds may be argued."

7.    The matter comes  before  me  to  assess  whether  the  Decision  does
    disclose an error of law and to re-make the Decision or  remit  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing, I
    indicated that I found an error of law in the Decision and would  issue
    a decision setting out my reasons for so finding which I  now  turn  to
    do.



Discussion and conclusions

8.    At [38] and [39] of the Decision, the Judge made a  finding  that  the
    Appellant is genuinely a gay man.  He did so in the following terms:-

         "[38]    The Appellant has satisfied me by abundant  evidence  from
         various sources that he is genuinely a gay man.  I am not  inclined
         to find that his past and tragic marriage shows otherwise.  He  may
         be bisexual as he  fathered  children  but  his  gay  side  is  the
         predominant one.  He has had gay feelings ever  since  puberty  and
         they have not stopped.

         [39]     The  evidence  here  of  sexual  proclivity  is  unusually
         strong.  It is rare  to  have  a  committed  gay  activist  who  is
         supported vociferously by other gay activists in this  jurisdiction
         and shows evidence of years of weekly activity.   It is  very  hard
         for me to imagine a heterosexual man doing that and  even  more  so
         being believed by other activists."

9.    The Judge went on to discount one of the reasons  the  Respondent  had
    rejected the claim because she did not accept that the Appellant was in
    a relationship as claimed. In support of that conclusion,  she  pointed
    out that the couple had been in the relationship for some time but  did
    not cohabit when, on the facts, they could have chosen to do  so.   The
    Judge found at [44] of the  Decision  that  the  true  nature  of  that
    relationship was casual and not serious and that they did  not  cohabit
    by choice for that reason.   The Judge also accepted that the Appellant
    took some time to come to terms with his sexuality after arrival in the
    UK and only after therapy.

10.   However, having reached those findings, the Judge went on at  [46]  to
    consider whether the Appellant would be at risk on return on account of
    his sexuality as follows:-

         "[46]    The Appellant is a discreet gay  man  now.   He  was  very
         discreet in Uganda.  That was due to his inquisitive wife.  It  was
         not due to fear of the authorities  as  such;  he  would  not  have
         wanted to lose contact with his children and that required he  keep
         a secret from his wife.

         [47]     There is no evidence before me that shows he can  rely  on
         HR (Iran) [sic] for protection.  He does not meet the first test in
         it.  The agents of persecution will not be aware.  It  is  possible
         to live openly as a widower in Uganda  and  have  a  life  that  is
         discreet in terms of sexuality, which is what he wants."

11.   It may be possible to read [39] compatibly with [46] and [47]  of  the
    Decision if what is meant by the Judge is that the  Appellant  is  open
    and outgoing about his support for gay rights  but  prefers  to  behave
    discreetly when it comes to his own relationships.   However,  even  if
    that is a possible reading of those  paragraphs,  the  Judge  does  not
    consider what would be the impact of the Appellant returning to  Uganda
    and continuing in that support.

12.   Furthermore, there are internal  inconsistencies  in  other  respects.
    At [45] of  the  Decision,  for  example,  the  Judge  finds  that  the
    Appellant was unable to come to terms  with  his  sexuality  whilst  in
    Uganda and only came to terms with it  in  the  UK  following  therapy.
    That is not taken into account when considering whether  the  Appellant
    would behave  discreetly  on  return  to  Uganda  even  if  he  did  so
    previously.

13.   Second, the Judge's finding  that  the  Appellant  behaved  discreetly
    when in Uganda previously because he was married at the  time  and  did
    not wish to upset his wife and lose  contact  with  his  children  also
    includes an implicit finding that,  if  his  wife  had  discovered  his
    relationship and disclosed  it,  that  would  not  have  been  seen  as
    acceptable in Uganda.

14.   Third, the Judge accepted that the Appellant is in a  relationship  in
    the UK  with  a  man  which  is  described  as  casual  but  which  has
    nonetheless been ongoing for some time and which the Appellant has been
    prepared to disclose.  Again, that is potentially incompatible  with  a
    finding that the Appellant has behaved discreetly also in the UK.

15.   Fourth, Ms Benitez pointed out that the Appellant's claim is  that  he
    would only behave discreetly on return  to  Uganda  because  he  feared
    recrimination due to his sexuality.  If the Judge rejected  that  claim
    as it appears he did at [47] of the Decision, he needed to say  why  he
    rejected that element of the claim.

16.   Whilst the Judge might be entitled to find as he did at  [48]  of  the
    Decision, that the Ugandan authorities do not prosecute frequently  for
    offences, as the Appellant points out in his ground two, such a finding
    does not take into account the background evidence  cited  at  [2.3.20]
    and [2.4.1] and [2.4.2] of the same report that if  a  person  is  open
    about their sexual orientation, they are likely to face harassment  and
    discrimination from the State  and  societal  discrimination  including
    harassment and violence.  Those factors taken together are likely to be
    sufficiently serious to amount to persecution and  serious  harm.   The
    question whether the Appellant  will  behave  discreetly  is  therefore
    central to the claimed risk on return.

17.   The Appellant's  ground  three  concerning  the  Judge's  findings  on
    internal relocation is made out also for similar reasons.

18.   For those reasons, the  grounds  disclose  an  error  of  law  in  the
    Decision and I agree that the Decision should be set aside.

19.   Ms Benitez initially submitted that, if I accepted that  the  Decision
    contains an error of law, I could simply re-make the  Decision  without
    hearing further evidence because of the Judge's  finding  at  [36]  and
    [37] that the Appellant is gay and behaves in such a way that he  would
    not behave discreetly on return.  The difficulty with that  submission,
    as I pointed out, is that on one view what the Judge is  there  finding
    is that the Appellant is a committed activist not  that  he  would  not
    behave discreetly with regard to his relationships.   The Judge has  in
    fact found, apparently based on  the  Appellant's  evidence,  that  the
    Appellant would behave discreetly in Uganda  in  relation  to  his  own
    sexuality as he had in the past and out of choice not because of feared
    persecution.

20.   Ms Benitez thereafter accepted that there were  insufficient  findings
    made by the Judge concerning the  way  in  which  the  Appellant  would
    choose to live his life in Uganda, based on  the  evidence  of  how  he
    conducted himself in the past and now and what had potentially  changed
    in that regard.  She accepted based on the lack  of  findings  on  that
    crucial aspect that, in fairness to the Appellant, the appeal ought  to
    be remitted.  She asked though that I preserve the  findings  that  the
    Appellant is a gay man and the finding about his behaviour in the UK at
    [39] of the Decision.

21.   Ms Kiss accepted that the Respondent has not challenged  the  findings
    that the Appellant is genuinely gay nor what is said  at  [39]  of  the
    Decision about his behaviour.  In fairness to the  Respondent,  I  note
    that there is no provision in the  Tribunal's  procedure  rules  for  a
    respondent's notice as exists in the Court of Appeal.   Nonetheless, no
    issue is taken with those findings in the Rule 24 statement.

22.   Both representatives were agreed in the circumstances that the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

23.   I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice Statement  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the  disposal  of
    appeals in this Tribunal.  That reads as follows:-

         "[7.2]   The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
         that:-

             a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a  party  before
                the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing   or   other
                opportunity  for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to   and
                considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is
                necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-
                made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective
                in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
                tier Tribunal."

24.   Accordingly, and in the interests of a fair and just disposal  of  the
    Appellant's protection claim, I am satisfied that it is appropriate  to
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  re-hearing  before  a
    Judge other than Judge Freer. I consider  that  it  is  appropriate  to
    preserve the findings made by the Judge at [38] to [45] of the Decision
    since the Respondent has not taken  issue  with  those  findings.   The
    finding at [38] that the Appellant is genuinely  gay  therefore  stands
    and what is said at [39] to [45] provides  reasoned  support  for  that
    finding.

DECISION

I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law. The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer  promulgated
on 20 December 2017 is set aside.  The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier
Tribunal for re-hearing before a Judge other than Judge Freer.

Signed
            [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Smith
    Dated:  23 April 2018
