
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08430/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 February 2020                           |On 6 March 2020               |
|Extempore                                     |                              |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     n j
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel, instructed by J McCarthy
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    G D Davison ("the judge"), promulgated on 16 October 2019, by which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision
    dated 13 August 2019, refusing his protection and human rights  claims.



 2. The Appellant, a national of Afghanistan  born  in  January  1992,  had
    previously had  an  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  2010
    (AA/14859/2010).  The previous judge had roundly rejected all  material
    aspects of the Appellant's protection claim and found that there was no
    risk on return.



Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. Judge Davison correctly directed himself to the  well-known  principles
    set out in Devaseelan * [2003] Imm AR 1 and took the  previous  judge's
    decision as a starting point, a reference to the adverse findings being
    stated in [22].  At [23] to  [28]  the  judge  concluded  that  certain
    aspects of the Appellant's evidence were unreliable, that the Appellant
    had what is described as "extended family" ties in Kabul, and  that  he
    was in contact with family members in Afghanistan.

 4. The  previous  country  guidance  decision  of  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)
    Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118  (IAC)  is  referred  to,  as  is  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal overturning that decision on a  limited
    basis (AS (Afghanistan) [2019] EWCA Civ 873.  At [29] the judge  stated
    that he was treating the Upper Tribunal's decision in AS "with a degree
    of caution".  At [30] and [31] the judge considers the UNHCR Guidelines
    of April 2018.  He sets out a number of factors which in  his  judgment
    went to show that the Appellant was neither at risk in Kabul, nor would
    internal relocation to the capital be unduly  harsh.   At  [33]  it  is
    concluded that there was no Article 15(c) risk to the Appellant either.
     At [34] the judge briefly considers Article 8, concluding  that  there
    would not  be  any  "very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    reintegration" into Afghani society, nor  were  there  any  exceptional
    reasons as to why he should succeed on Article 8 grounds.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. The grounds of appeal essentially  argue  that:  the  judge  failed  to
    adequately consider the UNHCR Guidelines; that  he  erred  in  reaching
    certain adverse credibility findings; and that  he  failed  to  address
    Article 8 adequately or at all.

 6. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  a  limited  basis,  namely  the
    assertion that the judge erred in respect of the UNHCR  Guidelines  and
    in assessing Article 8.  There has been no  application  for  ground  2
    (relating to the credibility findings) to be resurrected.



The hearing

 7. Mr Sharma put forward perfectly respectable arguments in support of the
    Appellant's challenge.  Essentially, he submitted that in light of  the
    Court of Appeal judgment in AS, it was in principle  possible  for  the
    judge to have departed from the guidance set out by the Upper Tribunal.
     The judge had failed  to  adequately  consider  all  of  the  relevant
    factors set out in the UNHCR Guidelines.  The judge had also failed  to
    give adequate consideration to the Article 8  claim,  both  within  the
    context of the Immigration Rules and without.  Mr Sharma quite properly
    accepted that the UNHCR Guidelines did not  state  in  terms  that  all
    returnees to Kabul are at risk of Article 15(c) treatment, and that was
    not the basis upon which this appeal was being put forward.

 8. Mr Avery submitted that the grounds amounted to  nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with the judge's adequately reasoned decision.



Decision on error of law

 9. I conclude that the judge has not materially erred in law.

10. Whilst his observation in [29] that the findings of the Upper  Tribunal
    in AS were to be treated with "a degree of caution" may appear at first
    glance to be somewhat ambiguous, it is clear enough from  what  follows
    in [30] and [31] that he gave careful consideration to the core item of
    documentary evidence relied on by the Appellant in the  appeal,  namely
    the UNHCR Guidelines.  Reading the decision as a whole, the  judge  did
    adequately address the relevant characteristics of the Appellant in the
    context of whether it would be unreasonable/unduly  harsh  for  him  to
    relocate to Kabul.  Specifically, the judge was  entitled  to  conclude
    that there was family in Afghanistan, and extended  family  members  in
    Kabul in particular, having regard to what he said in  [23],  [24]  and
    [26] of his decision.  The judge adequately dealt with the lack of  any
    risk based upon perceived "westernisation".  In short, he was  entitled
    to conclude that internal  relocation  to  the  capital  would  not  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh.

11. The judge was also entitled to conclude that the Appellant would not be
    at risk of serious harm or with  reference  to  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive.  Contrary to  a  passage  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, the UNHCR Guidelines do not assert that the mere presence of an
    individual in Kabul gives rise to such a risk.

12. In respect of an issue raised at the hearing, it is quite possible that
    the consideration of internal relocation to Kabul was  something  of  a
    legal red-herring, as it were.  This is because  it  had  already  been
    found in the previous decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  that  there
    was no risk in the Appellant's home area.  For whatever reason it  does
    not appear as though  any  real  attempt  was  made  to  resurrect  the
    original claim that there was such a risk there.   In  any  event,  the
    judge was entitled to regard the previous decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as a starting point and in my view, given that  there  was  no
    risk in the home area the issue of internal relocation did not actually
    arise at all.  There was nothing to suggest that  the  Appellant  could
    not go back to that home area, thereby avoiding the  need  to  relocate
    anywhere.  For the reasons I have  previously  given,  whether  or  not
    there  was  a  risk  in  the  home  area  is  immaterial:  the  judge's
    conclusions on risk and internal relocation are sound in any event.

13. Turning to the issue of Article 8, it is right  that  the  judge  dealt
    with this only briefly at [34].  However, what is said  there  must  be
    seen in the context of findings  previously  made  which  included  the
    existence of family connections, an absence of  risk,  the  Appellant's
    good health, his linguistic abilities, and the  absence  of  any  other
    particular characteristics that could possibly have resulted  in  there
    being "very significant  obstacles"  to  reintegration.   On  the  same
    factual basis, the judge was  entirely  justified  in  concluding  that
    there were no exceptional features in the Appellant's case which  could
    justify success on  Article  8  grounds  outside  the  context  of  the
    relevant Rules.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain errors of law.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




Signed   [pic]         Date: 24 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
