
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/08189/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16 November 2017                    |On 14 December 2017                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SMK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Cronin, instructed by Wesley Gryk solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cooper who allowed the  appeal  of  the  appellant,
    SMK, as he was before him, against the Secretary of State's decision of
    26 July 2016 refusing to revoke a deportation order made against him on
    27 May 2011.  The judge had of course to bear in mind the nature of the
    index offence which  occurred  in  2005  and  as  both  representatives
    mentioned, the facts are somewhat unusual.  There  was  a  trial  where
    there were  separate  indictments.   The  appellant  and  his  wife  as
    summarised by the judge at paragraph 12 of his decision pleaded  guilty
    to offences of conspiracy to defraud, obtaining a  pecuniary  advantage
    by deception and in the appellant's case having a false instrument with
    intent.  He was sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment and his wife
    to fourteen months' imprisonment.

2.   The grounds of appeal, if I may just  touch  on  those  before  getting
    back to the judge's decision, on which permission was granted by  Judge
    Blum are summarised by him as follows.  The principal issue before  the
    First-tier Tribunal was whether the appellant's deportation would  have
    an unduly harsh impact on his children.   The  respondent  accepted  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect the children to relocate  to  the  DRC.
    Although the First-tier Judge properly  took  account  of  the  factors
    weighing in the appellant's  favour  identified  at  paragraph  69  and
    although there was strong evidence  that  the  appellant's  deportation
    would have a significant impact on the family  unit,  it  was  arguable
    that the First-tier Judge failed to identify or take  full  account  of
    the scope of the public interest factors in favour of  the  deportation
    as identified in OH (Serbia) and this may have materially affected  his
    assessment of undue harshness.

3.   The issue then that concerned the Secretary of State which led  to  the
    grant of permission was that where she noted at  paragraph  69  of  his
    decision the judge referred to the public interest  in  deportation  of
    foreign criminals as being a strong one it was argued  that  the  judge
    had diluted the strength of the  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
    deportation by downplaying the seriousness of his offending  by  noting
    the sentencing judge's failure as it is put to recommend the  appellant
    for deportation and the appellant's lack of  offending  behaviour.   It
    was argued  that  this  as  referred  to  by  Judge  Blum  in  granting
    permission went contrary to what was said by the Court of Appeal in  OH
    (Serbia) EWCA Civ 694 in 2008, noting such factors that the risk of re-
    offending is one facet of the public interest  but  there  are  others.
    There is also a need to deter foreign nationals from committing serious
    crimes.  There is the element of an expression of  society's  revulsion
    at serious crimes and all the facets of the public interest  should  be
    considered as a linked but independent feature, the  approach  to  them
    adopted by the respondent in the context of the facts of the case,  the
    duty being no higher than to weigh this feature but it  was  argued  by
    downplaying the appellant's offence the judge had failed  correctly  to
    balance the weighty public interest in deportation against  the  effect
    on the children and had therefore incorrectly considered  the  test  of
    undue harshness as set out by the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) [2016]
    EWCA Civ 450.

4.   The judge as I say set out at paragraph 12 the offences that  had  been
    committed and when he went on from paragraph 49 onwards to consider the
    facts of the case  and  the  relevant  law  he  noted  for  example  at
    paragraph  57  that  they  were  both  convicted  of  serious  criminal
    offences,  both  he  and  his  wife,  and  both  made  the  subject  of
    deportation orders but of course noted that subsequently his  wife  was
    successful in an appeal.  The children are  British  citizens  and  the
    wife had made an  application  for  renewed  leave  to  remain  as  her
    previous grant of leave had expired on 20 March and the judge took  the
    view, and this has not been challenged, that it could be  assumed  that
    the wife and children will continue to  live  lawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom for the foreseeable future.

5.   The judge then went on to consider the evidence of the  social  workers
    and the relevant legal principles including what had been said  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in the decision relating to the wife.

6.   Then at paragraph 69:

         "I acknowledge that the public interest in deportation  of  foreign
         criminals is a strong one.  On the other hand, it is of  note  that
         the  sentencing  judge  consciously   decided   not   to   make   a
         recommendation for deportation in the cases of  the  Appellant  and
         his wife.  The pre-sentence  report  identified  the  Appellant  as
         presenting a low risk of reoffending, and a low risk of harm to the
         public.  As a matter of fact in the period of nearly 12 years  that
         have  elapsed  since  conviction,  the  Appellant  has  indeed  not
         reoffended and  he  has  complied  with  his  reporting  conditions
         attending every Monday for over seven years to sign on."


7.   The respondent, as he is before me, the  appellant  before  the  judge,
    has put in a Rule 24 response drafted by Ms Cronin which  goes  through
    the issues raised in the grounds.  Among other matters it  is  relevant
    to refer to is the issue of revulsion; society's view  of  criminality,
    should not be any longer seen as a component of the public interest  in
    deportation.  That was said by Lord Kerr in Hesham Ali [2016]  UKSC  60
    which  is  the  most  up-to-date  analysis  of  the  law  relating   to
    deportations and attempts to revoke deportations.  A number  of  points
    are made there but essentially in the  context  of  Hesham  Ali  it  is
    argued that the judge in fact did  give  proper  consideration  to  the
    relevant issues in considering the public interest and  there  was  not
    this downplaying of the appellant's criminal history.  It is right that
    the judge did go into detail into the differences  that  exist  between
    the couple and Mr Bramble has somewhat expanded the points made in  the
    grounds today by essentially arguing that the judge failed to  look  at
    the public interest in respect of the  particular  convictions  of  the
    appellant and had not sufficiently focused on the specific  criminality
    of the appellant but essentially took the two together.

8.   It is the case though that the judge clearly set out  at  paragraph  12
    the fact that they were convicted of different  offences  and  this  is
    relevant to the judge's sentencing remarks including  such  matters  as
    the fact that the appellant's wife was seen as the front woman  in  the
    operation.  Curiously, in passing, one notes that  when  the  judge  is
    talking  about  the  use  of  a  false  passport  as  being   literally
    indefensible and noting the work he got as a result of that,  it  seems
    that the appellant's wife also used false documents to get herself work
    but there was no charge I think in relation to that but it seems  clear
    to me  from  looking  at  the  sentencing  remarks  that  there  was  a
    significant overlap between the offences committed but nevertheless the
    judge took proper account in my view, at paragraph 69, of the fact that
    there were differences between the two.  I think  that  the  sentencing
    judge consciously decided not to make a recommendation for deportation,
    rather than it is put in the Secretary of State's grounds,  failing  to
    recommend the appellant for deportation.  It was not  a  lapse  by  the
    judge, a conscious decision was made and the judge makes that clear  at
    the first and second pages of the sentencing remarks.

9.   On bringing these matters together the grounds are  relatively  narrow.
    They have been expanded slightly by Mr Bramble and Ms  Cronin  has  not
    taken a point on that but has responded to it and it seems to  me  that
    when  one  looks  at  the  consideration  of   details   and   balanced
    consideration as I find it to be by the judge in this case that it  has
    not been shown that there is any error of law in his decision.  That of
    course is my task.  I am not re-deciding this case.  I have to look  at
    the judgment in the context of the law and the  submissions  that  have
    been made and decide whether there is any error of law in  the  judge's
    approach in the manner identified in the grounds and  developed  by  Mr
    Bramble and in my judgment there is no error of law.  As a  consequence
    the judge's decision allowing this appeal will stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen







