
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |Appeal Number: PA/08380/2019     |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via MS     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Teams)                           |                                 |
|On 25 May 2021                   |On 22 June 2021                  |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                              MAA (AFGHANISTAN)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aziz, instructed by Rashid & Rashid Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant is an Afghan national who was born on 1 January 1977.  He
    appeals, with permission granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Haria)  against  Judge  Shore's  decision  to  dismiss  his  appeal  on
    protection and human rights grounds.



Background

 2. As recorded by Judge Shore (hereafter "the judge") at  [3]-[7]  of  the
    decision under appeal, the appellant has a  long  immigration  history.
    He first claimed asylum in the UK on 31 July 2002.  The application was
    refused, an appeal was  dismissed,  and  the  appellant  became  appeal
    rights exhausted in February 2003.

 3. The appellant then made two human rights applications,  both  of  which
    were based on his relationship with a settled spouse.   The  first  was
    refused.  The second was  also  refused  but  an  appeal  against  that
    decision was allowed and the appellant was granted discretionary  leave
    to remain from 9 October 2006 to 9 October 2009.  The appellant applied
    for further leave but that application was withdrawn.

 4. The appellant seemingly applied for a visit visa in November  2010  but
    that application was refused in December that year.  He is said to have
    left the UK in 2013.  In 2017, the appellant  attempted  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom after leaving a flight at Heathrow Terminal  Three.   He
    was refused entry, whereupon he sought  asylum  again.   Those  further
    submission were accepted to amount to a fresh claim under paragraph 353
    of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The appellant claimed, in summary, that he was at  risk  of  kidnapping
    and ill-treatment upon return to Afghanistan.  He stated  that  he  had
    been kidnapped and held for  three  years  after  he  had  returned  to
    Afghanistan.  He claimed that he had been  ill-treated  at  this  time,
    sustaining injuries including a broken skull, and that he had only been
    released upon his family paying a $100,000 ransom.   Some  time  later,
    the appellant left Afghanistan again, and arrived in the UK in November
    2017.

 6. In her decision, the respondent noted  that  the  appellant's  previous
    asylum  claim  (which  concerned  an  asserted  fear  of  the  Northern
    Alliance) had been found to be untrue by Mr Birkby, an Adjudicator,  in
    2003: [17]-[18].  For reasons she gave  at  [26]-[31],  the  respondent
    considered that the appellant had fabricated his account of having been
    kidnapped on return to Afghanistan.  The respondent did not accept that
    any part of Afghanistan (including the  appellant's  home  province  of
    Logar) was experiencing such high  levels  of  indiscriminate  violence
    that the appellant required humanitarian protection: [51].

 7. In any event, the respondent considered that the appellant could safely
    and reasonably relocate to Kabul: [71].  The respondent did not  accept
    that the appellant would be at risk  on  return  to  Afghanistan  as  a
    Westernised person: [92]-[110].  For reasons she gave  at  [125]-[169],
    the respondent did not accept that the appellant's removal would be  in
    breach of Article 8 ECHR, as she did not accept that the appellant  had
    a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife or  his  son.   Nor
    did she consider that the appellant's mental health was such  that  his
    removal would be in breach of Article 3 ECHR: [176]-[194].

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant appealed to the FtT.  The grounds of appeal were  largely
    pro forma but it was appreciably clear that  the  appellant  relied  on
    protection and human rights grounds.

 9. The appeal came before the judge,  sitting  remotely,  on  18  December
    2020.  The appellant was represented by counsel, the  respondent  by  a
    Presenting Officer.  The judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant
    and his wife and submissions from the advocates  before  reserving  his
    decision.

10. In his reserved decision, the judge rejected the appellant's account of
    having been kidnapped, held and ill-treated because he considered there
    to be a range of difficulties with that account:  [25.8]-[25.18].   The
    judge  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  enjoyed  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with either his wife or his child, again due to
    a range of specified difficulties with that  account:  [25.19]-[25.29].
    The  judge  concluded,  therefore,  that  the  appellant's  return   to
    Afghanistan would not  place  the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  its
    obligations under the Refugee Convention, the  Qualification  Directive
    or the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

11. The grounds of appeal  were  settled  by  the  appellant's  solicitors.
    There are said to be three grounds, although there are  in  fact  four,
    which may be summarised as follows:

      i) The judge erred in law in deciding to attach no weight to a  report
         which had been prepared pursuant to rule 35 of the Detention Centre
         Rules 2001.

     ii) The judge had given no consideration to the statements prepared for
         the appeal by the appellant's wife and son and had accordingly left
         material evidence out of account.

    iii) The judge reached irrational findings  on  the  appellant's  asylum
         claim.

     iv) The judge erred in failing to undertake any  proper  assessment  of
         the best interests of the appellant's son.

12. In his admirably concise submissions before me, Mr Aziz submitted  that
    the judge had erred in failing to take the rule 35 report of  Dr  Sayed
    into account.  The  report  showed  the  location  of  the  appellant's
    scaring.  It was not relevant, Mr Aziz submitted, that the  report  did
    not comply with the Istanbul Protocol because it had been  commissioned
    by the respondent.  The report showed the  injuries  to  be  consistent
    with the appellant's claim. It had also been relevant to  the  question
    of whether  or  not  the  appellant  should  have  been  treated  as  a
    vulnerable witness under Presidential Guidance Note 2 of 2010.  Mr Aziz
    could not state whether counsel who represented  the  appellant  before
    the FtT had made an application for the appellant to be  treated  as  a
    vulnerable witness but it was clear, he said, that the rule  35  report
    was a 'huge part' of the appellant's case, which was  relevant  to  the
    assessment of his injuries and his state of mind  at  the  hearing  and
    when he was interviewed by the respondent.

13. As for ground two, Mr Aziz stated that the appellant's wife's  evidence
    and the supporting evidence of the  relationship  had  been  improperly
    discounted by the judge.  The  appellant  had  been  unable  to  gather
    further documents for the appeal due to  his  mental  state.   Mr  Aziz
    submitted that the judge had also erred in failing to take  account  of
    background evidence concerning the treatment of Westernised  people  in
    Afghanistan.

14. Ms Petterson submitted that the rule  35  report  was  very  brief  and
    specifically stated that it was not a medico-legal report.   The  judge
    was entitled to discount it for the reasons he  gave.  The  report  had
    been prepared in 2017 and there was no  more  recent  medical  evidence
    whatsoever, whether of a physical  or  mental  health  focus.   It  was
    apparent that counsel before the FtT had not applied for the  appellant
    to be treated as a vulnerable witness.

15. The judge had been  entitled,  Ms  Petterson  submitted,  to  find  the
    appellant incredible for the reasons he had given, one of which was the
    lack of supporting evidence about the family's ability to raise the sum
    of $100,000 for the appellant's release.  The judge had also taken into
    account the fact that some of the documents positively  undermined  the
    appellant's account.  The judge had, in  sum,  considered  all  of  the
    relevant evidence and had come to sustainable conclusions upon it.  The
    wife's evidence had  clearly  been  taken  into  account.   There  were
    adequate reasons throughout.

16. In response, Mr Aziz submitted again that the rule 35  report  did  not
    need to comply with rule 35 because it had been prepared by a doctor at
    the detention centre.

17. I reserved my decision.

Analysis

18. The grounds are unmeritorious and I find that the judge did not err  in
    law in reaching his decision in  this  appeal.   My  reasons  for  that
    conclusion are as follows.

19. The first ground criticises the judge for refusing to attach weight  to
    a report prepared by Dr Sayed when the appellant was detained following
    his arrival to the UK in 2017.  The report was prepared  in  compliance
    with rule 35 of the Detention Centre  Rules  2001,  which  currently[1]
    provides materially as follows:

    35.- Special illnesses and conditions (including torture claims)

    (1)  ...

    (2)  ...

    (3)  The medical practitioner shall report to the manager on  the  case
         of any detained person who he is concerned may have been the victim
         of torture.

    (4)  The manager shall send a copy of any report under paragraphs  (1),
         (2) or (3) to the Secretary of State without delay.

    (5)  The medical  practitioner  shall  pay  special  attention  to  any
         detained person whose mental condition appears to require  it,  and
         make any special arrangements (including counselling  arrangements)
         which appear necessary for his supervision or care.

    (6)  For the purposes of paragraph (3),  "torture"  means  any  act  by
         which a perpetrator intentionally inflicts severe pain or suffering
         on a victim in a situation in which-

         (a)  the perpetrator has control (whether mental or physical)  over
             the victim, and

         (b)  as a result of  that  control,  the  victim  is  powerless  to
         resist.

20. Dr Sayed's report is five pages long.  The  first  states  that  it  is
    prepared under rule 35(3)  and  gives  the  appellant's  details.   The
    second gives the appellant's prison number followed  by  the  following
    pro forma statement:

         I have examined the detainee named  above  in  my  capacity  as  an
         immigration removal centre medical practitioner and  hereby  report
         that I have concerns that the detainee may have been  a  victim  of
         torture.  This is a factual report rather than a medico-legal  one.



21. The third page contains an instruction to the doctor  about  completing
    the pro forma report.  The completed box contains the following:

         History in Urdu.  He was kidnapped by a gang for ransom  in  Logar,
         Afghanistan.  He was kidnapped in 2013 and was  held  for  3  years
         before his family paid money to  have  him  released  -  a  sum  of
         100,000 dollars.  He was kept in a small area under the ground with
         no light.  He was beaten with punches and kicks and sticks.  He was
         also burnt.  He claims he cannot sleep since he has been brought to
         detention.  He was treated at Al  Shife  Hospital  in  Kabul  after
         being released.

22. The fourth page contains a body map on  which  Dr  Syed  has  marked  a
    single blunt trauma scar at the  rear  of  the  appellant's  head  (the
    occiput) and a single burn  scar  on  his  right  buttock.   Page  five
    contains further instructions to the examining physician,  after  which
    there is the following:

         On examination he has scars consistent with the history given.   He
         also suffers with back pain - since the attack.   His  symptoms  of
         depression  and  anxiety  have  increased  in  detention.   He   is
         experiencing flashbacks and nightmares in detention.

23. What the judge said about this report is to be found at [25.11] of  his
    decision, which is as follows:

         I find that the appellant has failed to show to the lower  standard
         that he was regularly kicked and punched by his  captors.   I  make
         this finding because I do not find that  the  report  of  Dr  Sayed
         dated 14 December 2017 to be an expert report that I can  give  any
         weight to.  It does not comply with the requirements for an  expert
         medical report.  There is no CV of Dr Sayed  and  I  cannot  assess
         whether they  have  any  relevant  experience  or  expertise.   The
         assessment  of  the  scaring  is  not  made  by  reference  to  the
         established standards of the Istanbul Protocol.

24. The grounds of appeal suggest at that  the  judge  failed  to  take  Dr
    Sayed's report into account.  That is plainly not the  case.   Mr  Aziz
    therefore contended that the reasons given by the judge  for  rejecting
    the report were inadequate, particularly when it is recalled  that  the
    report is prepared by a doctor at the respondent's request.

25. With respect to Mr Aziz, who did not  draft  the  grounds,  this  is  a
    hopeless submission.  As the judge clearly explained, the report fell a
    long way short  of  providing  expert  evidence  which  could  properly
    corroborate the appellant's account.  It specifically  stated  that  it
    was not a medico-legal report.  There was no indication in  the  report
    that Dr Aziz had any particular experience or  expertise  in  examining
    scarring for this (or any) purpose.  The report was  not  addressed  to
    the Tribunal.  It contained no statement of truth.

26.  Fundamentally,  however,  the  major  problem  with  the  report,   as
    identified by the judge, is that  it  did  not  purport  to  apply  the
    Istanbul Protocol, the importance of which has been  underlined  in  an
    array of decisions of this Tribunal and the Court of Appeal,  including
    SA (Somalia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1302; [2007] Imm AR 236.  Reference
    was also made to the Protocol by Lord Wilson in KV (Sri Lanka)  v  SSHD
    [2019] UKSC 10.  In SA (Somalia), the President of the Family  Division
    (with whom Brooke and Moore-Bick LJ agreed) said:

         In any case where the medical report relied on by an asylum  seeker
         is  not  contemporaneous,  or  nearly  contemporaneous,  with   the
         injuries  said  to  have  been  suffered,  and   thus   potentially
         corroborative for that very reason, but is a report made long after
         the events relied on as evidence  of  persecution,  then,  if  such
         report is to have  any  corroborative  weight  at  all,  it  should
         contain  a  clear  statement  of  the  doctor's   opinion   as   to
         consistency, directed to  the  particular  injuries  said  to  have
         occurred as a result of the torture or other ill  treatment  relied
         on as evidence of persecution. It is also desirable  that,  in  the
         case of marks of injury  which  are  inherently  susceptible  of  a
         number of alternative or "everyday" explanations, reference  should
         be made to such  fact,  together  with  any  physical  features  or
         "pointers" found which may make the particular explanation for  the
         injury advanced by the complainant more or less likely.

27. On any proper view, the rule  35  report  did  not  comply  with  these
    requirements.  All that was said by the doctor was that the scars  were
    'consistent with the history given', without any consideration  of  the
    individual marks themselves or any assessment  of  whether  they  might
    have been caused by an 'everyday' injury.  If the word 'consistent' was
    used in the sense intended in the Istanbul Protocol, then that  was  in
    any event merely a neutral  indication  which  simply  meant  that  the
    physical signs did not contradict the appellant's account; it  did  not
    positively support or corroborate that account in the manner  suggested
    by Mr Aziz: MN & IXU v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1746; [2021] 1 WLR 1956, at
    [103]-[104].

28. Nor is there any merit in the submission that  the  judge  should  have
    treated the appellant as a vulnerable witness in light of  the  report.
    The report provided no real support for the appellant's claim  that  he
    was vulnerable as a result of previous torture.  Nor did it  offer  any
    valuable insight into the appellant's mental health  condition,  either
    at the time that it was written or at the date of the  appeal  hearing,
    three years or more later.  The report gave an indication of  what  the
    appellant had  said  about  his  mental  health  but  it  undertook  no
    assessment of whether he actually suffered  from  a  recognised  mental
    health condition.  Dr Sayed did not purport to offer a diagnosis of any
    such condition.  It was presumably for these reasons that  counsel  who
    represented the appellant before the FtT  (an  experienced  immigration
    practitioner) did not invite the judge to  treat  the  appellant  as  a
    vulnerable witness; there was simply no adequate evidential  basis  for
    any such application.

29. I do not really understand the second ground of appeal.  In fairness to
    Mr Aziz, he said little about it.  The contention appears  to  be  that
    the judge overlooked the statement made by the appellant's wife and the
    letter which had been  written  by  the  appellant's  son.   But  those
    documents were described by the judge at [16]-[23] of his decision  and
    were plainly taken into account.  It was because the judge found  there
    to be serious difficulties with the account given  by  the  appellant's
    wife that he came to find that there was no  family  life  between  the
    appellant, his wife and their son.  The reasons for that conclusion are
    cogent.  The  judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had  produced  little
    evidence in support of contact [25.19]; that he had not varied his bail
    conditions [25.20]; and that there  were  inconsistencies  between  the
    evidence given by the appellant  and  his  wife:  [25.21-[25.27].   The
    judge was plainly entitled to find, as  he  did  at  [25.28]  that  the
    appellant had not had any contact with his son since 2013.  In reaching
    that finding, the judge quoted from the letter from the son.

30. Contrary to the assertion in ground three, there  is  nothing  perverse
    about the judge's findings, whether with reference  to  the  protection
    claim  or  Article  8  ECHR.   The  judge  stated   at   [25.15]   that
    corroboration was not a requirement in asylum claims but  he  cited  TK
    (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40  in  the  same  paragraph  and  was
    entitled, pursuant to that decision, to attach weight to the fact  that
    the appellant had failed to produce documents which  should  have  been
    readily available.  There is no proper basis for Mr  Aziz's  submission
    that the appellant had been unable to obtain documents as a  result  of
    his mental health.  The  judge  considered  all  of  the  documents  in
    reaching his conclusions on  both  limbs  of  the  appeal  and  reached
    sustainable findings on the claims as a whole.

31. Mr Aziz also submitted that the judge had failed  to  take  account  of
    evidence  that  Westernised  people  are  at  risk  of  persecution  in
    Afghanistan.  The judge took account of the submission and resolved  it
    with reference to the respondent's Country Information and Policy  Unit
    note: [32].  I have considered the background material which  seemingly
    forms the basis of this submission.  In my judgment, it  takes  matters
    no further than the CPIN document upon which the judge  relied.   There
    was, in the circumstances, no need for him  to  weigh  the  one  source
    against the other.

32. The final point, which is said to be part of ground  three  but  really
    raises a freestanding ground, is that the judge failed to undertake  an
    assessment of the appellant's son's best interests in  compliance  with
    s55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009.   There  is
    obviously nothing in this  point;  in  light  of  the  judge's  primary
    finding about the absence of a relationship between the  appellant  and
    his son, s55 should not have come into his analysis of  the  Article  8
    ECHR claim.  He did  not  err  in  his  consideration  of  that  claim,
    therefore.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The appeal is accordingly dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court  proceedings.   It  is
appropriate to continue this direction, which was first made by the FtT,  on
account of  the  fact  that  the  appellant's  claim  is  for  international
protection.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                                                                18 June 2021
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Rule 35 was amended by the Detention Centre (Amendment) Rules  2018/411,
so as to include the definition of torture which now appears at rule 35(6).

