

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08786/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8 August 2017                         |On 23 August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                             Ms  PROSHA ABDULLAH

                       (Anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzam      (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    M Duffy          (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss her appeal against the  Secretary  of
State's decision of  28 July 2016  refusing  to  grant  her  international
protection.

2.    By way of brief background, the claimant is a female national of  Iraq
and she was  born,  in  that  country,  on  20 March 1997.   She  is  from
Suleymania which is located in the part  of  Iraq  which  is  under  Kurdish
control. She is of Kurdish ethnicity herself.

3.    In making her claim she asserted that because she had  been  reluctant
to enter into a marriage with a man her father had chosen for  her,  he  now
wished  to  kill  her.   She  had  been  forced  into  participating  in  an
engagement ceremony and had then fled Iraq assisted by her mother,  an  aunt
and an uncle.  After coming to the UK, she had formed a relationship with  a
man named Mikhail, who is a British citizen. She was expecting their  child.
 She thought she would be at additional risk in consequence of that  because
having a child born outside of marriage would bring shame  upon  her  family
and might lead to her being the victim of an honour killing.  The  Secretary
of State,  however,  rejected  her  claim  regarding  the  attempted  forced
marriage as being untruthful.  Accordingly, the  view  was  taken  that  she
would be able to safely  return  to  Iraq.   The  Secretary  of  State  also
thought there was no basis upon which she could rely upon Article 8 of  the
European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

4.    The claimant appealed against the decision to  refuse  her  claim  and
was  aided  by  solicitors  (though  not  those  now  representing  her)  in
completing and  submitting  her  grounds  of  appeal.   The  grounds  raised
contentions concerning international protection  only  and  no  mention  was
made of  Article  8.   However,  at  the  appeal  hearing  the  Home Office
presenting officer  agreed  that  Article 8  could  be  considered  (see
paragraph 16 of the First -tier Tribunal's decision).

5.    The First-tier Tribunal held an oral hearing which  was  attended  by
the claimant.  She gave oral evidence as did  Mikhail.   Both  parties  were
represented.  The claimant was found not to be credible.  This was said:

      "     38.  I do not consider it reasonably likely that  the  Appellant
      was forced into a marriage.  I take into account the alleged  timeline
      put forward by the Appellant.  She states that she is proposed  to  on
      7th February 2016.  The Appellant  having  undergone  an  engagement
      ceremony where she is presented with jewellery she goes to her  aunt's
      house on 9th February 2016.  On  her  account  she  leaves  Iraq  on
      11th February.  Within this tight timescale, the Appellant has  tried
      to commit suicide twice; sold the jewellery and found an agent.   This
      is not credible.

            39.  When asked in interview on 9th June 2016 at question 270
      whether there were any other reasons she wished to remain in the  U.K.
      and she had answered no; she made no mention of Mikhail  who  she  had
      met in April, entered a relationship with in May 2016.  She  actually
      confirmed she moved in with Mikhail 6 days after  this  interview  on
      15th June 2016.  I find this evidence unsatisfactory.  She stated she
      knew her partner's date of birth but knew nothing of  his  immigration
      history.  She said she had  not  discussed  his  with  him.   This  is
      despite her evidence that she told him all about her circumstances and
      he was supportive.  She is now expecting a child with him.  It is  not
      credible that  they  have  failed  to  discuss  Mikhail's  immigration
      history.

            40.  The Appellant's account as to how  this  arranged  marriage
      came to be is vague.  On  her  account  Mustafa  was  a  powerful  and
      influential character.  Her father was  a  taxi  driver.   It  is  not
      reasonably likely that her father and Mustafa  would  have  come  into
      contact with one another or to the extent that Mustafa would  want  to
      marry a taxi driver's daughter; the Appellant does not appear to  have
      ever met Mustafa prior to the engagement ceremony.

            41.  The Respondent spent a lot  of  time  cross examining  the
      Appellant about the country information he said he had.  This was  not
      produced until after the hearing titled 'Kurdish Families'.  I do not
      consider that the Appellant was disadvantaged because  the  point  the
      Respondent sought to make was substantially that there were two  parts
      to the engagement process and this was accepted by the Appellant.

            42.  However fundamentally I  reject  the  Appellant's  evidence
      about her arranged marriage because  of  the  factors  I  set  out  at
      paragraphs 38 to 40 above.

            43.  The Applicant is now pregnant.   She  has  become  pregnant
      whilst her immigration status was precarious.  She states that  as  an
      unmarried pregnant woman she would be considered to be shameful by her
      family and therefore at risk of  harm.   Regrettably  I  consider  her
      pregnancy to be convenient.  The Appellant's partner says he does  not
      wish to return to Iraq because he has a business and will  wait  until
      the Appellant is ready to marry him.   I  find  that  this  too  is  a
      convenient explanation.  I accept that there are  honour  killings  in
      Iraq and women are subject to  violence  in  particular  where  it  is
      considered that they have brought shame on their family.   This  could
      include pregnancy outside wedlock.  In my Judgment the  Appellant  has
      got pregnant when her immigration status is precarious and to  improve
      her unmeritorious asylum claim.  She has indicated that both her  aunt
      and uncle gave her refuge to assist her and appears  to  have  a  good
      relationship with them; she has contacted them since she left.  I find
      that if returned to Iraq (if the Appellant  does  not  marry  Mikhail)
      they are likely to assist her again and provide her  with  protection.
      I reject the submission that it is not proportionate or in the  public
      interest to remove the Appellant.

6.    At a slightly later point in the determination this was said:

      "     46.  On the facts as established in  this  appeal  I  find  that
      there are no substantial grounds for believing  that  the  appellant's
      removal would breach Article 2 or Article 3 of the ECHR."

7.     The  grounds  of  appeal  attacked  various  aspects  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal's reasoning.  There was also a contention, not pursued before
me, that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in considering a document  which
had been provided after the hearing.  A judge  of  the  First-tier Tribunal
granted permission to appeal and, in so doing, said this:

       "It  is  however  arguable  that  the Judge  fell  into  error   at
      paragraph 38 by failing to give adequate reasons  for  rejecting  the
      appellant's account.  It is also arguable  that  the Judge  erred  in
      failing to give adequate consideration to the risk to the appellant as
      an unmarried  pregnant  woman,  regardless  of  the  reasons  for  the
      pregnancy (Danian).  These grounds are arguable."

8.    In consequence of the grant of permission the case was  listed  before
the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that the question of whether or  not  the
First-tier Tribunal had erred in law could be  considered.   Representation
at  that  hearing  was  as  stated  above  and  I  am   grateful   to   each
representative.  In fact, it is fair to say that  there  was  a  significant
measure of agreement between them.

9.    I have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  a  number  of
ways.  First of all, on my reading of  its  written  reasons,  its  concerns
regarding the genuineness of the claimed relationship and regarding what  it
thought to be the claimant's motivation in becoming pregnant formed part  of
its general adverse credibility assessment  and  part  of  its  reasons  for
concluding that the account regarding the forced  marriage  was  fictitious.
I have no difficulty, in principle, with  the  First-tier Tribunal  relying
upon  those  sorts  of  concerns  for  a  general  credibility   assessment.
However, what it said at paragraph 39 was, in  my  judgment,  impermissibly
brief as an explanation for the apparent finding that the  relationship  was
not a genuine one. Further, although  the Judge  indicated  that  he  found
evidence  about  the  relationship  "unsatisfactory"  there  is   no   clear
explanation as to why that was or what, in particular,  was  unsatisfactory.
As to the pregnancy issue, the Judge observed "regrettably I  consider  her
pregnancy to be convenient".  What the Judge was saying  was  that  he  had
found that she had deliberately become impregnated in order to  bolster  her
claim for international protection.  It is not inconceivable that  a  person
might do that.  However, it is undoubtedly  a  dramatic  step  to  take  and
there is necessarily a degree  of  an  inexactness  about  when  or  whether
pregnancy could be achieved.  Further, it  would  be  a  somewhat  momentous
decision for a person to take bearing in mind that having a  child  in  such
situations would necessarily place the child's own future in some  jeopardy.
 I have concluded that the reasoning, in that regard, was simply inadequate
and Mr Duffy accepted, before me, that that was so.

10.   There is then  the  question  of  the  way  in  which  the First-tier
Tribunal considered the  claimed  risk  stemming  from  the  pregnancy.   At
paragraph 43 of the written reasons it did not find that the claimant would
not be at risk of an honour killing as a result of the  pregnancy.   Indeed,
it  accepted  that  honour  killings  do  sometimes  take  place   in   such
circumstances.  However, it went on to say that the claimant would  be  able
to secure protection from her aunt  and  her  uncle.   However,  the  First-
tier Tribunal does not explain how or why it is thought the aunt and  uncle
could afford protection bearing in mind that, if the claimant  was  to  seek
to avail herself of such protection from them, her father  would  be  likely
to know exactly where she was.

11.   Finally, although the First-tier Tribunal did  admit  the  Article 8
arguments for consideration it did not, in my judgment and  on  my  reading,
clearly resolve them.  This too was accepted by Mr Duffy.  It may  be  that
the Judge was applying his apparent disbelief of  the  genuineness  of  the
relationship to the Article 8 arguments as well  as  his  belief  that  the
pregnancy had come about for ulterior motives,  when  he  commented  at  the
foot of paragraph 43 "I reject the submission that it is not  proportionate
or in the public interest to remove the appellant".  But it is not  entirely
clear.  Nor is there any other reasoning at all with respect to  Article 8.
Indeed, at paragraph 46 the First-tier Tribunal only referred, with respect
to the ECHR, to Articles 2 and 3 which suggests  it  might  have  by  that
stage, simply lost sight of Article 8.

12.    In  the  above  circumstances  I  have  concluded  that  the   First-
tier Tribunal erred in law for the various reasons set out above.   I  have
concluded  that  the Judge's  decision   is,   in   consequence,   unsafe.
Accordingly, it is set aside.  Both representatives urged me to remit for  a
complete rehearing before a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal and
that is what I have decided to do.

13.   Finally, I have made no anonymity direction.  None  was  made  by  the
First-tier Tribunal and none was sought before me.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law.  Accordingly, its decision is set aside.   The  case  is  remitted,  in
accordance with the directions appearing below, for a full rehearing  before
a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  22 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:                           Date:  22 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


                        DIRECTIONS FOR THE REHEARING

1.    The appeal shall be listed for an oral hearing  before  a  differently
constituted First-tier Tribunal to that  which  considered  the  appeal  on
17 March 2017.

2.    The  claimant  shall  be  provided  with  a  Kurdish  Sorani  speaking
interpreter at the rehearing.

3.    The rehearing shall take place at the Bradford  Hearing  Centre  which
appears to be the most convenient centre for the  claimant  given  that  she
resides in Sheffield.

4.    These directions may be amended or supplemented by further  directions
made by a salaried judge of the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed:                           Date:  22 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
