
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA082372016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 June 2017                                |On 7 June 2017                |




                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     ZKM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs F Mustapha, solicitor, Wai Leung Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lucas, promulgated on 23 March 2017. Permission to appeal  was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne on 24 April 2017.

Anonymity

   2. No such direction was made previously, however given  the  appellant's
      young age and that he is seeking asylum, a direction is made below.

Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom aged 11 in  2015.  He  applied
    for asylum on 14 December 2015. The substance of his claim was that  he
    is from Laghman Province, his late father had an important role  within
    the Afghan National Army and fought the Taliban. The appellant's mother
    died when he was aged 8. His uncle and  brother  arranged  for  him  to
    leave Afghanistan accompanied by that brother. The appellant  has  lost
    contact with his brother during the journey to the United Kingdom.  The
    appellant's uncle told him that the appellant's life was in danger from
    the Taliban owing to his father's previous role.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the asylum claim on 19  July  2016,  but
    granted the appellant  leave  to  remain  as  an  unaccompanied  asylum
    seeking child (UASC). The appellant's identity and age  were  accepted,
    however  his  claims  regarding  his  father's  role  and  demise  were
    considered unsubstantiated. The appellant was awarded  the  benefit  of
    the doubt because he had not demonstrated any behaviour  which  damaged
    his general credibility under section 8 of the Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc)  Act  2004.  Nonetheless,  it  was  not
    accepted that he would be at  risk  of  ill-treatment  upon  return  to
    Afghanistan; it was considered that national protection  was  available
    and that he could reasonably be expected to relocate away from  Laghman
    Province. Mention was made of his uncle in Jalalabad.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant, then aged
    13, was tendered for cross-examination. The judge concluded that  there
    was no substance to the appellant's claims, other  than  his  own  "say
    so." He found that the appellant left Afghanistan for reasons  entirely
    unconnected with persecution and was "probably sent"  as  a  matter  of
    choice.

 6. The judge considered that the security situation in Afghanistan was not
    relevant because the appellant would not be removed,  owing  to  having
    leave to  remain  until  2019.  After  2019,  the  judge  (erroneously)
    calculated that the appellant would no longer be a minor.

The grounds of appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal argued that the judge erred in finding that there
    was no need for a consideration of  any  risk  of  return  because  the
    appellant was a minor with leave to remain in the United Kingdom at the
    time of the hearing; no caution was taken owing to the appellant's  age
    or reference made to the various guidance produced before him; that the
    judge failed to give consideration to the background material regarding
    the risks to family members of those perceived  as  supportive  of  the
    Afghan government and that the judge erred in  failing to consider case
    law placed  before  him  including  LQ(Age:  immutable  characteristic)
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 9. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 12  May  2017  indicated
    that the appeal was opposed.

The hearing

10. Neither representative had seen the Rule 24 response; however given its
    brevity it caused them no difficulty.

11. At the outset, Mr Jarvis stated that he could not  defend  the  judge's
    failure to deal with the matter as at the date of the hearing but  that
    he would be arguing that the judge's findings on credibility  were  not
    in error.

12. Mrs Mustapha made brief submissions  on  the  appellant's  behalf.  She
    argued that the judge did not  take  into  consideration  the  abundant
    guidance which was drawn to his attention and which was enclosed in the
    appellant's bundle. Furthermore,  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    objective evidence in relation to child-related risks. She stood by all
    the grounds raised.

13. Mr Jarvis relied on the authorities of MD(Guinea) v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 733 and JA (Ghana) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1031. With  reference  to
    [12] of MD (Guinea), he argued that the guidelines referred to did  not
    carry the force of law and that there  was  no  need  for  a  judge  to
    catalogue such documents. He contended that the judge was aware of  the
    appellant's age, that the events relied upon occurred  when  he  was  a
    child and that the submissions made regarding the appellant's age  were
    recorded. He further argued, with reference to JA (Ghana) at [31], that
    there was no need for a judge to make reference to practice  statements
    and it is presumed that he would know what was the normal  approach  of
    the tribunal. Nonetheless, he described  as  "surprising"  the  judge's
    failure to address Article 15(c).

14. Mr Jarvis argued that the judge's credibility findings could stand, but
    that in any event he made  alternative  findings  that  the  claim  was
    speculative.  Furthermore,  had  the  judge  applied   the   background
    material, it would not have made any difference.

15. Mrs Mustapha added little by way of response.

Decision on error of law

16. At the end of the hearing,  I  announced  that  I  concurred  with  the
    parties and found that the judge erred in failing to assess any risk to
    the appellant in returning to Afghanistan as  an  unaccompanied  minor,
    aged 13, as at the date of the hearing. The judge's conclusion at  [40]
    that the current security situation in Afghanistan was "not  especially
    relevant" is a clear error of law given that the appellant was entitled
    to a reasoned  decision  in  respect  of  his  claim  for  humanitarian
    protection.

17. There was some discussion as to the future  venue  of  the  appeal.  Mr
    Jarvis argued that if the credibility findings were upheld, the  matter
    could be relisted before the Upper Tribunal. Mrs Mustapha invited me to
    remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. I announced that the judge's credibility findings should be set  aside.
    My reasons are as follows.

19. Firstly, the judge rejected the appellant's account of events primarily
    on the basis that they were uncorroborated. At [32], the  judge  states
    that "other than the say so of  the  appellant  himself,  there  is  no
    evidence to show that his parents and sister are deceased or  that  his
    father had any role at all within or for the Afghanistan army." Also at
    [37] he comments on the absence of supporting documentary evidence.  It
    is trite law  that  the  appellant's  oral  and  written  testimony  is
    evidence and that  there  is  no  requirement  for  an  account  to  be
    corroborated.

20. Secondly, the judge resorted to  speculation  at  [38]  by  contending,
    without evidence, that the appellant had "probably been sent to the  UK
    as a matter of choice." Given that the respondent raised no  section  8
    matters and afforded the  appellant  the  benefit  of  the  doubt,  the
    judge's  approach  to  the  appellant's  credibility,  which  made   no
    allowance for age, was erroneous.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Lucas.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 20 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
