
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/08415/2018
                                                               PA/14028/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 September 2019                  |On 16 September 2019                 |
|Prepared 4 September 2019            |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                          mr A B (First Appellant)
                          mr Y b (Second Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss S Sanders, counsel instructed by The Manuel
Bravo Project
For the Respondent:    Mr N Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants, nationals of Morocco, dates of  birth  respectively  11
    August 1985  and  1  April  1988,  appealed  against  the  Respondent's
    decision dated 1 April 2018 to refuse their protection  claims.   Their
    appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge A K Hussain  (the  Judge)
    who, on  29  March  2019,  dismissed  their  appeals  on  all  grounds.
    Permission to appeal was given by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on  14
    June 2019.

2.   The Upper Tribunal Judge, whilst expressing in the decision  permission
    to appeal was granted, plainly set out her  view  that  of  the  appeal
    grounds, Ground 1 did not disclose a discrete arguable  error  of  law,
    but rather was a disagreement with the findings and an attempt  to  re-
    argue the case, but it was accepted that Ground 2 was arguable  in  the
    sense that the judge had not considered the documentary evidence in the
    round.  Miss Sanders argues by reference to the  case  of  Safi  &  Ors
    [2018] UKUT 388 that the Upper Tribunal Judge had failed to  limit,  if
    intended, the Grounds that  could  be  argued  and  then  give  further
    reasons or repeat the same matter again in the reasons section  of  the
    permission.  Whether there was force in that argument, it seemed to  me
    Safi, and indeed the case of Ferer  are  to  some  extent  demonstrably
    distinguishable, matters not because  the  case  was  presented  as  if
    permission had been generally given  at  large.  I  therefore,  on  the
    unopposed basis that  that  was  put,  have  considered  these  grounds
    generally as invited to by Miss Sander.

3.   It was sufficient to say that the Judge makes very considerable use  of
    the expression that 'for reasons  that  have  already  been  given'  he
    reached certain adverse credibility  findings  or  conclusions  on  the
    claim.  The Judge also never clearly, I find, particularised what those
    reasons were that he was tangentially referring to from time to time in
    the decision.  It also seemed to me that the Judge had  fairly,  freely
    used the expression that 'matters made no sense' to the Judge  when  it
    is less than clear why they did make no sense when there was an absence
    of  sufficiently  particularised  reasons.   Unhappily  various   other
    expressions are used to identify the fact that the  Judge  plainly  did
    not accept the evidence of the First Appellant. It was less than  clear
    to what extent he was rejecting the evidence of the  Second  Appellant.
    It therefore was somewhat infelicitous for the Judge to refer to  parts
    of the claim as being 'slightly comical' and not credible when this was
    plainly an important matter to the Appellants.  Similarly, although  it
    seemed to me the Judge was not  evidently  to  be  criticised,  he  was
    presented with documents which whilst it seemed to  him  face  to  show
    contradictions may not have been discrepant.

4.   It may well be that on a  further  consideration  of  this  matter  the
    documents referred to at D37, D38 are not inconsistent, but  I  express
    no view upon that, but there was sufficient doubt raised by  the  issue
    to again give rise to a concern about the sufficiency of the reasons or
    their adequacy as given by the Judge.  The documents were at the  heart
    of the protection claim. Plainly there were matters, for example,  with
    reference to Section 8 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 which may have some merit, but they  are  but
    one factor. Rather the impression given by the  language  used  by  the
    Judge having concluded,  was  that  because  he  did  not  believe  the
    Appellants, he then dismissed documentary evidence adduced  to  support
    their claim as to aspects of the events that were involved.

5.   It seemed to me therefore that this was  a  case  where,  even  if  one
    could try and ascertain exactly what adverse findings were  being  made
    on different aspects of the claim, it would be inappropriate to  cherry
    pick within this decision which lacks the adequacy and clarity that was
    required.  Accordingly, I conclude  the  Original  Tribunal's  decision
    discloses  material  errors  of  law  in  terms  of  the  adequacy  and
    sufficiency of reasoning and therefore the Original Tribunal's decision
    cannot stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

6.   The Original Tribunal's decision does not stand.  The matter is  to  be
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade in accordance with the
    law.

DIRECTIONS

(1)  List for hearing not before Judge A K Hussain nor before Judge Pooler.

(2)  Time estimate - three hours.

(3)  African Arabic interpreter required.

(4)  Appellants and Respondent's bundles to  be  provided  for  the  further
    hearing.

(5)  Any skeleton arguments and case law relied upon to be notified  to  the
    parties and the IAC  First-tier  Tribunal  not  later  than  ten  clear
    working days before the further hearing.

(6)  Any further directions sought to be made in writing to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

(7)  List for hearing in Bradford.

ANONYMITY

An anonymity order is made.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 11 September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

