
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08743/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2019                  |On 13 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity should have been granted at an earlier stage  of  the  proceedings
because the case involves protection issues. I find that it  is  appropriate
to continue the  order.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise, the respondent (SH) is granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.



Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms A. Harvey instructed by Cranbrook Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity, I shall continue to refer to  the  parties
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal  although  technically  the
    Secretary of State is the appellant in  the  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

2.    The appellant (SH) appealed the respondent's (SSHD) decision dated  29
    June 2018 to refuse a protection and human rights claim.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert ("the judge") allowed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 03 September 2018.

4.    The Secretary of State appeals the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
    the ground of procedural unfairness. The Secretary of State relied on a
    quote from a post-hearing note by the Home Office  Presenting  Officer,
    which alleged that the judge made comments and asked  questions  during
    the hearing which indicated that he was bias against  the  respondent's
    case. He did not allow questioning as  to  how  one  of  the  witnesses
    obtained his status in the UK. The Presenting Officer asserted that the
    judge's  conduct  "lacked  impartiality,  professionalism  and  started
    commenting and laughing with the Applnt counsel". The respondent relied
    on the decision in Sivapatham (Appearance of Bias) [2017] UKUT 00293.

Decision and reasons

5.          Having considered the ground of appeal and submissions  made  by
    both parties I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  decision  did
    not involve the making of an error on a point of law.

6.          The burden is on the Secretary of State to  show  that  a  fair-
    minded observer, having considered  the  facts,  would  concluded  that
    there was a real possibility that the tribunal was bias: see  Porter  v
    Magill [2001] UKHL 67.

7.    Apart from the section quoted in  the  grounds  there  is  no  witness
    statement from the Presenting Officer who was present at  the  hearing.
    No copy of the original note  has  been  produced.  The  only  evidence
    before the Tribunal is a summary of her file note in the  text  of  the
    grounds of appeal.

8.    In contrast, the appellant  has  produced  a  witness  statement  from
    counsel who attended the hearing and  a  copy  of  his  contemporaneous
    notes and a witness statement  from  the  solicitor  who  attended  the
    hearing and a copy of his attendance note. The judge has also  produced
    a note in response to the allegations. The picture  provided  by  those
    witnesses does not support  the  allegations  made  about  the  judge's
    conduct.

9.     The  evidence  is  consistent  in  stating  that  the  judge  limited
    questioning on one  particular  area,  but  the  circumstances  do  not
    indicate that this was done unfairly. A judge is  entitled  to  control
    the evidence and the  questioning  if  he  considers  that  it  is  not
    material to the issues that need to be determined in the appeal. It was
    within a range of reasonable responses for the judge to  find  that  it
    was not necessary to question the  supporting  witness  about  his  own
    immigration history and how he came to be granted leave to remain.

10.   Clearly the Presenting Officer was not happy when  the  judge  stopped
    her from pursuing a line of questioning that she thought was  relevant,
    but in the absence of anything more, and in  light  of  the  dearth  of
    evidence from the Presenting  Officer  herself,  any  tensions  at  the
    hearing between the Presenting Officer and the judge are  not  elevated
    to a potential error of  law.  There  is  no  challenge  to  the  other
    findings made by the judge, which were open  to  him  to  make  on  the
    evidence.

11.   I conclude that the weight of the evidence does not show that a  fair-
    minded observer, having considered all the facts, would  conclude  that
    there was a real possibility that the Tribunal was bias.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  of
law

Signed   [pic]   Date 09 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








