
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/08241/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12th June 2017                         |On 20th June 2017                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               GEORGINA GOMEZ
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Harding, instructed by J McCarthy Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.
     The Appellant is a citizen of Gambia born on 19th November 1984.   Her
    appeal against a deportation order was allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Herbert OBE,  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  Article  8
    grounds, on 9th March 2017.

2.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department appealed on  the  ground
    that the judge only considered the circumstances  if  the  family  unit
    were returned to Gambia.  The judge failed  to  consider  the  position
    where the Appellant's son and his stepfather remained in the UK and the
    Appellant was deported. Secondly, the judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for finding there  were  very  compelling  circumstances  which
    meant that the Appellant's son could not  return  to  the  Gambia.  The
    Appellant's son was at school in Gambia until 2014 when he came to  the
    UK. There was also evidence that  the  Appellant  had  extended  family
    members there. The very compelling  circumstances  were  summarised  at
    paragraph 110 but again only refer to the family returning to Gambia as
    a family unit rather than the Appellant being deported on her own.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Landes
    on 13th April 2017 on the grounds that it was arguable that  the  judge
    failed to consider whether it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant's
    husband and son to remain in the UK without the  Appellant.  The  judge
    found that they would in fact return to the Gambia with the  Appellant,
    but as that would be a matter of  choice  for  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband (as the Appellant's son was a British citizen and  her  husband
    had extant leave to remain) it was still arguably relevant and material
    for the purposes of Article 8 to consider the position if they were  to
    remain in the UK.


Submissions

4.   Mr Duffy submitted that there was no challenge to the  judge's  finding
    in relation to his  consideration  of  the  family  unit  returning  to
    Gambia. However, the judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  Appellant's
    return without her husband and son and, had he done so, he  could  have
    come to a different conclusion. The judge was obliged to consider  this
    separation  under  the  Immigration  Rules   and   following   relevant
    authorities.  The Appellant's son would not be compelled to  leave  the
    UK because he could live with his stepfather, who had leave until  next
    year, and the relevant factors were those existing at the date  of  the
    hearing. Further, the Appellant's husband was  likely  to  be  able  to
    remain in the UK since he had no history of criminal offending  and  he
    was the carer of a British citizen child.   Accordingly,  his  position
    could not be said to be precarious.

5.   In relation to ground 2, the judge failed to give adequate reasons  for
    what amounted to very compelling circumstances. The Appellant's son had
    lived in the Gambia until 2014  as  had  the  Appellant.  She  was  the
    daughter of the attorney general and the family could  be  said  to  be
    well-off. The judge's comment at paragraph 87 was unreasoned. The judge
    stated:
         "I find that there is therefore a significant ongoing risk  to  the
         Appellant's father and by definition to herself and her  family  if
         not from the state itself, which is less likely, and from non-state
         agents who would clearly  be  aggrieved  at  the  role  her  father
         played."


6.   Mr Duffy submitted that, had the judge concluded  the  Appellant  would
    be at risk on return, he should  have  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
    Refugee Convention or on humanitarian protection grounds. He failed  to
    do so. The decision should be set aside and remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

7.   Mr Harding submitted that the judge was not  obliged  to  look  at  the
    separation of the family unit because, on the evidence before him, that
    situation would never arise.  The evidence of  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband had been accepted: If the Appellant was deported,  her  husband
    and son would return with her to the Gambia and they would remain as  a
    family unit. The judge did not have to  look  at  the  consequences  of
    separation because the judge found as a fact that  there  would  be  no
    separation. The Appellant is able to take her British citizen son  back
    to the Gambia and her husband said he would return with her.  That  was
    the factual situation which the judge had to address. If the judge  had
    gone on to speculate as to the consequences of separation,  then  there
    would have been a ground of appeal on that basis.

8.   In any event, any error  by  the  judge  in  failing  to  consider  the
    separation of the family unit was not material because the  family  had
    made a strong declaration that they would remain together. The  concept
    of separation was not so significant that the judge had  to  deal  with
    it, but had he done so he would  have  found  that  separation  of  the
    family unit would be unduly harsh on the particular facts of this case.

9.   Mr Harding submitted that the judge had given adequate reasons for  his
    conclusions.  It was quite clear to the Respondent why she had lost the
    appeal. Reading the decision as a whole, it was thorough and the  judge
    looked in detail at the impact  that  deportation  would  have  on  the
    family unit from paragraph 75 onwards. It  was  clear  what  the  judge
    considered to be very compelling circumstances and he  summarised  them
    at paragraph 110.

10.  Mr Harding represented the Appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and the judge had indicated that her Article 3 protection claim was not
    a strong one and was unlikely to succeed. However, any risk  on  return
    to Gambia was relevant to the judge's assessment of whether it would be
    unduly harsh for  the  family  unit  to  return.   It  was  a  relevant
    consideration, but not a considerable one.

11.  The Appellant's father was  the  former  attorney  general.  The  judge
    considered all relevant factors and had an  evidential  basis  for  the
    finding that he made at paragraph 87. This  finding  was  open  to  the
    judge on the facts, which he had accepted and relied upon. This factual
    situation was also accepted by the Respondent in  her  refusal  letter.
    There was no requirement for the judge to give any further reasons than
    he did at  paragraph  87,  but  in  any  event  this  did  not  form  a
    considerable part of the judge's decision in relation  to  deportation.
    The judge quite properly focused on the consequences to the Appellant's
    son and the circumstances of the Appellant herself.
12.  Mr Harding submitted that this was one of the rare  cases  where  there
    were indeed very compelling circumstances over and above those  in  the
    Immigration Rules.   There  was  no  error  in  the  decision  and  the
    Respondent's appeal should be dismissed.


Discussion and Conclusion

13.  The Appellant was sentenced to five years' imprisonment. Paragraph  399
    of the Immigration Rules did not apply.  The  judge  properly  directed
    himself following Greenwood (No 2) (paragraph  398  considered)  [2015]
    UKUT 00629 and concluded that there were very compelling  circumstances
    over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A. There was no
    error of law in the judge's failure to make a  finding  on  whether  it
    would be unduly harsh for the Appellant to return to the Gambia and for
    her son and his stepfather to remain in the UK.

14.  The judge applied section 117C  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. Exception 2 applies where a foreign criminal, C, has a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner or  child
    and the effect of C's deportation would  be  unduly  harsh.  The  judge
    applied the correct test of  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above Exception 2. It was clear from the evidence, which  was  accepted
    by the judge, that the Appellant, her husband and her son  intended  to
    remain as a family unit in the event that she was deported.

15.  The judge gave adequate reasons for why he found that  they  were  very
    compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in   the
    Immigration Rules and he summarised those at paragraph 110:


         "(a) The damage that is likely to  be  caused  to  the  Appellant's
             son's welfare.


         (b)  The fact that the Appellant herself and  her  son  and  family
             face some risk upon  return  to  the  Gambia  because  of  her
             father's key role in supporting the  former  President  Jammeh
             who had a notorious reputation for  human  rights  abuses  and
             corruption.


         (c)  The fact that according to  Gambian  culture  the  family  are
             likely to face being ostracised which would have a significant
             impact notwithstanding the formally very privileged  political
             circle that the Appellant's family was able to move  in  under
             the former president.


         (d)  The fact that the  risk  to  the  Appellant  herself  and  her
             husband in that the association with their father  had  placed
             the whole family at risk of reprisals from  non-state  agents.
             Whilst that risk does not equate  to  a  sufficiently  serious
             risk to impact to engage the Refugee Convention or the ECHR it
             is nevertheless a significant factor that would  affect  their
             wellbeing and therefore that of her son."

16.  The judge expressed exactly why he  found  these  reasons  to  be  very
    compelling  in  paragraphs  75  to  108.  The  judge  focused  on   the
    Appellant's conduct and the effect of her deportation on  her  son.  He
    took into account all relevant factors and he gave a reason for why  he
    did not allow the appeal under the Refugee Convention.

17.  In any event,  the  judge's  failure  to  address  separation  was  not
    material to the decision. The Appellant's husband had limited leave  to
    remain in the UK. He was not the biological father of  the  Appellant's
    son. The judge found that the Appellant  had  a  very  close  and  deep
    relationship with her son and he would face the most disruption  should
    the Appellant  be  deported  [77].  The  judge  found  that  there  was
    overwhelming  evidence  before  him  of  the  detrimental  effect   the
    Appellant's imprisonment had on her son [78]. On the facts found by the
    judge, it would be unduly harsh to separate the Appellant and her  son.



18.  For these reasons I find that there was no material  error  of  law  in
    the judge's decision and he gave adequate reasons for his findings. The
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed. The decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dated 9th March 2017 shall stand.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction made.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 16th June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


