
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08269/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 April 2019                              |On 13 June 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  AMINA [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Parker, Rhodes Hickmotts,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 13 March 2019, I found that the First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set  aside.
    My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant was born on 1 July 1948 and is a female  citizen
         of Iraq. She claimed asylum on arrival in  the  United  Kingdom  in
         February 2017. By a decision dated 11 August 2017, the Secretary of
         State refused the appellant international protection. She  appealed
         to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision  promulgated  on  7
         September 2018, dismissed the appeal. The  appellant  now  appeals,
         with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   There are three grounds of appeal. I  shall  deal  first  with
         those grounds which I consider do not have merit. The appellant had
         claimed that she fears returning to Iraq as a result of an incident
         with a man known as Yassin. Details of that incident are  contained
         in the decision at [56]. The judge did not believe  the  appellant.
         In part, the judge reached that conclusion  because  the  appellant
         had failed in her screening interview  to  make  reference  to  the
         incident or to Yassin at all. Instead, the  appellant  had  claimed
         that the reason she had left Iraq was 'fear of IS  militants.'  She
         also said that she had nothing left for her in Iraq  and  that  her
         only son was living in the United Kingdom. When questioned  at  the
         hearing about this omission the appellant had  said  that  she  was
         'tired and had forgotten everything.' The grounds assert  that  the
         appellant had at the screening interview advanced her  remain  fear
         of living in Iraq, namely a fear of IS. The grounds assert that the
         screening interviews very often do not contain a full and  detailed
         account of past events or an applicant's  claim.  Having  read  the
         decision and the screening interview very carefully, I find that it
         was open to the  judge  to  reject  the  appellant's  claim  of  an
         incident with Yassin for the very reason she gives at [56]. She was
         entitled to draw an adverse  inference  from  the  failure  of  the
         appellant to mention what subsequently became her main  reason  for
         seeking asylum in the Upper Tribunal, namely her fear of Yassin.

         3.   Secondly, the grounds assert that the  judge  failed  to  take
         into account material factors. Judge found that section  8  of  the
         2004 Act applied because the appellant had travelled  on  a  forged
         passport which was produced to the Home Office  is  if  it  were  a
         valid passport. The  grounds  do  no  more  than  assert  that  the
         appellant had not claimed to be of another nationality or  identity
         even though she had used a forged passport. I cannot see  how  that
         fact  should  have  prevented  the  appellant  falling  within  the
         provisions of section 8. Moreover, there is not, despite  what  the
         grounds may assert, any 'double  counting'  by  the  judge  of  the
         section 8 considerations.  The  judge  refers  to  the  appellant's
         conduct and to section 8 at [55] and  again  at  [61];  the  second
         reference is no more than a reiteration of her previous comments.

         4.   Where the judge has fallen into error is in her application  a
         country guidance. The appellant decided to depart from the existing
         country guidance of AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944. She relied  upon
         a Country Policy and Information Note (CPIN) provided to her by the
         presenting officer which indicated that the appellant's  home  area
         of Diyala is no longer in the control of IS. Accordingly,  she  did
         not apply  AA  nor  did  she  consider  the  question  of  internal
         relocation.

         5.   The judge's analysis is problematic. She was  aware  that,  in
         order to depart from country  guidance,  there  had  to  be  strong
         evidence of  a  well-established  and  durable  change  in  country
         circumstances.  The  appellant  submits  that  a  CPIN   does   not
         constitute evidence and is nothing more than a policy statement  by
         the Secretary of State. Mr Howells, who appeared the  Secretary  of
         State at the Upper Tribunal, told us that CPINs  are  different  in
         nature now than at the time the Upper Tribunal considered CPINs  in
         MD (Ivory Coast) [2010] UKUT 215 (IAC) in  that  they  consist  not
         only of a policy statement and guidance but also comprise a section
         containing country material.  Mr  Holmes,  who  appeared  from  the
         appellant,  accepted  that  that  may  be  the  case.  However,  he
         submitted that reasons given for the judge for departing  from  the
         country guidance of AA remained  inadequate.  I  agree.  The  judge
         wrote that, 'there has not been  any  evidence  put  before  be  to
         suggest that ISIS are  in  control  of  the  area  or  indeed  have
         attempted to rotate control [of  Diyala]  and  country  information
         indicates that the areas under the control of Preshmerga and  Iraqi
         forces.' I agree with Mr Holmes  that,  put  that  way,  the  judge
         appears to have reversed the burden of proof. Moreover,  the  judge
         gives no support for her subsequent  finding  that  the  change  in
         circumstances in the area is 'durable'. The analysis as a whole  is
         inadequate.

         6.   I set aside the decision. The judge's findings in  respect  of
         the appellant's claimed fear of ill-treatment at the hands of IS or
         others specifically targeted at  her  are  preserved.  The  judge's
         findings in respect of risk on return to the appellant's home  area
         are  set  aside.  The  Upper  Tribunal  will  remake  the  decision
         following a resumed hearing at Bradford on a date to be fixed. Both
         parties may  introduce  fresh  evidence  provided  copies  of  such
         evidence are sent to the tribunal and served on the other party  no
         less than 10 days prior to the resumed hearing. The Upper  Tribunal
         will consider whether it is safe for the appellant returned to  her
         home area of Iraq as at the date of the resumed hearing  and  will,
         in addition, consider the question of  internal  flight.  No  other
         aspect of her appeal shall be revisited.

         Notice of Decision

         7.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 7 September 2018 is set-aside. The findings  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal to which I refer at [6] are preserved. The Upper  Tribunal
         shall remake the decision at or  following  a  resumed  hearing  at
         Bradford on a date to be fixed (Before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lane:
         Kurdish Sorani interpreter: 2 hours allowed)."

 2. The resumed hearing on 30 April 2019 preceded  by  way  of  submissions
    only.

 3.  Mr  Holmes,  who  appeared  to  the  appellant,  submitted  that   the
    appellant's home area of Iraq, Diyala, remains  unsafe  because  it  is
    still a 'contested area.' In the light of what I said in  my  error  of
    law decision at [5] and given  also  the  material  before  me  at  the
    resumed hearing, I agree. I find the appellant would be exposed  to  an
    Article 15(c) risk if she returned to her home  area.  In  addition,  I
    agree with Mr Holmes that any removal of the appellant from the  United
    Kingdom will be to Baghdad. If she is following arrival in  Baghdad  to
    return to her home area, she would have to arrange to  travel  from  to
    Diyala Province. She would be doing so as a 71-year-old lone woman with
    some mobility problems. Neither party contests  the  appellant's  claim
    that her only family members are not in Baghdad but in Diyala Province.
    It is not clear that such family members would be willing  or,  indeed,
    able to travel to Baghdad in order to meet  the  appellant  on  arrival
    there. Mr Holmes also submitted that the appellant would have  problems
    without the necessary documentation (viz. a CSID). The appellant is  of
    Arab ethnicity and she is not a Kurd. Notwithstanding  that  fact,  she
    would  have  no  prospect  of  employment  at  her  age   nor   obvious
    entitlement, without a CSID, to accommodation or health care  services.
    Mr Holmes submitted that the appellant would be exposed  to  real  risk
    upon arrival in Baghdad where  she  would  be  faced  with  a  possibly
    insuperable  problem  of  caring  for  herself  and,   without   family
    assistance there, accommodating and feeding herself in the longer term.

 4. I agree with Mr Holmes. Notwithstanding the fact that the appellant  is
    an Arab, she is not young, male or capable of subsisting in Baghdad for
    any period of time without a CSID or any obvious prospect of  obtaining
    one. Given her particular circumstances, I find on  the  evidence  that
    she is entitled to humanitarian protection.

Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds. The  appeal  is  allowed  on
    humanitarian protection grounds


Signed                              Date 2 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




































