

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08363/2018 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at George House, Edinburgh              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|by Skype for Business                         |On 31 December 2020              |
|on 16 December 2020                           |                                 |
|                                              |                                 |


                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               SARASWATHY [S]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Jain, Neil &
Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on  4  March  1943.   She
    entered the UK on false documents in 2010 and  made  an  asylum  claim,
    which was refused.  Appeal proceedings (reference  AA/09885/2010)  were
    exhausted in 2011.

 2. The appellant made further submissions to the respondent on grounds  of
    her medical condition and of her family life  with  her  daughter,  her
    daughter's husband, and their children.  By a  decision  dated  5  June
    2018, the respondent found that she had no right to remain in the UK.

 3. FtT Judge Montgomery refused  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 12 February 2019.

 4. The FtT and  the  UT  refused  permission  to  appeal.   The  appellant
    petitioned the Court of Session.  Parties entered into a joint minute:

      [1]  The decision of the FtT ... arguably erred in its approach to the
      [appellant's] case under article 8 ... by arguably  focusing  only  on
      the question of functional impairment as opposed to dependency in  the
      broader Kugathas sense in order to determine whether there was  family
      life between the [appellant] and her relatives;

      [2] The decision of the UT [refusing permission] amounted to an  error
      of law.  The UT did not identify that there was an arguable ground ...
      The UT appeared to conflate the  cases  under  articles  3  and  8  in
      refusing permission [and] ... did not demonstrate anxious scrutiny  in
      considering whether the FtT erred ... in respect of ... article 8...

      [4] It is ... not necessary ... for the Court to  consider  the  other
      issues raised ... parties reserve their respective positions  [without
      concessions] ...

 5. On 10 March 2020 the Vice President of the UT  granted  permission,  in
    light of the Court's interlocutor and the joint minute.

 6. On 23 September 2020 the  appellant  filed  a  response  to  directions
    issued by the UT, and sought a remote hearing.

 7. On 7 October 2020 the SSHD filed a  response,  also  seeking  a  remote
    hearing.

 8.  I  conducted  the  hearing  on  16   December   from   George   House.
    Representatives attended remotely.  The technology enabled an effective
    hearing.

 9. At [7] of her response the SSHD accepts that there is error (not merely
    arguable error) in relation to the assessment of the  article  8  claim
    only.

10. Parties agreed that the case fell to be  remitted  to  the  FtT  for  a
    hearing  which  would  focus  firstly  on  the  question  whether   the
    relationships of the appellant in the UK constitute family life  within
    the scope of article 8.

11. The leading cases on article 8 do not include an example of a breach on
    medical grounds only, but  they  have  not  closed  the  door  on  that
    possibility.  The most relevant passage is perhaps in  MM  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 279 from [16] - [24], where Moses LJ said:
      The only cases I can foresee where the  absence  of  adequate  medical
      treatment in the country to which a person is to be deported  will  be
      relevant to Article 8, is where it  is  an  additional  factor  to  be
      weighed in the balance, with other factors which by themselves  engage
      Article 8. Suppose, in this case, the appellant had  established  firm
      family ties in this  country,  then  the  availability  of  continuing
      medical treatment here, coupled with his dependence on the family here
      for support, together establish 'private life' under Article  8.  That
      conclusion would not involve a comparison between  medical  facilities
      here and those in Zimbabwe.  Such  a  finding  would  not  offend  the
      principle  expressed  above  that  the  United  Kingdom  is  under  no
      Convention obligation to provide medical treatment here when it is not
      available in the country to which the appellant is to be deported.

12. It appears to be open to the appellant, if she establishes family life,
    to rely on her medical condition as a factor in the proportionality  of
    her  removal.  The  target  remains  a  high  one,  but  there   is   a
    differentiation from a case which turns on article 3 only.

13. The SSHD's submission at [8] - [17] argues that the FtT's conclusion on
    article 3 does not err.  However, having heard from representatives,  I
    decided that it would be narrow and  artificial  to  restrict  the  re-
    hearing, which is likely to be on updated evidence, to article 8.

14. The decision of the FtT is set aside and stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.  The case is  remitted  for  an  entirely
    fresh hearing, not before Judge Montgomery.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]
      17 December 2020
      UT Judge Macleman

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




