
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08619/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                            |On 6 December 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  rekar [r]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Khan, Fountains Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   In a decision sent on 20 November 2017 Judge  Juss  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of the  appellant,  a  national  of
    Iran, against the decision made by the respondent  on  23  August  2017
    refusing his protection claim.

2.   My decision on the  appellant's  grounds  can  be  brief  because  both
    parties were in agreement with me that the judge  materially  erred  in
    law.  It is abundantly clear from the evidence before  the  judge  (see
    e.g. answers to questions 29, 33, 80,  83,  85  and  93  of  the  first
    interview and answers  to  questions  26,  29  and  32  of  the  second
    interview) that the appellant's case had two limbs: a  claim  based  on
    his political  activities  in  Iran  and  his  father's  profile  as  a
    Peshmerga; and a sur  place  claim.   Yet  the  judge's  assessment  is
    confined solely to  the  appellant's  sur  place  claim.   As  such  it
    represents a failure to take account  of  material  particulars  and  a
    failure to make findings on material parts of  the  appellant's  asylum
    claim.  This constitutes a material error of law and causes me  to  set
    aside the judge's decision and remit it to be heard de novo by  another
    FtT Judge.

3.   To conclude:

     The decision is set aside for material error of law.

     The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Juss).

     No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 1 December 2018
                 [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




