
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08564/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 May 2019                     |On 10 June 2019                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                  DAVID [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Worthington, of Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVetty, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Davies promulgated on  5  March  2019,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 27 August 1966 and is a national  of  Cameroon.
The appellant entered the UK in 2005. In 2011 the appellant claimed  asylum.
The respondent refused his claim and the  appellant  appealed  against  that
refusal. His appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on 9  September
2014, and his appeal rights were exhausted  early  in  2015.  The  appellant
submitted further submissions on 6 September 2016 and again on  26  February
2018. On 26 June  2018  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Davies ("the Judge") dismissed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  1  April  2019  Judge  Loke
granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "Given that the Judge found at [49-51] that the judgement was  genuine,
    it follows that the appellant was convicted of subversion.  That  being
    the case it is arguable the Judge ought  to  have  considered  risk  of
    return in that context."

The Hearing

5. As soon as Mr  Worthington  moved  the  grounds  of  appeal,  Mr  McVetty
conceded that the decision contains a material error of law. He agreed  that
there is a tension between [51] and  [52]  of  the  decision  which  is  not
reconciled. He told me that the Judge finds that an extract conviction is  a
genuine document and accepts the expert report prepared by Justice M T  Itoe
dated 17 December 2018. On joint motion, parties' agents  asked  me  to  set
the decision aside and remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
further fact-finding.

Analysis

6. Between [49] and [51] of the decision  the  Judge  accepts  the  evidence
provided in an expert report prepared by Justice M T Itoe dated 17  December
2018. In his report Justice Itoe recounts taking a copy of a  document  said
to be an extract conviction to  the  court  from  which  it  was  issued  in
Cameroon, speaking to the  court  president  and  then  checking  the  court
records. Having carried out his own investigations, Justice Itoe says that

    "Judgement No 759 delivered on 7 February 2003 by the  Court  of  First
    Instance Douala is genuine, authentic and regularly issued."

7. At [51] the Judge finds that the copy extract conviction relied on  is  a
genuine document. At [52] the Judge considers the contents of  the  document
& finds that the appellant fails to prove the contents of the document.  The
Judge does not take guidance from Tanveer Ahmed (Starred) 2002 UKIAT  00439.
The Judge's findings are contradictory. It is not possible to reconcile  the
Judge's wholesale acceptance of the evidence  contained  in  Justice  Itoe's
report with the Judge's rejection of the contents  of  the  document  (which
the Judge finds is genuine and authentic and regularly issued).

8. The result is that the decision contains a material  error  of  law.  The
Judge makes contradictory findings. The Judge makes  a  clear  finding  that
the appellant has been convicted of subversion. That clear  finding  is  not
factored into the assessment of risk on return. The Judge does not  consider
what will happen to the appellant if he returns  to  Cameroon  to  face  the
penalty for his conviction.

9. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT  00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

10.   I consider whether or not I can substitute my own decision.  There  is
an inadequacy of fact finding in the  First-tier's  decision.  I  find  that
none of the First-tier Judge's findings of  fact  can  be  preserved.  I  am
asked to remit this case the First-tier Tribunal. The material error of  law
in the  decision  relates  to  an  inadequacy  of  fact  finding.  I  cannot
substitute my own decision. A further fact-finding exercise is necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

11. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or




    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


12. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

13. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Manchester  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Davies.



Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

15. I set aside the Judge's  decision  promulgated  on  5  March  2019.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.





Signed
              Date 3 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle




