






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/08361/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12th December 2017                 |On 22nd December 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                                     PK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Popal Counsel instructed by Longfellow solicitors
For the Respondent :   Ms Ahmad Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant is a citizen of India.

 2. These proceedings concern and involve the status and rights of a child.
    The appellant is a mother of the child and the child is to  be  treated
    as a dependant of the appellant. In the  circumstances  I  consider  it
    appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R Chowdhury promulgated on 7th  June  2017  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department. The Secretary of State  had
    refused  the  appellant  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  or   relief
    otherwise on the grounds of Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

 4. By a decision of 28th September  2017  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McCarthy granted permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Thus the case appeared before me to decide whether there was  an  error
    of law in the original decision. In granting leave Judge  McCarthy  had
    ruled that the decision in respect of the appellant's protection  claim
    contained no arguable error of law. Leave was limited to  consideration
    of the Article 8 rights of the appellant and her child. Judge  McCarthy
    indicated  that  it  was  arguable  that  there  had  been  no   proper
    consideration of the best interests of the child.

    Immigration History/Factual background

 5. Originally the appellant had entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  11
    February 2011 as a student with a visa valid until 27th November  2012.
    After an in-time application the appellant's leave  was  extended  with
    leave valid until 25th August 2014.

 6. Allegedly within 3 days of entering the UK in 2011 the appellant met IS
    and the parties married on the 10th April  2011,  that  is  within  two
    months of entry and meeting.

 7. On 17 April 2014 the educational establishment, at which the  appellant
    was studying, had its licence revoked. Subsequent to that on 22  August
    2014 the appellant's leave was curtailed.

 8. On the 22nd August 2014 the appellant had applied for further leave  as
    a student. That application was refused  on  30  October  2014  as  the
    appellant could not meet the maintenance requirements.  On  4  November
    2014 the appellant lodged an appeal.

 9. On 12 June 2015 the appellant gave birth to her daughter.

10. On 26 June 2015 the appellant made an application for leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom under Article 8  with  IS  and  her  daughter  as
    dependants. That application was rejected  as  void  as  there  was  an
    ongoing appeal against the refusal of the  previous  application  as  a
    student. [The case of DA (Section 3C - meaning and effect) Ghana [2007]
    UKAIT00043 is relevant in that it rules that only one  application  can
    be pursued whilst leave is extended by operation of 3C-see  also  3C(4)
    ].

11. On 9 November the appellant withdrew her appeal against the refusal  of
    her student application. At that stage her Section 3C leave would  have
    come to an end.

12. On 20 December 2015 the appellant's marriage broke down.

13. On 5 January 2016 the appellant attended at the Asylum  Screening  Unit
    in Croydon. On 1 February 2016 the appellant made a  claim  for  asylum
    with her daughter as a dependant. Following an interview the respondent
    had refused the appellant's application based upon asylum, humanitarian
    protection and Article 2 and 3 and also refused the appellant relief on
    the grounds of Article 8 by decision dated 28 July 2016. The  appellant
    appealed against that decision.

14. As  stated  the  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  R
    Chowdhury. Who dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

15. The appellant has sought to appeal against that decision.  In  granting
    leave the Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge found that  the  grounds
    set out with regard to asylum were not  made  out.  In  dismissing  the
    application on asylum Judge McCarthy indicated that  the  ground  asked
    the judge to give weight to mere speculation rather  than  acting  upon
    the evidence. In refusing the  application  on  the  protection  issues
    Judge McCarthy  was  satisfied  that  cogent  reasons  had  been  given
    justifying the finding that the appellant was not entitled to asylum.

16. However Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge  McCarthy  indicated  that
    there was an arguable case in respect of the Article 8  rights  of  the
    family in that it was arguable  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  take
    account of the best interests  of  the  child.  Accordingly  leave  was
    limited to Article 8.

    The hearing

17. The representative for the  appellant  sought  to  raise  a  number  of
    matters during the course of the hearing, which  issues  had  not  been
    raised before the First-tier Tribunal or in the application for leave.

18. The appellant's representative sought to argue that there had  been  an
    error because in paragraph 62 of the decision reference had  been  made
    to the appellant's status as being precarious and thereafter  unlawful.
    The representative claimed that the appellant had not  been  unlawfully
    in the UK. As is clear from the history set out  above,  the  appellant
    status was originally precarious but her status came to an end with the
    withdrawal of her appeal. At that point she had no leave to be  in  the
    United Kingdom  was  unlawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom.  However  no
    apparent difference has been identified arising out of the  distinction
    between precarious and unlawful.

19. The appellant's representative also sought to advance  an  argument  on
    the basis of the case of MK [2017] EWHC  1365.  It  was  sought  to  be
    argued that the daughter of the appellant was stateless and as such was
    entitled to British citizenship. If the child is a British  citizenship
    the submission was that the child could not be removed from the  United
    Kingdom.

20. In the first instance that was not a ground was argued before the First-
    tier Tribunal and was not a ground upon which permission  was  granted.
    It is difficult to criticise the judge for failing to take a point that
    had not been put before him to be determined.

21. No evidence had been submitted with regard to the status of the  child,
    whether the child had  been  registered  with  the  Indian  embassy  or
    otherwise. It was therefore not an issue that the judge needed to  make
    a ruling upon and he cannot be  criticised  where  the  issue  was  not
    raised and there was no evidence about it.

22. In any event the case of MK was related to whether or not  the  refusal
    of British citizenship to a child was lawful in the circumstances. That
    is not the case here. No application has ever been made for  the  child
    to be registered as a British citizen. The issue in the present case is
    whether or not it would be reasonable for the child to be  returned  to
    India and what the best interests of the child  were.  The  appellant's
    representative took issue that the conclusion by  the  judge  that  the
    child could be returned India was not made out because  the  child  was
    not a citizen of India. Without the evidence and the issue being raised
    the judge was not required to deal with the issue. It was not  for  the
    judge to guess whether the child had been registered  with  the  Indian
    Embassy.

23. The principal issue relates to the article 8 rights  of  the  appellant
    and the child and whether the judge has taken account of best interests
    of the child. I would note that the child was born in  June  2014.  The
    child is not a British citizen and has not been in the United Kingdom 7
    years. Given the age of the child the child has not started education.

24. Within the evidence submitted by the appellant the child is referred to
    on occasions. At paragraph 13 of the appellant's statement  she  refers
    to the fact that she asked her former husband to help  her  look  after
    the child and he became furious. In paragraph 16 she refers to the fact
    that she was seeking justice for herself and her child. In paragraph 17
    she refers to the fact that she had to be taken  to  hospital  and  her
    child went with her as a result of the beating she  had  received  from
    her ex-husband. She has referred to the fact in paragraph 19 that  they
    went to a refuge. However other than that there is  little  by  way  of
    reference to the needs of the child or the interests of the child.  The
    whole life of the child is centred around her mother.

25. In respect of the mother it was noted at paragraph 53 that she  enjoyed
    the support of her brother. Given the fact that  she  had  postgraduate
    qualifications from the United Kingdom the judge was satisfied that the
    mother would be in an advantageous economic position. In  paragraph  55
    the judge noted that the appellant and her daughter lived together.  As
    far as the evidence was concerned, the appellant and her daughter would
    be removed together. In the light of that and  given  the  age  of  the
    child and the child circumstances and the fact  that  they  would  have
    support from family in India it was clear that the  best  interests  of
    the child were to remain with the mother. In  the  light  of  that  the
    judge has made sufficient findings and has dealt with the child in line
    with the principle that it is important to maintain  the  integrity  of
    the family.

26. The best interests of the child are clearly to remain with the  mother.
    Whilst the judge has not specifically spelt that out, it is quite clear
    and evident that the judge was mindful of the age of the child the fact
    and that the whole life of the child was centred upon the parent. As it
    had  been  concluded  that  the  mother  had  no  basis  for  remaining
    consideration had to be given as to whether or not  the  other  factors
    which made it inappropriate to remove the child.

27. On the evidence submitted there were  no  factors  advanced  above  and
    beyond claims of the mother to protection which warranted allowing  the
    child to remain in the United Kingdom. There were  no  medical  reasons
    for the child not to return with the mother and  there  were  no  other
    reasons advanced why the child could not return with mother. It has  to
    be noted that since the separation of the mother from the  father,  the
    mother has had sole responsibility for the child.

28. In the circumstances whilst there is an obligation to consider the best
    interests of the child under section 55 given the circumstances present
    there was only one conclusion the best interests of the child  were  to
    remain in the care  of  the  mother.  In  the  circumstances  only  one
    conclusion was capable of being made on the facts  was  that  the  best
    interests of the child were to remain with the mother. Taking that into
    account I find that there is no material arguable error of law.

29. I find that there is no material error of law in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.







Notice of Decision


30. I dismiss the appeal.

31. I do make an anonymity direction


Signed





Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
      Date: 21st December 2017




Direction regarding anonymity

Under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant  or  any  member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
and to the Appellant. Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.
Signed





Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
        Date: 21st December 2017





