
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08773/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 February 2018                   |On 01st March 2019                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    S H M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sadiq, Adam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Iraq, born on 25.3.84.  He  arrived  in
the United Kingdom on 16.2.15 and claimed asylum. The basis of his claim  is
that he is a Sunni Kurd from Tuz Khurmatu, in the province of  Saladin.  His
family were supporters of the Pershmerga, as a result of  which  his  father
was killed by ISIS, who also put a bomb in his or  his  brother's  car.  The
Appellant  received  three  threatening  phone  calls  from  ISIS.  His  two
brothers fled and he too decided to leave Iraq for his safety.

2.    The Appellant's asylum application was refused  in  a  decision  dated
5.8.16, on the basis of his credibility due to major inconsistencies in  his
account and  because  of  his  immigration  history,  the  Appellant  having
travelled to the UK via the IKR, Turkey,  Greece,  Belgium  and  France.  He
appealed against this  decision  and  his  appeal  came  before  First  tier
Tribunal Judge Agnew for hearing on 17 March 2017.

3.    In a decision and reasons promulgated on  30  March  2017,  the  Judge
dismissed the appeal, finding that there were significant  discrepancies  in
his account and that the Appellant was neither plausible  nor  credible.  In
light of the fact that the Appellant's home province  of  Saladin  is  in  a
contested area the Judge found the Appellant could  return  to  Baghdad  and
internally relocate to Erbil.

4.    The Appellant sought and obtained permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on the issue of internal relocation only.

5.    In a decision and reasons promulgated  on  13  February  2018,  Deputy
Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell concluded that  the  Judge  had  made  material
errors of law in that she  failed  to  identify  the  relevant  test  to  be
applied ie whether it was reasonable to expect the Appellant  to  internally
relocate; gave inadequate assessment of the factors set out in  AA  (Article
15C) Iraq [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) and failed to make a clear findings as  to
how the Appellant would obtain his CSID; the likelihood of  him  being  able
to find employment in the IKR in light of the number of IDPs  there  and  as
to whether he has family or friends in the IKR. Thus the  decision  was  set
aside in respect of  internal  relocation  only,  all  other  findings  were
preserved.

6.    The appeal was adjourned for a resumed hearing and  was  then  subject
to a transfer order. It came before the Upper Tribunal for  remaking  on  26
November 2016 but unfortunately had to be adjourned due to the fact that  no
Kurdish Sorani interpreter had been booked.

Hearing

7.    At the resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal,  there  was,  again,
no appearance by a Kurdish  Sorani  interpreter.  Mr  McVeety  informed  the
Upper Tribunal that he would be content not to cross-examine  the  Appellant
but simply to make submissions. The interpreter subsequently  arrived,  late
and assisted by translating the submissions to the Appellant.

8.    Mr McVeety submitted that the negative credibility  findings  made  by
the First tier Tribunal Judge had been preserved by  Judge  Birrell  in  her
decision and reasons dated 13.2.18. Nothing  the  Appellant  said  had  been
believed. The previous Judge found at [40] and [42] that the  Appellant  had
a CSID card at his family home and did not accept  he  was  not  in  contact
with his family. The Judge also accepted that the Appellant was not  telling
the truth about his financial circumstances and his family, nor that he  had
as few skills as he claimed.

9.    Mr McVeety submitted that the Appellant does not  originate  from  the
IKR but is from  Tuz  Khurmatu,  which  is  in  a  contested  area  and  the
Respondent accepts that this gives rise to an article 15C risk. However,  he
could reasonably be expected to internally relocate to the IKR.

10.   Mr McVeety submitted that the Appellant's new witness  statement  must
be considered in light of his overall credibility. The Judge  found  he  was
still in contact with his  family  and  it  is  interesting  that  there  is
nothing from the Red Cross as to what the Appellant  may  or  may  not  have
said, despite the fact that this could have been extremely  easily  obtained
and the Red Cross could have produced more  to  support  what  he  said.  He
submitted that the Appellant has not produced anything that interferes  with
the Judge's finding that the Appellant is in touch with his family.

11.   Mr McVeety further accepted that there are flights between the UK  and
Baghdad, however, he submitted that,  given  that  the  Appellant  has  been
found to have a CSID at home in Iraq, he would fly to Baghdad  and  then  go
to the IKR. He would not be in Baghdad for any length of time and  could  go
straight to the IKR.

12.   Mr McVeety in reliance on the  CG  decision  in  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -
internal relocation) [2018]  UKUT  00212  (IAC)  at  [9]  of  the  headnote,
submitted that the Appellant has the ability  to  access  accommodation  and
that the AVR scheme would give him the ability  to  rent  in  the  IKR.  The
First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  also  found  the   Appellant   could   receive
remittances from his family and use these to assist  him  in  the  IKR.  The
Judge did not accept the Appellant's claim about his background,  therefore,
he cannot rely on the fact  he  said  he  was  unskilled  as  this  was  not
accepted by the Judge. He has family; he  could  rely  on  remittances  from
them and his CSID and thus the Appellant could internally  relocate  to  the
IKR.

13.   In his submissions in response, Mr Sadiq stated that the focus of  his
submissions must be to do with where his  client  comes  from,  which  is  a
particularly problematic area, even within what is known as contested  areas
and that this was accepted by the Respondent:  see  [16]  and  [17]  of  the
refusal letter. The level of disruption and ongoing trouble and violence  is
extreme and continues to this day. Mr  Sadiq  submitted  that  it  was  also
important to note and what is also clear from  the  evidence,  is  that  the
word genocide has been used in relation to  the  Kurdish  community  in  Tuz
Khurmatu. All the evidence  pointed  to  his  client's  family  having  been
displaced. The relevant objective evidence is that over 10,000 IDPs  are  in
refugee camps in Kurdistan. This highlights their position and  the  ongoing
risk to them. Even if the Appellant is in touch with his family,  this  does
not mean he can access their support or documentation or his CSID. Mr  Sadiq
submitted that, given the level of violence against Kurds in  Tuz  Khurmatu,
it is highly likely that his family will not be there now.

14.   Mr Sadiq sought to rely on the CG in AAH (op cit) at  1.(iii)  of  the
headnote, which provides:

    "iii)  Are there male family members who would be able and  willing  to
    attend the civil registry with P? Because the  registration  system  is
    patrilineal it will be relevant to consider  whether  the  relative  is
    from the mother or father's side. A maternal uncle in possession of his
    CSID would be  able  to  assist  in  locating  the  original  place  of
    registration of the individual's mother, and from there the trail would
    need to be followed to the place that her records were transferred upon
    marriage. It must also be borne in mind that a  significant  number  of
    IDPs in Iraq are themselves undocumented; if that is  the  case  it  is
    unlikely that they could be of  assistance.  A  woman  without  a  male
    relative to assist with the process of redocumentation would face  very
    significant obstacles in that officials may refuse  to  deal  with  her
    case at all."

15.   Whilst it may be the majority  of  IDPs  are  undocumented,  Mr  Sadiq
submitted  that  there  is  an  easy  jump  to  the  conclusion  that   CSID
documentation is accessible when there is a  good  deal  of  evidence  that,
even if one is inside Iraq, documentation is not at  all  easily  available.
Therefore, the Appellant's family cannot be of assistance. Mr  Sadiq  sought
to rely on background evidence set  out  in  the  Appellant's  supplementary
bundle at 19-22 and 46-48, where there is  reference  to  60%  of  IDPs  not
having access to their own CSID documentation.

16.   Mr Sadiq submitted that relocation to Kurdistan without the CSID  will
mean it is unreasonable to expect the Appellant to return and make  his  way
to Kurdistan. Even assuming there is  a  CSID  card  that  can  be  got,  he
submitted that there is still a significant question around  whether  it  is
reasonable to expect this man to make his way in Kurdistan.  Even  with  the
preserved negative findings, Mr Sadiq  submitted  that  it  would  still  be
unreasonable to expect the Appellant to be able to safely  relocate  to  the
IKR. If he has a CSID he would be able to enter the IKR and receive ARV  but
beyond that, despite the finding of  the  Tribunal  as  to  access  to  some
monies, there remain real  question  marks  over  whether  a  man  with  his
profile, single, with no children, would be able to access accommodation.

17.   In respect of [9] of AAH (Iraq) (op  cit)  he  submitted  that  it  is
unlikely the Appellant would be able  to  access  a  camp  and  that  it  is
likely, given his situation as a single man, that he would end  up  in  that
critical shelter. He only has  primary  education  [Q47  of  the  AIR].  The
examples of work he gave were basically low skilled and itinerant. Mr  Sadiq
submitted that it would not be at all easy for him in Kurdistan in terms  of
securing employment.

18.   He further submitted that, given the objective  evidence  in  relation
to Tuz Khurmatu and pages 92-112, which is the Amnesty International  report
of late 2017, it is particularly telling and it is  not  possible  for  this
court to conclude that Kurds are still in Tuz Khurmatu as they  have  become
IDPs. Mr Sadiq further sought to rely on the country  guidance  decision  in
AAH (op cit) as to an assessment of the  Appellant's  employment  prospects.
The Appellant is from an area that had a marked association with  ISIL,  who
controlled that area. He will not be able to get on and have a  stable  life
in Kurdistan. He has no connections in terms of family in the IKR.

19.   I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

Findings and reasons

20.   I turn first to the preserved findings of fact by First tier  Tribunal
Judge Agnew. Those which are material to my assessment are that:

    (i)    the Judge did not accept  that  the  Appellant's  father  was  a
    former spy for the Ba'ath Party and that this was known to the  Kurdish
    people, thus he could not live in the IKR [25];

    (ii)   he has not established that he has lost contact with his  family
    and therefore does not have any  family  members  in  Iraq  willing  to
    support  him  on  return  or  that  he  does  not  have  the  necessary
    documentation or cannot obtain it in order to return to his country  of
    nationality [34];

    (iii)  the Appellant is not credible or plausible in terms of the basis
    of his claim as to why he left Iraq [34].

21.   I also bear in mind the fact that  the  Appellant  did  not  have  the
benefit of legal representation at that hearing. I also bear  in  mind  that
the Appellant claimed to have been shot in the head whilst in France and  he
provided a consent for dated 31.1.17 agreeing to a  procedure  to  remove  a
pellet from his head, right side [12. refers].

22.   Whilst Judge Agnew found at [40] that the Appellant claimed he  had  a
CSID at home and had not established that he could not obtain the  documents
he needed from his family in order to travel to Baghdad  and  on  to  Erbil,
this finding was expressly overturned by Judge Birrell.

23.   Mr McVeety declined to cross-examine the  Appellant  thus  I  make  my
findings of fact, bearing in mind the lower standard of proof, on the  basis
of the  evidence  given  to  the  First  tier  Tribunal,  in  light  of  the
background and supporting evidence.

24.   Mr McVeety's  submissions  were  predicated  on  the  basis  that  the
Appellant has, or could obtain, a CSID card.  The  Appellant's  evidence  is
that he had a CSID card at  home  in  Iraq  [5]  of  his  witness  statement
refers. His home is in Tuz Khurmatu,  which  is  in  a  contested  area  viz
Saladin province.  In  his  updated  witness  statement  prepared  for  this
hearing, which is signed but undated,  the  Appellant  states  that  he  has
attended the Red Cross office in Liverpool to try to assist him in  locating
his family. He has  also  appended  a  Red  Cross  business  card  from  the
international family tracing section in Merseyside, with the  names  of  the
manager and service co-ordinator. The Appellant also  states  that  he  last
spoke to his mother after he left Iraq but before he came to the UK and  she
told him that she had re-married and was not in  contact  with  his  brother
and that he has no means of being able to contact her or any of  his  family
members now.

25.   In his submissions, Mr Sadiq made reference to  a  document  from  the
website www.rudaw.net entitled  "Iraq's  Rapid  Response  Force  withdrawing
from Tuz Khurmatu" dated 9.9.18 which states that the Rapid  Response  Force
who were deployed to Tuz Khurmatu  in  January  2018  in  a  bid  to  reduce
tensions that skyrocketed during the withdrawal of  Kurdish  forces  in  the
area after Shi'ite militia groups took it  over,  would  be  replaced  by  a
regular army brigade. "Kurdish residents fled the  ethnically  diverse  town
and their homes and businesses were looted and burned in acts  condemned  by
the Kurdistan Region parliament as genocide."

26.   Mr Sadiq also sought to rely on an article from www.basnews.com  dated
19.11.18  which  provides  that:  "more  than  10,000  internally  displaced
persons  (IDP)   are   still   living   in   Kurdistan   region's   Garmiyan
Administration and reluctant to return to their homes in Tuz Khurmatu  under
the rule of Sh-ite militias of Hashd al-Shaabi.  Lat  year  in  October  the
Iraqi army and Iranian-backed Hashd al0Shaabi overran Kirkuk,  Tuz  Khurmatu
and other disputed Kurdish territories to push the Peshmerga forces  out  of
the region. The offensives led to a humanitarian crisis which left  hundreds
of thousands of Kurdish civilians displaced ... There are also people  among
the IDPs whose homes, shops or factories are burned  down  by  the  militia,
and they have no motivation to return to their hometown."

27.   In light  of  the  background  evidence  as  to  the  displacement  of
thousands of Kurds from Tuz Khurmatu I find that it cannot be  assumed  that
the Appellant would be able to obtain his  original  CSID  from  his  family
home because there is a serious risk that his  family  home  may  have  been
destroyed and that any family members remaining there ie either his  mother,
who has re-married or his brother, have been internally  displaced.  I  find
in light of the new evidence and bearing in mind  the  background  evidence,
that the Appellant has contacted the Red Cross to help him trace his  family
that he is not currently in contact with any family members in Iraq.

28.   Thus the question is, bearing in mind the  guidance  set  out  in  AAH
(Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT  00212  (IAC),  which  post
dates the decisions of Judge Agnew and Judge Birrell, whether the  Appellant
could obtain a new CSID. Headnotes 1 - 5 provide:

    "1.    Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee (P) to
    obtain a new CSID whether P is able  to  do  so,  or  do  so  within  a
    reasonable time frame, will depend  on  the  individual  circumstances.
    Factors to be considered include:

         i) Whether P has any other form of  documentation,  or  information
         about the location of his entry in  the  civil  register.  An  INC,
         passport, birth/marriage certificates or an expired CSID would  all
         be of substantial assistance. For someone in possession of  one  or
         more of these documents the process should  be  straightforward.  A
         laissez-passer should not be counted for these purposes: these  can
         be issued without any other form of ID being available, are not  of
         any assistance in 'tracing back'  to  the  family  record  and  are
         confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;

         ii)      The location of the relevant civil registry office. If  it
         is in an area held, or formerly held, by ISIL, is it operational?

         iii)     Are there male  family  members  who  would  be  able  and
         willing  to  attend  the  civil  registry  with  P?   Because   the
         registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant to  consider
         whether the relative  is  from  the  mother  or  father's  side.  A
         maternal uncle in possession of his CSID would be able to assist in
         locating the original place of  registration  of  the  individual's
         mother, and from there the trail would need to be followed  to  the
         place that her records were transferred upon marriage. It must also
         be borne in mind that a significant number  of  IDPs  in  Iraq  are
         themselves undocumented; if that is the case it  is  unlikely  that
         they could be of assistance. A woman without  a  male  relative  to
         assist  with  the  process  of  redocumentation  would  face   very
         significant obstacles in that officials may refuse to deal with her
         case at all.

    2.     There are  currently  no  international  flights  to  the  Iraqi
    Kurdish Region (IKR). All  returns  from  the  United  Kingdom  are  to
    Baghdad.

    3.     For  an  Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish  origin  in
    possession of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the journey from  Baghdad
    to the IKR, whether by air or land, is affordable and practical and can
    be made without a real risk of P suffering persecution,  serious  harm,
    Article 3 ill treatment nor would any difficulties on the journey  make
    relocation unduly harsh.

    4.     P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad  and  the
    IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.

    5.     P will  face  considerable  difficulty  in  making  the  journey
    between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a CSID or  valid  passport.
    There are numerous checkpoints en route, including two  checkpoints  in
    the immediate vicinity of the airport. If P has neither a  CSID  nor  a
    valid passport there is a real risk of P being detained at a checkpoint
    until such time as the  security  personnel  are  able  to  verify  P's
    identity. It is not reasonable to require P to travel  between  Baghdad
    and IKR by land absent the ability of P to verify  his  identity  at  a
    checkpoint. This normally requires the  attendance  of  a  male  family
    member and production  of  P's  identity  documents  but  may  also  be
    achieved by calling upon  "connections"  higher  up  in  the  chain  of
    command."

29.   I find that the Appellant could not reasonably be expected  to  attend
the civil registry in Tuz Khurmatu,  due  to  the  fact  that  it  is  in  a
contested area and in light of the above he would, in any event,  be  unable
to travel there safely without  a  CSID.  In  the  absence  of  any  of  the
relevant documentation and in the absence of any  male  family  members  who
could meet the Appellant in Baghdad in the  hope  of  persuading  the  civil
registry office there to provide him with a CSID, I find that the  Appellant
would simply be unable  to  obtain  a  CSID.  Thus  the  issue  is  internal
relocation to Baghdad, because it is clear from AAH that he would be  unable
to travel onwards to the IKR without a CSID.

30.   As the Upper Tribunal made clear in BA (Returns to  Baghdad)  Iraq  CG
[2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC) at headnote 5-8 the fact that  the  Appellant  is  a
young, Sunni male is a risk factor,  due  to  sectarian  violence,  although
Sunni identity is not sufficient to give rise to  a  real  risk  of  serious
harm the authorities  are  unable  and  unwilling  to  be  able  to  provide
sufficient protection.

31.   On the facts of BA (op cit) the Appellant was returning  to  his  home
town of Baghdad and thus the issue of internal  relocation  did  not  arise.
However, in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT  00544  (IAC)  the  Upper
Tribunal held:

    "14.   As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh
    for a person from a contested area  to  relocate  to  Baghdad  City  or
    (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.

    15.    In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for P
    to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,  likely  to
    be relevant:

         (a)      whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see
         Part C above);

         (b)      whether P can speak Arabic  (those  who  cannot  are  less
         likely to find employment);

         (c)      whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
         accommodate him;

         (d)       whether  P  is  a  lone  female   (women   face   greater
         difficulties than men in finding employment);

         (e)      whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or
         rent accommodation;

         (f)      whether P is from a minority community;

         (g)      whether there is support available for P bearing  in  mind
         there is some evidence that  returned  failed  asylum  seekers  are
         provided with the support generally given to IDPs."

32.   Whilst AA was appealed to the Court of Appeal, on the manner in  which
the Upper Tribunal treated the issue of obtaining  a  CSID,  the  paragraphs
cited above were not subject to challenge and were preserved  on  appeal.  I
thus assess this Appellant's case in light of the factors set out  above.  I
find that:

    (i)    the Appellant does not have a CSID nor will be likely to be able
    to obtain one;

    (ii)   he cannot speak Arabic;

    (iii)  he does not have family or friends in Baghdad who  are  able  to
    accommodate him;

    (iv)   he is not a lone woman;

    (v)    it is unlikely that he would be able to find  a  Sponsor,  given
    his provenance and former residence in Tuz Khurmatu;

    (vi)   he is a Sunni Kurd and thus could be considered  to  be  from  a
    minority community;

    (vii)  he may be able to access some general support as an IDP.

33.   Bearing in mind the finding in BA (op cit) at [121] that there  are  a
large number of legal and illegal checkpoints across the city,  which  would
give rise to a reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant  would  be
stopped at a checkpoint on a fairly  regular  basis  and  in  light  of  the
background evidence shows  that  checkpoints  are  largely  manned  by  Shia
militias, I find that there is a risk to the  Appellant,  albeit  small,  on
the basis of his Sunni religion. The Upper Tribunal found in BA  that  there
was no sufficiency of protection in such circumstances. I further find  that
he is unlikely to find somewhere to live in Baghdad,  apart  from  provision
for IDPs or to find employment; he has no family or friends to turn  to  for
support, he is not an Arabic speaker and does not possess a CSID.

34.   In light  of  the  factors  extrapolated  from  the  country  guidance
judgments, I find that it would be unreasonable and unduly harsh  to  expect
the Appellant to internally relocate to Baghdad. His asylum  claim  succeeds
on this basis, despite the fact that his original basis of claim  was  found
to lack credibility.  Further  or  in  the  alternative,  I  find  that  the
Appellant is entitled to humanitarian protection pursuant to Article 15C  of
the QD for the same  reasons,  on  the  basis  of  his  individualised  risk
factors.

Decision

35.   The appeal is allowed on the basis that  the  Appellant  has  a  well-
founded fear of persecution on account of his  membership  of  a  particular
social group viz young Sunni Kurdish men and that it would be  unduly  harsh
and unreasonable to expect  him  to  relocate  to  Baghdad.  The  appeal  is
allowed in the alternative on humanitarian protection grounds.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman                      28 February 2019
