
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/08172/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                           | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8 November 2017                         | On 15 November  2017            |



                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                     E K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss L Gardner, instructed by Virgo Consultancy
Services Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Fowell promulgated on 2 June  2017  dismissing  her
    appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 22 July  2016  to
    refuse her protection claim.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Georgia  who  is  married  to  an  Indian
    national.  It is her case that she faces discrimination and persecution
    both as a result of being a mixed race couple and also  on  account  of
    her mother's political activities in Georgia which had  caused  her  to
    flee the country (she was subsequently recognised as a refugee  in  the
    United Kingdom).

 3.  At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant's
    representative asked for an adjournment on the basis that the  Georgian
    interpreter had previously translated for the appellant at  her  asylum
    interview.  The appellant had identified some discrepancies between her
    answers and the way they had  been  translated  particularly  about  an
    injury to her daughter being accidental.  The judge took the view  that
    an adjournment to obtain another interpreter would not assist a  proper
    consideration of the issues [14] and that and in  the  event,  although
    the appellant did  challenge  the  answers  about  the  injury  to  her
    daughter, no difficulty of translation arose.

 4. The judge did not accept the appellant's account of what  had  happened
    to her in Georgia and dismissed her appeal.

 5. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge:-

      1) had permitted a procedural irregularity in not adjourning to permit
         another interpreter to be found; and

      2) failure to give sufficient weight to material matters.

 6. On 19 June 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro granted permission.

 7. Notwithstanding the response made pursuant to Rule 24 by the respondent
    on 5 July 2015 and Mr Richards' submissions, I am  satisfied  that  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the  making  of  a
    procedural error capable of amounting to an error of law.

 8. It is of note that it is the interpreter, according to the  grounds  of
    appeal, who drew attention to the fact that he had interpreted  in  the
    past.  It is also evident that it was the appellant's case that certain
    matters  had  been  mistranslated.   Whilst  it  is  clear  that  those
    allegations extended only to certain aspects of the case,  the  central
    issue was credibility.  As is  noted  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  the
    inconsistency in answers with regard to the  child's  injury  were  not
    peripheral to the decision and are set out at paragraphs 27, 52 and 53.



 9. The problem in this case is twofold.  First,  if  the  interpreter  had
    misunderstood the appellant's word in the first case, it  is  difficult
    to discern how the judge could properly have understood  whether  there
    was a mistake on the second occasion.  Further, if  mistakes  had  been
    made in some aspects, there may well be difficulty about other areas of
    the appellant's evidence.  It was certainly unwise of the judge, as  Mr
    Richards accepted, to proceed in the circumstances.  Further, there was
    the appearance of an unfair hearing in that the appellant was  expected
    to give evidence through  somebody  whose  expertise  she  had  already
    challenged and the interpreter was being put in a difficult position in
    that he would effectively have been treated as a witness.  At the  very
    least there was a  conflict  of  interest  and  this  should  not  have
    occurred.

10. Accordingly, I consider that a procedural error occurred amounting to a
    material error of law and that accordingly the  matter  should  be  set
    aside.

11. Given that the error in this case was the absence of a fair hearing, it
    is necessary for the matter to be reheard afresh.   I  therefore  remit
    the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing  on  all
    issues, before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Fowell.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision
    on all issues; none of the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
    preserved.

 3. I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal




Signed                                  Date 14 November 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul







