

                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Number:
PA/08778/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                    |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                  |Promulgated                    |
|On July 14, 2017                  |On July 17, 2017               |
|                                  |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               MR WARIS SADAT
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
Appellant   Miss Gibbons, Counsel, instructed by Staffordshire
      and Stoke-on-Trent CAB
Respondent  Mr Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I do not make an anonymity order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

    2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom from Afghanistan on January
       13, 2015 concealed in a lorry and claimed asylum as an unaccompanied
       minor on February 9, 2016. The respondent refused his application on
       August 5, 2016 under paragraph 336 HC 395.


    3. The appellant appealed against that  decision  on  August  17,  2016
       under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
       2002.


    4. The appellant's appeal came before former Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Somal (hereinafter called the "Judge") on March 3, 2017 and
       in a decision  promulgated  on  March  16,  2017  he  dismissed  the
       appellant's appeal on all grounds.


    5. The appellant appealed that decision on March 30, 2017 but Judge  of
       the First-tier Tribunal Grant refused permission to appeal on  April
       10, 2017. Permission was renewed to the Upper Tribunal and on May 8,
       2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer found there was an arguable  error
       of law.


    6. The matter came before me on the above date.


    7. Miss Gibbons relied on her grounds of appeal and submitted the Judge
       had failed to give any weight to the  evidence  of  the  expert,  Mr
       Foxley, and in doing so he erred. The negative findings made by  the
       Judge in paragraph [60] of his decision had been  addressed  by  the
       expert witness in his report. In particular, the expert  had  argued
       weight should be given to the appellant's age, the fact he had  been
       brought up in a sheltered environment and the risks facing  a  young
       male on return. Miss Gibbons further submitted  that  the  appellant
       was a minor when brought to the United Kingdom  and  the  Judge  had
       erred to make an adverse section 8 finding  against  the  appellant.
       The Judge had also failed to attach weight to the fact  neither  the
       Home Office nor the Red Cross had been able to trace his family.  On
       the issue of   relocation  to  Kabul  the  expert  stated  that  the
       appellant would be at risk due to the over-stretched infra-structure
       and the regular attacks carried out by the Taliban. He would face  a
       dearth of resources and would have a lack of  mental  and  emotional
       support in Kabul. She submitted the Judge  erred  and  the  decision
       should be set aside and reheard.

    8. Mr Bates invited me to find there had been no error in law an  error
       in law and to remit the matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal  because
       ultimately the Judge  was  the  person  tasked  with  assessing  the
       evidence and making credibility findings.  It  was  clear  from  the
       Judge's decision that the Judge was aware of the report but for  the
       reasons given in the decision  he  concluded  the  appellant  lacked
       credibility and the findings made were all  open  to  him.  Even  if
       those reasons about return to his  home  area  were  not  adequately
       reasoned he could return to Kabul.  It  was  not  suggested  in  the
       grounds of appeal that Kabul  was  not  available  to  him  and  all
       findings made were open to him.



FINDINGS


    9. The appellant arrived in this country as an unaccompanied minor  and
       applied for asylum. The respondent refused his application  and  his
       appeal was heard by the Judge who found his claim lacked credibility
       and found he could either return to his home area or Kabul.

   10. The grounds of appeal in the main take issue with the lack of weight
       given to the expert report of Mr Foxley.


   11. Mr Foxley's report was contained in the appellant's  bundle  between
       pages 7 and 19 although  the  substantive  part  of  his  report  is
       contained between pages 7 and 17. Pages 7 to  14  detail  background
       material and  pages  14  to  17  contained  his  assessment  of  the
       appellant's claim. Mr Foxley was asked to consider  whether  it  was
       plausible:


        a. He knew little about the surrounding area.
        b. He would not use the Afghan calendar.
        c. His girlfriend's parents would have allowed  their  daughter  to
           visit his home as claimed.
        d. Whether he would have  been  ignorant  of  the  consequences  of
           sexual relations.
        e. He would be able to meet her as claimed.
        f. Her pregnancy would be brought to the attention  of  the  Afghan
           authorities.


   12. In considering the appellant's account the Judge  recorded  in  some
       detail the appellant's various versions of events as set out in  his
       screening  and  substantive  interviews,  his  statement  and   oral
       evidence. The Judge then set out from paragraph [49] of his decision
       the opinion of the  expert  witness  and  his  views  are  contained
       between paragraphs [49] and [56].

   13. From paragraph [56] onwards the Judge then assessed  that  evidence.
       He clearly had regard to Mr Foxley's  report  because  in  paragraph
       [59] the Judge accepted part  of  his  evidence  and  concluded  the
       appellant was an Afghan national. However,  on  the  core  issue  of
       whether his claim was credible the Judge rejected this and made that
       finding based on inconsistencies in the appellant's  account.  These
       are detailed in  paragraphs  [60]  to  [61].  Whilst  there  was  no
       specific reference to the expert report I am satisfied there  is  no
       error on this issue because the Judge identified inconsistencies  in
       the account and he rejected the events occurred. The finding made in
       paragraph [62] was again open to him.


   14. This was not a case whereby expert evidence was a  deciding  factor.
       The Judge  clearly  considered  the  account  presented  and  having
       identified inconsistencies rejected the  whole  claim.  Whether  the
       events were plausible was of no significance because the  Judge  had
       rejected the claim due to inconsistencies as against  simply  saying
       events did or did not occur.


   15. The Judge considered how he gave  fingerprints  on  three  separated
       occasions and although he was a minor the Judge concluded  he  could
       have claimed asylum.


   16. The Judge's conclusion was that  he  could  either  return  home  or
       relocate to Kabul. As regarding returning home  the  Judge  rejected
       his claimed fear and whilst there  were  difficulties  locating  his
       family the realty was he was now an adult. It was, according to  the
       Judge, safe for him to return to his home area or following case law
       it was safe to relocate to Kabul, if he so wished. The expert agreed
       he would be of little interest to the Taliban in Kabul.


   17. All findings were open to the Judge. There is no error in law.

DECISION

   18. The appeal is dismissed and the original decision shall stand.

Signed:                                 Dated

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee award is made as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
