
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08151/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2020                           |On 9 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                             ARWAND RIZGAR MAMUD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Greer, instructed by Ison Harrison, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer






                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant was born in 2000 and  is  a  male  citizen  of  Iraq.  He
    entered the United Kingdom  on  29  November  2018.  I  note  that  the
    appellant's date of birth is disputed. An age  assessment  was  carried
    out by Coventry Social Services and provides a birth date of July 2000;
    the appellant claims that he was a child when  he  entered  the  United
    Kingdom. I do not have notice of any proceedings for judicial review by
    which the appellant might seek to challenge  the  age  assessment.  The
    appellant's claim for  international  protection  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State by decision dated  13  August  2019.  The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on
    10 October 2019, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal. First, the appellant submits that,  as
    a minor when he entered the United Kingdom, the Secretary of State  was
    obliged to take steps to  trace  his  family  in  Iraq.  The  appellant
    asserts that, 'the respondent's omission is of real  relevance  to  the
    question whether the tribunal should accord the appellant  the  benefit
    of the doubt in respect of whether he has relatives remaining  in  Iraq
    and whether he is able to establish contact with them; if  the  British
    state is unable to trace them, and this is relevant to the question  of
    whether the appellant, a private individual, may be able to do so.' The
    appellant complains that the judge failed to make any mention of  these
    matters in her determination of the appeal.

 3. I find that the challenge is without merit. It would appear  that  when
    the appellant entered the United Kingdom in November 2018,  he  was  an
    adult by reference to the local authority age  assessment  which  gives
    his date of  birth  is  July  2000.  The  appellant  may  dispute  that
    assessment but he has taken a no steps  to  challenge  it  in  law.  No
    obligation therefore rested  on  the  Secretary  of  State  as  regards
    tracing the appellant's family in Baghdad. Secondly, in her analysis of
    the appellant's account judge has given cogent and  sound  reasons  for
    concluding that the appellant was not telling the truth.  Indeed,  many
    of the findings focus  upon  the  evidence  which  the  appellant  gave
    regarding his family in Iraq, in particular his mother. I find that  it
    was open to the judge [27]  to  find  that  it  is  not  plausible  the
    appellant's mother would not have made arrangements to  stay  in  touch
    with the appellant after he began his journey to  the  United  Kingdom.
    The points which the  judge  makes  at  [28]  regarding  the  appellant
    failure to make any effort order  traces  mother  whilst  he  has  been
    living in the United Kingdom are also sound in the light  of  the  fact
    that the appellant has been deemed  to  be  an  adult  throughout  that
    period.  At [32], judge unambiguously found that the appellant was  not
    truthful witness as regards whereabouts of his mother. She  found  that
    it was reasonably likely that the appellant and his mother are still in
    contact and that she  could  make  arrangements  to  send  to  him  the
    original or a copy CSID, 'thereby effectively re-documenting him in the
    United Kingdom.' The appellant accepts that  the  judge's  findings  as
    regards the unreliability of other parts of his account are  sound  and
    he does not challenge them. In the light of that  fact,  I  reject  the
    appellant's challenge to the judge's findings at [32] regarding contact
    with his mother and, crucially, as  regards  the  likelihood  that  the
    appellant would be able to obtain the necessary identity  documentation
    from Iraq before he travels to that country.

 4. The second ground of appeal concerns the judge's findings regarding  is
    the appellant's ability to relocate to  the  IKR  (Independent  Kurdish
    Region). The judge accepted that the appellant that the  appellant  has
    no known family living in the IKR who would be able to provide you with
    accommodation. However, she founds that the appellant is  a  young  fit
    healthy male who in possession of a  CSID,  would  be  able  to  access
    employment in the IKR.

 5. I have considered the materiality of any error which may have been made
    by the judge. Since the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, new country
    guidance is now available (SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);  identity
    documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC)). The appellant's home area is
    Tuz Khurmatu. The appellant would not be relocating  but  returning  to
    his home area and,  being  in  possession  of  the  necessary  identity
    documentation, he would not now find there any  Article  15  (c)  risk.
    Moreover, SMO states as follows as regards the location in Baghdad:

    Relocation  to  Baghdad.   Baghdad  is  generally  safe  for   ordinary
    civilians but whether it  is  safe  for  a  particular  returnee  is  a
    question of fact  in  the  individual  case.   There  are  no  on-entry
    sponsorship  requirements  for  Baghdad  but  there   are   sponsorship
    requirements for residency.  A documented individual of working age  is
    likely to be able to satisfy those requirements. [my emphasis]

    The  judge's  findings  regarding  the  likelihood  of  the   appellant
    receiving his CSID card whilst he is still in the United Kingdom and as
    regards the appellant's continuing  contact  and  assistance  from  his
    mother are, in my opinion, wholly sound. The formally contested area of
    Tuz Khurmatu would be accessible to the appellant  travelling  overland
    without significant risk; as it is his home area, he would not face the
    difficulties of a stranger relocating there.  Moreover,  the  appellant
    personal circumstances are such that he could relocate,  if  necessary,
    to Baghdad.

 6. For the reasons I have given above, I reject both  grounds  of  appeal.
    the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  fall  into  legal  error  either  as
    asserted in grounds or at all. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date 26 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
