
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08918/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|Centre                               |                                 |
|On 9 July 2019                       |On 17 July 2019                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL



                                   Between

                              ABDI ISMAIL GURE

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Aziz of Lei Dat Baig Solicitors

For the Respondent: Ms Groves Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Thorne promulgated on 30 January 2019,  which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the refusal of a protection claim on all
    grounds.



The Judge's Decision

 3. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Thorne  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found the Appellant came from the area
    he claimed and left because of issues with Al Shabab but did not accept
    that the Appellant was from a minority clan. He considered whether  the
    Appellant could relocate to Mogadishu as an ordinary civilian and found
    that he could.

 4. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the Judge had failed to take
    into account the guidance set out in MOJ&  Ors  (Return  to  Mogadishu)
    Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) and on 1 May 2019 Judge Andrew  gave
    permission to appeal.

 5. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Aziz  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

    (a)    The Judge failed to take into account the period of absence from
         Mogadishu and the fact that he had no family support there.

    (b)    That the  bullet  points  set  out  in  MOJ  were  not  properly
         considered.

 6. On behalf of the Respondent Ms Groves submitted that:

      a) MOJ set out a non exhaustive list of factors that were to be  taken
         into account in assessing whether an Appellant  could  relocate  to
         Mogadishu.

      b) The Judge assessed all of the relevant circumstances.

      c) Having no family was not determinative.

      d) The Judge found that the Appellant had the prospect of finding work



The Law

 7.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.



Finding on Material Error

 9. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

10. As to the duty to give reasons I take into account what was said by the
    Court of Appeal in MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 at paragraph 26:

         "The duty to give reasons requires that  reasons  must  be  proper,
         intelligible and adequate:  see the classic authority of this court
         in Re Poyser and Mills' Arbitration [1964]  2  QB  467.   The  only
         dispute in the present case relates to the last of those  elements,
         that is the adequacy of the  reasons  given  by  the  FtT  for  its
         decision allowing the  appellant's  appeal.   It  is  important  to
         appreciate that adequacy in this context is precisely that, no more
         and no less.  It is not a counsel of perfection.  Still less should
         it provide an opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment  of
         the reasons to see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on
         their merits.  The purpose of the duty to give reasons is, in part,
         to enable the losing party to know why she has lost.  It is also to
         enable an appellate court or tribunal to see what the  reasons  for
         the decision are so that they can be examined in case some error of
         approach has been committed."

11. The Judge did not accept that the  Appellant  was,  as  he  claimed,  a
    member of a minority clan  and  this  part  of  his  decision  was  not
    challenged in the grounds of appeal.

12. The Judge clearly had in mind the guidance in MOJ whose headnote he set
    out in full at paragraph 42 of the decision because he states  this  at
    paragraph 48 and indeed  in  assessing  the  Appellants  return  as  an
    'ordinary civilian' he was reflecting the words of the decision at  the
    Country Guidance section  at  (ii)  recognising  contrary  to  what  is
    asserted in the grounds that the Appellant was returning after a period
    of absence.

13. The Judge recognised at paragraph 50 that the Appellant had  no  family
    in Mogadishu but  no  where  in  MOJ  is  it  suggested  that  this  is
    determinative of the appeal. The Judge was entitled  to  find  that  as
    someone who was in good health, was literate, speaks Somali and  was  a
    fully trained tailor there was a reasonable  prospect  of  'securing  a
    livelihood' (again reflecting the words of the guidance in MOJ at  (ix)
    . Given that MOJ states at (x) that 'it will be for the  person  facing
    return to explain why he would not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
    opportunities that have been produced by the economic boom,  especially
    as there is evidence to the effect that returnees are  taking  jobs  at
    the expense of those who have never been away' the Judge  was  entitled
    to note that his only reason for not being able to  live  in  Mogadishu
    was  he  knew  no  one  was  insufficient  to  establish  that  it  was
    unreasonable for someone in his circumstances to relocate.

14. I therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination  when  read  as  a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.



CONCLUSION

15. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.



DECISION

16. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed                                                                  Date
11.7.2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
