

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: PA/08703/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16th January 2020                   |On 31st January 2020              |
|                                       |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     RM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr M McHardy, instructed by Virgo Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  RM.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings




         1. The appellant, a Kurd of  Iranian  citizenship,  born  on  24th
            November 1990 appealed a decision of the respondent dated  23rd
            August 2019 refusing his international  protection  claim.  His
            appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cary  on  10th
            October 2019 and dismissed for reasons set out  in  a  decision
            promulgated on 17th October 2019.


         2. Mr [M]  sought  and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  that
            decision in the following terms:

                   "while I am unpersuaded there is an arguable error of law
                  in the judge's credibility findings as to what took  place
                  in Iran, it is arguable that the judge erred in failing to
                  assess  and  make  findings  on  whether  the  appellant's
                  Facebook activity would place him at risk on return."


        Background

         3. The  appellant  arrived  in  the  UK,  clandestinely,  on  26th
            February 2016 and was  arrested.  He  claimed  asylum  on  27th
            February  2016  and  was   screened;   he   was   substantively
            interviewed in connection with his asylum claim  on  27th  June
            2019.


         4. The appellant claimed to have  left  Iran  illegally  on  14/15
            November 2015 or 6th December  2015  and  travelled,  with  the
            assistance of an agent to Iraq where he remained for some  five
            days. He then claims he travelled to Turkey where  he  remained
            for one day and thence travelled to Greece. In  Greece  he  was
            taken to a refugee camp  where  he  stayed  for  one  night.  A
            EURODAC search identified he was  fingerprinted  in  Greece  on
            20th December 2015. He was issued  with  papers  and  travelled
            through various  countries  and  being  fingerprinted  in  each
            country. He arrived in Austria a, was fingerprinted  and  taken
            to Germany to a designated camp.  A Eurodac  search  showed  he
            claimed asylum in Germany on 25th December 2015. The  appellant
            did not remain in Germany but, with the assistance of an agent,
            he travelled to France where he remained for two months  before
            crossing to the UK.


         5. The appellant claimed he was at risk  of  being  persecuted  if
            returned to Iran because of his imputed  political  involvement
            with the Kurdish democratic Party of Iran ("KDPI"). The salient
            issues of his claim were:


                  (a)he worked in a tea-room in Sarchawe which  belonged  to
                  Mohammad [S];


                  (b)on 6th December 2015, he was given a lift by Mr [S]  to
                  Rabat to visit his, the appellant's, sister.  On  the  way
                  they were involved in a car accident as a result of  which
                  they  were  taken  to  Imaam  Khomeini  Hospital.  At  the
                  hospital he lost contact with his employer; he was visited
                  by his maternal uncle who made enquiries and  advised  him
                  to leave Iran because political papers had been  found  in
                  the car and he, the appellant,  would  be  implicated  and
                  accused of being a supporter.


                  (c)According to his screening interview he had  left  Iran
                  on 14-15  November  2015;  according  to  his  substantive
                  interview he left Iran on the evening of the car  accident
                  - 6th December 2015.


         6. The respondent accepted the appellant was Kurdish  Iranian  and
            had left Iran illegally. The respondent,  in  the  reasons  for
            refusal of the claim for  international  protection  identified
            inconsistencies and contradictions in his account:


                  (a)in his screening interview  he  claimed  to  have  been
                  distributing leaflets and to have been threatened  by  the
                  police; in his substantive interview he stated he did  not
                  distribute leaflets and the person with whom he was in the
                  car had political publications. His  explanation  for  the
                  discrepancy was that he couldn't remember,  and  that  the
                  interpreter may have misunderstood.


                  (b)in his substantive interview he said that he and Mr [S]
                  were separated at the  hospital  and  there  has  been  no
                  contact since then; his maternal uncle made enquiries  and
                  told him that Mr [S] had political papers in the  car  and
                  that he would be  investigated;  he  also  said  that  the
                  police found political documents on Mr [S]  and  that  he,
                  the appellant, was treated like Mr [S]. When asked  if  he
                  had been interviewed by the police  he  said  not  at  the
                  hospital and referred  to  an  incident  some  five  years
                  earlier.


                  (c)the appellant was asked in  his  substantive  interview
                  how he knew that Mr [S] had political papers and  he  said
                  he didn't know, he hadn't seen the car but they might have
                  been  there.  When  asked  how  his  uncle  obtained   the
                  information about the papers he said that his  uncle  said
                  he might be interrogated; he didn't know how his uncle got
                  the information.


        First-tier Tribunal decision


         7. The First-tier Tribunal judge set out in  detail  the  evidence
            given by the appellant at the hearing. There was  no  challenge
            to that recital of evidence in the grounds  seeking  permission
            to appeal, which included putting to  him  the  inconsistencies
            identified by the respondent.


         8. In addition to various  explanations  provided,  the  appellant
            stated he had opened and started posting on a personal Facebook
            account in 2017. Screenshots of the postings were not  produced
            but the First-tier Tribunal  judge  was  shown,  on  a  laptop,
            copies of postings between July and September  2019  which,  he
            records were explained to him as posts  showing  the  appellant
            attending demonstrations and sharing anti-government posts. The
            respondent  is  noted  as  accepting  that  the  appellant  had
            attended various demonstrations and had posted photographs  and
            other items  on  his  Facebook  page  but  that  did  not,  she
            submitted, entitle him to international protection.


         9. The appellant did not seek an  adjournment  to  obtain  printed
            screenshots of the Facebook entries.


        10. The First-tier Tribunal judge found the appellant's  claim  not
            credible and rejected the appellant's account in its  entirety.
            He drew attention to the inconsistencies in  his  account,  not
            only  between  the  screening  interview  and  the  substantive
            interview but also the further inconsistencies that arose  from
            his  evidence  to  the  Tribunal.  In  relation  to  sur  place
            activities  the  judge  concluded  the  appellant  was  not   a
            committed Kurdish activist, had not produced evidence  that  it
            was reasonably likely the Iranian authorities  had  viewed  his
            Facebook posts and rejected his claim that he would be at  risk
            of being persecuted because of the account.


        Error of law


        11. The grounds of appeal set out lengthy  extracts  from  caselaw,
            which were repeated in oral submissions. The  appellant  relied
            upon five grounds:


              Ground (i):the judge  failed  to  consider  crucial  evidence
             sufficiently or at all;


              Ground (ii):illogical reasoning of other evidence in relation
             to credibility;


              Ground (iii):the judge erred  in  directing  himself  that  a
              person who has voluntarily  exposed  himself  to  a  risk  of
              persecution in order to bolster a  protection  claim  is  not
              entitled to international protection if  he  can  effectively
              retract or conceal the facts giving rise to such exposure;


              Ground (iv): Failure to fully consider and/or  apply  caselaw
              in relation to risk factors.;


              Ground (v):incorrect date of assessment of the  asylum  claim
             used;




        12. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  a  lengthy  and  detailed
            decision sets out the evidence before him and  the  submissions
            made. The appellant presented  evidence  of  Facebook  postings
            between  July  and  September  2019  on   a   laptop.   Printed
            screenshots copies were not provided. The judge records:


                  9.At the outset of the hearing Mr McHardy  said  that  the
                  appellant had a public profile on Facebook  which  related
                  to his political activity in the United Kingdom.  He  said
                  the profile was in Kurdish, Farsi as well as English.  The
                  Appellant could not be expected to delete that profile  in
                  accordance with HJ(Iran). I was  told  that  the  Facebook
                  posts showed the appellant attending demonstrations in the
                  United Kingdom as well as sharing anti-government posts.


                  10.For some reason the Appellant's representatives had not
                  produced any paper  copies  of  the  Appellant's  Facebook
                  profile. Mr McHardy showed me a few posts/photographs from
                  July to September 2019 on his laptop....


                  11. ... [The Appellant] said he  first  began  posting  on
                  Facebook in July 2017. His public  Facebook  pages  showed
                  him   attending   demonstrations   against   the   Iranian
                  government's attitude to the Kurds as well as  giving  his
                  views on the subject.


                  ...
                  21.[The Appellant] was reminded that it was  possible  for
                  him to delete his Facebook account. In response he said it
                  was his Facebook account and he was using it. He was asked
                  why he had decided to post on Facebook particularly as  he
                  knew that he could be sent back to Iran. He  said  at  the
                  beginning  it  was  just  for  information.  He  did   not
                  appreciate it would be dangerous.


                  ...
                  25.[respondent's  submissions]  The  Appellant's  Facebook
                  evidence had been produced very late in the day. The  Home
                  Office have a detailed  Facebook  manual  and  could  have
                  investigated the Appellant's postings  if  they  had  been
                  provided earlier. The Appellant's postings could well have
                  been private until the morning of the hearing. Even if the
                  Appellant's postings had attracted  a  number  of  "likes"
                  they  could  have  been  manufactured.  It  was  perfectly
                  possible to substitute one photograph  for  another  while
                  retaining the "likes".


                  ...
                  28.[appellant's submissions] He had clearly  been  posting
                  on Facebook and had attended a number of demonstrations in
                  the United Kingdom....he had been posting since  2017.  If
                  he was returned to Iran there was no  expectation  on  him
                  that he would lie to the authorities about his  activities
                  in the United Kingdom.


                  ...
                  39.It is the Appellant's case that if he  is  returned  to
                  Iran he is likely to be persecuted and ill-treated by  the
                  authorities who suspect him of involvement with  the  KDPI
                  in Iran. He also maintains  that  his  activities  in  the
                  United Kingdom in attending demonstrations as well as  his
                  Facebook posts will put him at risk on return.. ...


                  ...
                  57.I also have to consider how the appellant's  activities
                  in the United Kingdom, if any, impact upon his  claim.  He
                  claims to have participated in a number of  demonstrations
                  since 2017. In evidence he told me he had participated  in
                  15 demonstrations in  front  of  the  Iranian  embassy  in
                  London. In his asylum interview which took  place  only  a
                  few months ago  he  said  since  arriving  in  the  United
                  Kingdom  he  had  "been  with  the  Democrats  (KDPI)  and
                  participating in all their activities"  ...  He  described
                  himself as a supporter and not as a member. He said he had
                  not attended any meetings as only members  could  attended
                  [sic] ...he made no mention of his Facebook account  which
                  I was told at the hearing show him at  demonstrations  and
                  contains criticism of the current regime.


                  ...
                  62. It is the appellants case that his activities  in  the
                  United Kingdom are reasonably likely to put him at risk on
                  return. Even opportunistic activity sur place  is  not  an
                  automatic bar to asylum.... it is evident that  activities
                  other than bona fide political protest can create  refugee
                  status sur place if a fear  of  persecution  arising  from
                  such activities is objectively well founded. ...


                  ...
                  64. The  appellant  may  well  have  participated  in  the
                  demonstrations outside the Iranian embassy since  arriving
                  in  the  United  Kingdom.  However,  he  has   failed   to
                  particularise  the  demonstrations  he  claims   to   have
                  attended. I do not know when they took place nor do I know
                  what the appellants role or involvement, if  any  at  each
                  was. There are a few photo copies of  photographs  of  the
                  appellant at "UK protests" in the appellants bundle. I  do
                  not know whether the demonstrations were well attended  or
                  what they were about. he is not a member  of  any  Kurdish
                  group in the United Kingdom and would appear to  have  had
                  no political profile in Iran. In his asylum  interview  he
                  confirmed that he had not been involved with  any  Kurdish
                  political parties in Iran...


                  65. The evidence does not suggest that  the  appellant  is
                  someone who has become committed Kurdish activist  in  the
                  United Kingdom. His explanations in evidence for attending
                  demonstrations  in  the  United  Kingdom  were  far   from
                  impressive  and  did  not  really  show  a   deeply   held
                  commitment  to  the  Kurdish  cause.  He  simply  said  he
                  attended because no one in this country "can stop you" and
                  also because he had "freedom" as well as more time. in his
                  asylum interview he confirmed that he had not attended any
                  meetings of the KDPI here as he was  not  a  member...  in
                  evidence he told me he had never  spoken  at  any  of  the
                  demonstrations. there is nothing from  anyone  to  confirm
                  the level of his activities in the United Kingdom. He  has
                  not produced any evidence to show it is reasonably  likely
                  that the Iranian authorities are likely to be aware of any
                  of these activities such as they are.


                  66. Simply  because  an  applicant  attends  one  or  more
                  protests against the Iranian regime in the United  Kingdom
                  does not mean that he or she is reasonably likely to be at
                  risk on return. Given  the  large  numbers  of  those  who
                  demonstrate here and  the  publicity  which  demonstrators
                  receive,  for  example  on  Facebook,  combined  with  the
                  inability  of  the  Iranian  government  to  monitor   all
                  returnees who have been involved in  demonstrations  here,
                  regard must be had to the  level  of  involvement  of  the
                  individual here as well as any  political  activity  which
                  the individual might have been  involved  in  Iran  before
                  seeking asylum in Britain - see BA (above).


                  67. I do not accept the appellants involvement in  various
                  demonstrations in this country is reasonably likely to put
                  him at risk on return particularly as there is no evidence
                  that his participation may have come to the  attention  of
                  the authorities. He does not  appear  to  have  taken  any
                  active role in any  of  the  demonstrations.  By  his  own
                  admission he never spoke at any of them and  there  is  no
                  evidence that he  played  any  significant  role  such  as
                  leading any chanting there may have been. There is nothing
                  from any of those involved in Kurdish  political  protests
                  in the United Kingdom to support the appellants  case.  In
                  particular I have nothing from the KDPI or  any  of  those
                  who may have attended any of the demonstrations  with  the
                  appellant.


                  68. The appellant does not claim to have played  any  part
                  in organising any of those demonstrations he attended.  he
                  may well have been little more than a member of the crowd.
                  he has not said, for example if he  carried  a  banner  or
                  placard although the copy  photographs  show  him  with  a
                  range of items. He has not explained what any of the items
                  he carried purport to say or show. he has not  claimed  to
                  have been photographed  from  within  the  embassy  or  by
                  agents of the regime. There is no evidence that any of the
                  demonstrations attracted publicity either  in  the  United
                  Kingdom or Iran or if they did that the material published
                  and  publicly  available  referred  in  some  way  to  the
                  appellant or  would  enable  the  Iranian  authorities  to
                  identify him. The appellant has produced no evidence  that
                  the Iranian authorities are or  would  be  aware  of  what
                  appears to have been his low-level participation  are[sic]
                  whatever demonstration he may have attended.  the  current
                  guidance as set out in BA  in  the  circumstances  I  have
                  outlined does not suggest that the appellant  will  be  at
                  risk of identification.


                  69. The appellant will be returned without a passport  and
                  so will be questioned on return....  it  is  part  of  the
                  routine process for the authorities to look at an Internet
                  profile, Facebook and emails of a returnee.  according  to
                  HB "a person would be asked whether they  had  a  Facebook
                  page and that would be checked. When  the  person  returns
                  they will be asked to log onto their  Facebook  and  email
                  accounts". ...


                  70. The appellants case differs from that of the applicant
                  in HB. for some reason neither the  respondent  or  myself
                  were provided  with  copies  of  the  appellants  Facebook
                  account at the hearing. All Mr McHardy was able to do  was
                  to show me a few posts  (some  with  photographs)  on  his
                  laptop for July and September this year which were said to
                  be from the appellants account. In comparison the tribunal
                  in HB were able to consider  and  analyse  the  appellants
                  Facebook account which contained a number of posts showing
                  support for the Kurdish  political  cause  and  expressing
                  opposition to the Iranian regime....


                  71.  I  accept  that  if  the  authorities  see  what  the
                  appellant claims to have posted  on  Facebook  this  might
                  expose him to prosecution  with  a  risk  of  imprisonment
                  which in turn would result in a real risk of ill treatment
                  as it would be  clear  to  them  that  the  appellant  had
                  participated at some level in anti-government  activities.
                  Photographs showing him attending a  demonstration  and/or
                  comments criticising the regime may well be taken  by  the
                  Iranian authorities as showing support for Kurdish  rights
                  and opposition to the Iranian regime. there is no evidence
                  that  the  authorities  distinguish  between   those   who
                  participate in such  protests  out  of  a  genuinely  held
                  political opinion and those who do so simply to [sic] as a
                  device to try to secure international protection. However,
                  the appellant is able  to  extinguish  that  risk  by  the
                  simple expedient of  deleting  his  Facebook  posts  which
                  would have the effect of removing all posts he has created
                  as well as by not adding to them.


                  72. The appellant has not produced any evidence to suggest
                  that it is reasonably likely that the Iranian  authorities
                  have already viewed his Facebook posts to date or would do
                  so prior to his return to Iran. The appellant is neither a
                  Blogger nor journalist nor an online activist. He is not a
                  member of any political party. I have rejected  his  claim
                  about his activities in Iran and so he would not have been
                  of any interest to the authorities in Iran before he  came
                  here. It is therefore not reasonably likely that he  would
                  be subject to a speculative Internet search  or  that  the
                  authorities have been monitoring him.  There  is  also  no
                  evidence that the Iranian authorities  would  be  able  to
                  recover his Facebook account once it has been deleted.


                  73. The appellant  claims  that  even  if  he  was  facing
                  removal he  would  not  delete  his  Facebook  posts.  the
                  principle  derived  from  HJ  Iran  (and  applied  in   RT
                  Zimbabwe) would only become relevant if it was found as  a
                  fact  that  the  claimant  would  tell   the   authorities
                  something about his background in the UK which  would  put
                  him at risk of persecution and it was  contended  that  he
                  should modify what he said ( including having to  lie)  in
                  order to avoid that persecution. I have no doubt that  the
                  appellants  underlying  motives  for   participating   the
                  demonstrations recorded on his Facebook pages and  posting
                  any comments critical of the Iranian regime was to enhance
                  his asylum claim in the United Kingdom rather than to show
                  any genuine support for Kurdish rights. If that  is  right
                  then it must follow that he would have no reason  to  tell
                  the authorities  anything  about  his  activities  in  the
                  United Kingdom and would  not  do  so.  He  would  not  be
                  required to modify his behaviour to avoid persecution.  As
                  his sur place activities have been undertaken  to  enhance
                  his protection claim he would not be required to  disclose
                  anything  about  his  deleted  Facebook  account  or   his
                  attendance at demonstrations because those beliefs are not
                  genuinely held. As he is not a  genuine  opponent  of  the
                  Iranian authorities requiring him to  close  down/  delete
                  his Facebook account would  not  contravene  the  HJ  Iran
                  principle.


        13. Mr McHardy sought to produce print outs of what  he  said  were
            screenshots of the Facebook entries that had been on the laptop
            that was shown to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  Ms  Bassi
            objected; she submitted that the printouts had not been  before
            the First-tier Tribunal judge and it was  not  appropriate  for
            evidence to be introduced at this stage. I agreed. The Facebook
            postings that were shown to the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on
            the laptop were the evidence that was before the judge, not the
            printed screenshots.


        Ground (i)


        14. The thrust of Mr McHardy's submission was that the evidence  of
            the Facebook entries was crucial to the proper determination of
            the appellant's sur place asylum claim and that the failure  of
            the judge to  refer  to  this  evidence  indicated  that  their
            content had not been considered holistically with the  evidence
            overall and this amounted to  an  error  of  law.  The  act  of
            posting was itself part of the assessment of political activism
            as well as the content of the posts.  Mr  McHardy  acknowledged
            that there is reference in the First-tier Tribunal decision  to
            the presentation of the appellant's  Facebook  entries  over  a
            three-month period on a laptop  and  that  printed  screenshots
            were not produced. It was not submitted that the appellant  had
            given evidence as to the content of the posts other  than  that
            which is recorded in the First-tier Tribunal decision. It  does
            not appear to be the case  that  the  appellant  was  asked  to
            describe the content of each posting or what it referred to  or
            when or how it had been posted. Nor does the  appellant  appear
            to have been asked whether his Facebook account was  public  or
            private or a mixture prior to June 2019. Nor does there  appear
            to have been a post showing when the account was  open  or  any
            indication what his profile was.


        15. The judge was, as can be seen from the extracts of his judgment
            above, aware that there  were  posts  on  Facebook.  He  refers
            (paragraph 70) to the limited evidence that was available about
            the content of the posts.  The  judge  referred  in  detail  to
            HB(Iran) and drew a clear distinction to the difference in  the
            evidence put forward in that case and that which the  appellant
            was relying upon.

        16. Although Mr McHardy referred to the Facebook evidence as  being
            "crucial" in terms of  the  determination  of  the  appellant's
            asylum claim it cannot logically be suggested that  the  detail
            of  the  Facebook  account  could  impact  on  the  credibility
            findings made by the judge  on  the  appellant's  asylum  claim
            based on events whilst he was  in  Iran.  The  appellant's  own
            evidence was that he had  no  political  interest  or  activity
            whatsoever  whilst  in  Iran.  There  was  no  request  for  an
            adjournment by the appellant; had there been  the  judge  would
            have considered that in the context of the  relevance  and  the
            submitted importance of the Facebook posts.

        17. Mr McHardy submitted before me that the judge  should,  of  his
            own motion, have considered whether a fair hearing  could  take
            place in the absence of printed  screenshots  of  the  Facebook
            evidence. The  appellant  was  professionally  represented;  he
            produced last minute evidence which he  sought  to  rely  upon;
            there does not appear to have been any attempt to  undertake  a
            detailed description of the  content  of  the  posts  with  the
            assistance of the interpreter  who  could  at  the  least  have
            translated what the  appellant  read  out.  There  was  nothing
            before the judge which could begin to indicate that  he  should
            have given an adjournment.

        18. The issue of the Facebook entries can therefore only impact  on
            the nature and extent of the appellant's sur place activity.

        19. Mr McHardy in his grounds of appeal  and  in  oral  submissions
            laid great stress upon caselaw and referred to extracts from YH
            [2010] EWCA Civ 116, MK (duty to give reasons) [2013] UKUT  641
            (IAC), JA (Afghanistan) [2014] EWCA Civ 450. But his references
            miss the point: the judge was plainly  aware  that  there  were
            Facebook posts, the content (such as it was) had been described
            to him and that is referred to in the  decision.  There  is  no
            indication that the description as recorded was  not  given  to
            the judge. The Facebook posts as described and the photographic
            evidence and the appellant's  evidence  of  the  demonstrations
            attended and the lack of other political  party  activity  were
            all considered  by  the  judge  who,  in  the  context  of  the
            appellant's overall lack of political engagement  and  lack  of
            explanation for his posts  and  attendance  at  demonstrations,
            reached a conclusion that was open to him namely that  his  sur
            place activities were undertaken to enhance an asylum claim and
            not to show any support for Kurdish rights.

        20. The caselaw references do not begin to undermine  the  findings
            of the judge on the motives of the appellant. The judge reached
            those findings on the basis of the evidence  which  was  before
            him; he gave full, detailed and sustainable reasons.

        21. Ground (i) is not made out.


        Ground (ii)


        22.  Mr McHardy referred in his grounds to three  findings  in  the
            First-tier Tribunal decision to support his submission that the
            reasoning in  connection  with  the  credibility  findings  was
            illogical:
            (a) that the judge stating that  the  reference  to  the  first
            mention of the appellant's uncle seeing Mr [S] speaking to  the
            police was in evidence whereas this could have  been  the  case
            when the appellant referred in his screening interview  to  his
            uncle making "a few queries".
            (b)  that the judge's conclusion that "it would make  no  sense
            for Mr [S] to keep any publications or other  documentation  in
            his car..." was speculative.
            (c)the judge's comment re the accident  and  leaving  Iran  was
            unclear and the judge merely noted the explanation and did  not
            state whether it was accepted or rejected.


            These issues are minor disagreements with phraseology  used  by
            the judge. That it may have been speculation on the part of the
            judge regarding the documents in the car does not  in  any  way
            undermine the thorough assessment undertaken by  the  judge  of
            the statements made by the appellant in his screening interview
            (some three months after the incidents  he  claimed  occurred),
            his claims made in his substantive interview and  his  attempts
            trying to remedy the inconsistencies  and  contradictions.  The
            judge  considered  the  evidence   holistically   and   reached
            conclusions that were plainly  open  to  him  on  the  evidence
            before him.


        23. Ground (ii) is not made out.


        Ground (iii) and ground (iv)


        24. The grounds do not accurately reflect the conclusion reached by
            the  judge  or  the  nuanced  approach  of   the   caselaw   to
            opportunistic embellishment of an asylum claim.


        25. The judge did not take the view that an  asylum  applicant  was
            not entitled to protection if he could effectively  retract  or
            conceal elements of his claim  to  avoid  exposure.  The  first
            point  to  be  made  is  that  the  judge  has  made  firm  and
            unassailable findings that the appellant is  not  and  has  not
            been involved  in  any  political  opposition  to  the  Iranian
            government. At most, from the  evidence  that  was  before  the
            First-tier Tribunal judge, he has attended a few demonstrations
            and made a limited number of posts on a Facebook account  which
            have not been translated and their provenance, content,  spread
            and public nature was not in evidence  before  the  judge.  The
            appellant will not have to lie if asked if he is opposed to the
            Iranian government; he is not. If  he  chooses  to  say  he  is
            opposed to the government, that itself is a lie  and  a  matter
            for him. The appellant has no  reason  to  inform  the  Iranian
            authorities  that  he  has  been  involved  in  anti-government
            activities because his involvement was not predicated upon  any
            genuine political involvement. To  assert  otherwise  would  be
            inaccurate.

        26. It is not, as submitted by  Mr  McHardy,  immaterial,  that  HJ
            (Iran) was dealing with a  case  where  the  individual  had  a
            genuine characteristic. In this case, the  appellant  does  not
            have a characteristic that requires protection.

        27. Although as said in Iftikar Ahmed [1999]  EWCA  Civ  3003,  the
            ultimate question is whether the behaviour of an appellant,  no
            matter how cynical or manufactured, would result in a  risk  of
            persecution on return; if so then he may establish his right to
            protection. But that is  not  the  end  of  the  issue.  Having
            established the particular behaviour the next  question  to  be
            asked is whether that behaviour does  place  the  appellant  at
            risk.
        28. The judge examined this. He identified and accepted that if the
            authorities in Iran came to know of adverse  behaviour  by  the
            appellant then he would be at risk  of  being  persecuted.  The
            judge looked at the evidence relied upon by  the  appellant  in
            the context of the relevant  jurisprudence  and  concluded,  in
            line with country guidance that the activities of the appellant
            in   attending   demonstrations   would   not   lead   to   his
            identification. That was a finding the judge  was  entitled  to
            come to on the evidence before him.


        29. Mr McHardy submitted that  the  appellant  would  be  asked  to
            disclose his Facebook password and the posts he made  would  be
            available to the authorities which would lead  to  persecution.
            Apart from the difficulty for the appellant that  at  most  the
            Facebook    evidence    shows    demonstrations    and     some
            unparticularised postings, the nature and content of which  was
            not disclosed (although the judge  took  the  evidence  at  its
            highest and said that he accepted that the appellant  might  be
            exposed to risk if that was disclosed), the appellant could, as
            identified by the judge delete his Facebook account. It was not
            argued  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that   the   Iranian
            authorities would be able to recover a deleted account.

        30. The judge found that it was not reasonably  likely,  given  his
            lack of activity, that the appellant would have been subject to
            monitoring or would be of any interest to  the  authorities  in
            Iran. If asked on return if he had a Facebook account he could,
            if he deletes it, legitimately say no.

        31. Mr McHardy said that the appellant could  not  lie;  to  do  so
            would  contravene  the  principles  in  HJ(Iran).  This  is  to
            misunderstand the basis  of  those  principles.  Although  this
            appellant has claimed asylum on the  basis  that  he  is  anti-
            government,  his  claim  is  fabricated  -  he  is  not   anti-
            government,  he  has  not  been  involved  in   anti-government
            activity in Iran, his sur place activity has been contrived and
            does not amount to activity that would, in accordance with  HB,
            result in adverse interest. He would be under no obligation  to
            say that he had made an asylum claim as  being  anti-government
            given that his claim to have been involved in such activity  is
            a fabrication.

        32. The judge correctly found, on the evidence before him, that  if
            the appellant deleted his Facebook account he would not  be  at
            risk of being persecuted.

        33. Although Mr McHardy submits that the extent to which a  deleted
            Facebook account was irrecoverable  required  expert  evidence,
            the appellant did not file any such expert evidence. It is  not
            a matter of the judge taking judicial notice, although of  what
            is not quite clear. The  appellant  did  not,  at  his  hearing
            before the First-tier Tribunal judge make submissions regarding
            the lack of ability to delete  a  Facebook  account  or  how  a
            deleted  account  could  be  re-activated.   Nor   were   there
            submissions that even  if  deleted,  this  appellant  would  be
            further investigated  -  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
            Tribunal judge was such that, in line with HB,  this  appellant
            would not be at risk. This appellant has no  activity,  on  the
            judge's sustainable findings, that could lead to him  being  at
            risk of being persecuted, if his Facebook account  is  deleted.
            If he chooses not to delete his Facebook account,  despite  him
            not being politically anti-government, that  is  a  matter  for
            him.


        34. Grounds (iii) and (iv) are not made out.


        Ground (v)


        35. Mr McHardy submits that because the appellant  has  a  Facebook
            account at the date of the hearing and the decision whether the
            appellant will be at risk of being persecuted is to be taken at
            the date of hearing, the judge has erred in law in  speculating
            that the appellant will delete his Facebook  account  to  avoid
            being at risk.


        36. That submission is flawed on two grounds. Firstly, and  perhaps
            the most basic, it is  not  speculative  to  conclude  that  an
            individual who is not anti-government and  has  no  significant
            political activity  would  not  delete  something  which  is  a
            fabrication.

        37. Secondly the evidence of what was on the Facebook  account  was
            that the applicant had attended a few demonstrations  on  dates
            and at places unknown  and  had  made  a  few  unparticularised
            posts.

        38. HB sets out the matters that may  result  in  risk  to  a  Kurd
            returning to Iran after a period abroad. This appellant has not
            been involved in Kurdish political  groups  or  activity  other
            than attending  a  few  demonstrations  at  which  he  is  very
            unlikely to have been identified; he  has  not  spoken  out  in
            favour of Kurdish rights; he has not been involved in social or
            charitable activities on behalf  of  Kurds;  he  has  not  been
            involved in any organised activity on behalf of or  in  support
            of Kurds.

        39. Although, as described in HB, the Iranian authorities operate a
            'hair-trigger' approach, the only factor that can  be  remotely
            considered to be adverse  to  this  appellant  is  that  he  is
            Kurdish and has been in the UK for some years. In line with HB,
            that is not enough.

        40. Ground (v) is not made out.

        41. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not err in law in  dismissing
            the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse  him
            international protection.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set  aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing the appeal stands.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  rule  13  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.


    I make an order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.



                                    Date 28th January 2020
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
