

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/08532/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly        |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                         |
|On 7 February 2018                    |       On 19 February 2018          |
|                                      |                                    |

                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                              LEVAN IREMASHVILI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr A Sinker instructed by Sabz Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 6 April 1985 and is a national of Georgia.


3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Thorne promulgated on 1 March  2017  which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent dated 5  August
   2016 to dismiss the Appellants protection claim.
5. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that the Judge  was  in  error  in
   that he applied the wrong standard of proof; the  Judge  failed  to  take
   into account the risk of persecution  by  the  state  but  the  potential
   mistreatment he would face in prison as a deserter.
6.  On 19 June 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle  refused  permission  to
   appeal. The grounds were renewed and on 14 September 2017 permission  was
   granted.
7. There is a Rule 24 response dated 4 October 2017.

8. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Sinker  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that (a) He relied on the grounds of appeal.

   (b) The Appellant was accepted to have deserted and was  sentenced  to  5
   years in prison in absentia. It appears to be a high  sentence  and  from
   that it can be assumed that the sentence was politically motivated.

   (c) There is background material to suggest that there  are  issues  with
   the independence of the judiciary although there have been improvements.

   (d) The background material did not suggest that the conditions in prison
   engaged Article 3 but if his sentence was politically motivated he  would
   serve it in harsher conditions

9. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Mc Vitie submitted that :

   a) This was simply a disagreement with findings that were reasonably open
      to the Judge

   b) It cannot be argued that the sentence was high given that the  offence
      carries a sentence of between 3-7 years.

   c) The Appellants evidence before the Judge was that he no longer  feared
      mistreatment arising out if  his  political  associations  just  as  a
      result of desertion.

   d) The sentence passed was a proper one given the nature of the treatment
      meted out to the officers. One  of  the  sergeants  was  sentenced  to
      Community Service which was not harsh.

   e) The Judge sets out that the Appellant had a right  of  appeal  against
      his  sentence  and  there  was  the  suggestion  that  the   term   of
      imprisonment might be set aside if he returned.

   f) In relation to prison conditions in Georgia they  appeared  to  be  no
      worse that those in the UK.

   g) It was speculation  that  he  would  serve  a  sentence  in  different
      circumstances because of the nature of the conviction.

The Law

10.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration.
Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. It is a trite observation that a judge need not address in detail  every
   single argument advanced before him,  nor  consider  in  isolation  every
   single piece of evidence. He must weigh all of the evidence  before  him,
   and give clear reasons for his conclusions such that the parties, and  in
   particular the losing party, can understand the reasons for her decision.

14. The argument that the Judge applied the wrong standard of proof  has  no
   merit and quite properly was not pursued  by  Mr  Sinker  either  in  his
   skeleton argument or in oral submissions. The Judge  at  paragraphs  2949
   set out the legal principles that included both the burden  and  standard
   of proof for all those matters he had to assess. There is nothing in  his
   decision that suggests he applied these criteria incorrectly.

15. The Judge accurately and  succinctly  set  out  the  background  to  the
   Appellants flight to the UK. He noted at paragraph 52 that the Appellants
   claim was no longer that he was at risk because of the events of 2011. He
   did not fear that he would be prosecuted for what he accepted had been an
   illegal act: others had taken responsibility and he had  only  ever  been
   summonsed as a witness.

16. The Judge also noted at paragraph  54  that  a  nation  is  entitled  to
   expect its citizens to perform national service and prosecute  those  who
   deserted which the Appellant accepted he had.

17. Against that background I see no basis on which  the  Judge  could  find
   that his sentence of 5 years for desertion was politically motivated. Not
   only did the Appellant not advance that argument  but  such  an  argument
   would be unsupported by the background material that the Judge had before
   him and which he summarised at paragraphs  21-23  that  showed  that  the
   Appellant had received a mid level sentence given  the  penalty  was  3-7
   years and Document A made clear that there was a right of appeal and  the
   Judge noted that the background material showed that the  appeal  process
   was fair (paragraph 55).

18. Mr Sinker did not  seek  to  argue  before  me  that  prison  conditions
   breached Article 3 and conceded that they did not because the  weight  of
   the background material from independent  sources  was  strongly  against
   him. The conditions described in  some  of  the  prisons  and  pre  trial
   detention  facilities  were  poor  and  they  lacked  'adequate  sanitary
   facilities' (paragraph 23) but this is not enough to engage Article 3.

19. Given the fact that there was no basis on which  to  conclude  that  the
   sentence was politically motivated there was no reason or basis on  which
   the Judge could have concluded that the Appellant was likely to serve his
   sentence in les favourable conditions even if in the  event  he  appealed
   and was unsuccessful.

20. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

21. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

22. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date
11.2.2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
