
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08468/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On 25 June 2020                      |On 10 July 2020                      |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

                                     A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity

I make a direction under r.14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This  direction
applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other  persons.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

I make this direction because this is a protection claim.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

    This is a decision on the  papers  without  a  hearing.  Neither  party
    objected. A face-to-face hearing or a remote hearing was not  held  for
    the reasons given at paras 5-8 below. The documents described at para 4
    below were submitted. The order made is  set  out  at  para  32  below.
    (Administrative  Instruction  No.  2  from  the  Senior  President   of
    Tribunals).

Representation (by submissions in writing):
For the appellant:     Ms K Smith, of Counsel.
For the respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Specialist Appeals Team.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant, a national of  Iraq  born  on  1  August  1982,  appeals
    against a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  N  Lodge
    (hereafter referred to as the "judge") who, in a  decision  promulgated
    on 15 November 2019 following a hearing on 7 November  2019,  dismissed
    his appeal against a decision of the respondent of 19  August  2019  to
    refuse his further submissions  of  2  July  2019  in  support  of  his
    protection and human rights claims first made on  2  October  2008  and
    refused in a decision dated 14 October 2008.

The issues

 2. The following are the issues I have to decide (hereafter the "Issues"):

         (i)  whether it is appropriate to decide  the  following  questions
         without a hearing:

             (a)  whether the decision of the judge involved the making  of
             an error on a point of law; and

             (b)  whether the judge's decision should be set aside.

         (ii) if I conclude that it is  appropriate  to  proceed  without  a
         hearing and if the answer to both questions (a) and  (b)  above  is
         "yes", then whether the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier
         Tribunal or whether the decision on the appeal should be re-made in
         the Upper Tribunal.

 3. I come to decide these issues after the following have been  issued  by
    the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  (the  "Tribunal")
    after the "lockdown" due to the Covid-19 pandemic commenced on 23 March
    2020:

         (i)  A "Note and Directions"  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rimington
         dated 3 April 2020 and issued by the Upper  Tribunal  on  22  April
         2020. Para 1 of the "Note and Directions" stated that, in light  of
         the present need to take precautions against the spread  of  Covid-
         19, Judge  Rimington  had  reached  the  provisional  view,  having
         reviewed the file in this case, that it  would  be  appropriate  to
         determine questions (i)(a) and (b) above without a hearing.

             Para 2 of the "Note and Directions"  issued  directions  which
             provided for the party  who  had  sought  permission  to  make
             submissions, within 14 days of the "Note and Directions" being
             sent to the parties, in support of the assertion of  an  error
             of law and on the question whether the decision of the  First-
             tier Tribunal ("FtT") should be set aside if error of  law  is
             found; for any other party to file and serve, within  21  days
             of the  "Note  and  Directions"  being  sent,  submissions  in
             response; and, if such submissions in response were made,  for
             the party who sought permission to file a reply no later  than
             28 days of the "Note and Directions" being sent.

             Para 3 of the "Note and Directions" stated that any party  who
             considered that despite the foregoing directions a hearing was
             necessary to  consider  questions  1(a)  and  (b)  may  submit
             reasons for that view no later than 21 days of the  "Note  and
             Directions" being sent to the parties.

 4. I have received the following documents from the parties:

         (i)  from the appellant:

             (a)  a document  entitled  "Appellant's  Written  Submissions"
             dated 6 May 2020 by Ms K. Smith, of  Counsel,  accompanied  by
             typed notes of Ms Smith's record of the proceedings before the
             judge and  the  appellant's  further  representations  to  the
             respondent dated 24 June 2019, submitted to the Upper Tribunal
             by Ms Smith under cover of an email dated 6 May 2020 timed  at
             14:44 hours; and

             (b)   a  document   entitled   "Appellant's   reply   to   the
             respondent's written submissions" by Ms  Smith  dated  19  May
             2020, submitted to the Upper Tribunal by Ms Smith under  cover
             of an email dated 20 May 2020 timed at 09:34 hours.

         (ii) From the respondent a document entitled: "Secretary of State's
         response to Directions" dated 11 May 2020, by Ms  Aboni,  submitted
         to the Upper Tribunal under cover of an email  dated  11  May  2020
         timed at 11:32 hours.

    To the extent that any of the above submissions  were  late,  I  extend
    time for compliance with the relevant direction and admit them.

Issue (i) - whether it is appropriate to proceed without a hearing

 5. Neither party has objected to the Upper Tribunal proceeding  to  decide
    the Issues without a hearing.

 6. Whilst the limitations imposed during the lockdown have been relaxed to
    a certain extent, the Upper Tribunal is not  yet  listing  appeals  for
    hearing (whether remotely or face-to-face) at the capacity that it  had
    been prior to the lockdown being imposed. Resolution of the appellant's
    appeal may therefore be unduly delayed if it is  to  be  listed  to  be
    heard remotely or at a face-to-face hearing.

 7. I have the benefit of the parties' detailed submissions on the  Issues.
    I have considered the grounds, the parties' submissions on  the  Issues
    and the decision of  the  judge  in  order  to  decide  whether  it  is
    appropriate for me to decide the Issues without a hearing.  Given  that
    my decision is limited to the Issues and  given  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the Tribunal do not raise any ground that will  require  oral
    evidence to be heard in  order  to  decide  the  Issues,  there  is  no
    question of my making findings of fact or hearing oral evidence at this
    stage.

 8. In all of the circumstances, and taking  into  account  the  overriding
    objective, I have concluded that it is appropriate for me  to  exercise
    my discretion and proceed to decide the Issues without a hearing.

Issues (i) (a) and (b) - whether the judge erred  in  law  and  whether  his
decision should be set aside

The basis of the appellant's claim

 9. The appellant originates from Kirkuk in Iraq. The basis of  his  asylum
    claim in 2008 was that  he  feared  persecution  in  Iraq  from  a  man
    (hereafter referred to "SI") for two reasons: (i)  he  (the  appellant)
    used to act for a theatre group and, in 2004, he played a role in which
    he had to carry a cross as a result of which SI  made  threats  against
    him and, subsequently, against the entire theatre group; and  (ii)  due
    to his relationship with a Christian girl  (hereafter  referred  to  as
    "M") which started in June 2007 and continued until the appellant  left
    Iraq as a result of which SI threatened to kill him unless  he  stopped
    seeing M.

The appellant's previous appeal

10. In the refusal letter dated 14 October 2008,  the  respondent  did  not
    challenge the appellant's credibility. The appellant's  appeal  against
    the decision of 14 October 2008  was  heard  before  Immigration  Judge
    Morrison on 2 December 2008.  In  a  determination  promulgated  on  10
    December 2008, Judge  Morrison  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum  grounds,  humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  human  rights
    grounds.

11. At para 13 of his decision, Judge Morrison said that he was prepared to
    accept the appellant's account as credible, as he had earlier  set  out
    at para 9 of his decision and which I have summarised at para 9  above.
    Judge Morrison then said (para 13):

         "... The only additional comment I wish to make in relation to  the
         findings of fact is that while I have accepted that  the  appellant
         did receive threats from [SI] there is no  evidence  as  to  [SI's]
         precise role and no evidence of any kind that he has any  influence
         outside Kirkuk other than the appellant's  oral  evidence  and  for
         that reason my conclusion is that the appellant has not established
         that SI has any influence outside Kirkuk".

12. At para 20 of his decision, Judge Morrison said that he  accepted  that
    the appellant had a subjective fear of being returned to  Kirkuk  as  a
    result of both his acting  activities  and  his  relationship  with  M.
    However, he found that the appellant's fear of SI  due  to  his  acting
    activities was not objectively well-founded because  (in  summary)  the
    appellant had  never  encountered  any  personal  violence  or  threats
    arising from these activities and there was noting in his account which
    amounted to persecution. In relation to his  fear  of  SI  due  to  his
    relationship with M, Judge Morrison accepted that the appellant's  fear
    was objectively well-founded and that it would  not  be  safe  for  the
    appellant to return to Kirkuk as  a  result  of  threats  made  by  SI.
    However, he found (para 23) that it would be safe and not unduly  harsh
    for the appellant to relocate either to the southern part  of  Iraq  or
    the Iraqi Kurdish Region ("IKR", referred to by Judge Morrison  as  the
    Kurdish Autonomous Area or "KAA"), stating, again (at para 22):

         "The only finding in fact which I am able to make  in  relation  to
         [SI] is that he is the  head  of  the  family/tribe  to  which  the
         appellant and his family belong but there is no objective  evidence
         as to the extent of his influence, if any, outside Kirkuk."

13. In the decision letter dated 19 August 2019 that was the subject of the
    appeal before the judge, the respondent did not  take  issue  with  the
    credibility of the appellant's account  of  the  basis  of  his  asylum
    claim. In this decision letter, the respondent noted (para 18) that  it
    had been found by Judge Morrison that the  appellant  was  at  risk  on
    return in his home area of Kirkuk due to his fear of a non-state actor.
    The  respondent  therefore  considered  the  feasibility  of   internal
    relocation to Baghdad and the IKR.

14. The respondent noted (para 24 of the decision letter  dated  19  August
    2019) that the appellant had previously stated that his CSID  card  was
    in Iraq and (at para 29) that he had a National Identity card which  as
    in Kirkuk. She considered (para 24) that the appellant had not provided
    any corroborative evidence to show that he could not  obtain  his  CSID
    card and there was no evidence to suggest that  he  did  not  have  any
    extended family in Iraq; that he had not provided any evidence to  show
    that he had made any applications to the Iraqi Embassy  in  the  United
    Kingdom to obtain a CSID or travel documents or that he was  unable  to
    obtain these documents; that he has male family members  who  would  be
    able to attend the relevant civil registry office in Iraq with  him  to
    obtain a CSID (para 30); and that he had not established that he had no
    family in Iraq (para 31).

15. It is therefore clear from the decision letter  dated  19  August  2019
    that the respondent did not take issue  with  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account of the basis of his  asylum  claim,  that  is,  his
    account that he  had  received  threats  from  SI  due  to  his  acting
    activities and his relationship with  M.  The  factual  issues  in  the
    appeal before the judge were the factual issues mentioned at my para 14
    above. It is also clear that Judge Morrison did not make  any  findings
    of fact on these factual issues.

Summary of the judge's decision

16. At para 19 of his decision, the judge said that he  did  not  find  the
    appellant a credible witness. At paras 29-31, he said:

         "29. Miss Smith submitted that I should have  regard  to  the  fact
             that the appellant was found to be a credible witness by Judge
             Morrison.

         30.  I am not satisfied in relation to that last point  that  Judge
             Morrison's findings have any bearing on the issue  of  whether
             the appellant's evidence with regard to his CSID is  credible.
             Judge Morrison does not positively assert that  the  appellant
             is a credible witness. He says he is prepared  to  accept  the
             appellant's account as credible, there  being  no  credibility
             challenge to it in the refusal letter. He then goes on to find
             that whilst he has accepted that  the  appellant  did  receive
             threats from [SI], there is no evidence as to  [SI's]  precise
             role and no evidence of any kind that  he  has  any  influence
             outside Kirkuk other than the appellant's oral evidence,  "and
             for that  reason  my  conclusion  is  the  appellant  has  not
             established that [SI] has any influence outside Kirkuk".  That
             is not  in  my  opinion  a  wholehearted  endorsement  of  the
             appellant's credibility.

         31.  I start therefore  from  the  position  that  the  appellant's
             account must be examined ab initio, from scratch, without  any
             precondition relating to the appellant's credibility.  Looking
             at the appellant's account, I do not find it credible. A  CSID
             is an important document. It  was  an  important  document  in
             2008. It has since that time acquired considerably more status
             in relation to the feasibility of return to Iraq but  even  in
             2008, it was an important document for an  Iraqi  citizen.  In
             2008, it was at the appellant's home. He left it there when he
             fled Iraq. He has not given me any explanation as  to  why  he
             would leave such an important document at home."

         (my emphasis)

17. The judge went on to reject the appellant's evidence  that  he  had  no
    idea what had happened  to  his  CSID  (para  32).  He  considered  the
    appellant's evidence that his parents had relocated to Syria  in  2009,
    that his mother died in Syria in December 2012, that  his  father  then
    moved to Jordan and that his contact with his father ceased  in  August
    2018. It is clear from his reasoning at paras 33-35 that the judge  did
    not find this evidence reliable. At paras 36-38, he said:

         "36. I am not satisfied the appellant has established  to  the  low
             standard that he has lost his CSID. I  am  not  satisfied  the
             appellant is a credible witness. I have no  reliable  evidence
             that his father and mother are not in Iraq. On the face of it,
             it is unlikely that he does not have extended family in  Iraq.
             I find it highly unlikely in such  a  philoprogenitive  nation
             that his father and mother had but one sibling  between  them.
             Even if  that  were  the  case  surely  his  grandparents  had
             children (plural) who have had children who in their turn have
             had children.[pic]

         37.  I am not satisfied that having known the  whereabouts  of  his
             CSID, he does not know its whereabouts now. I am satisfied  he
             has access to his CSID and I am satisfied  he  is  in  contact
             with his father (and possibly other relatives).

         38.  I am satisfied that on return to Baghdad, he will have  access
             to his CSID and the support of family members. I am  satisfied
             (pace Judge Morrison) that armed with his CSID, the  appellant
             can safely relocate to a non-contested area of Iraq."

Grounds of appeal

18. There are three grounds. There are two separate limbs to ground 2.  The
    grounds may be summarised as follows:

         (i)  (Ground 1) The judge erred in reaching his adverse credibility
             assessment because he  failed  to  take  into  account,  as  a
             starting point pursuant to the guidance in Devaseelan * [2002]
             UKIAT 0072,  the  fact  that  Judge  Morrison  had  found  the
             appellant credible.

         (ii) (Ground 2.a) The judge erred in assessing the  credibility  of
             the appellant's evidence that he had left his CSID in Iraq and
             in  reaching  his  findings  at  paras  31-36,  including  his
             assessment of the appellant's evidence that he has no  contact
             with his  father.  Firstly,  the  judge  failed  to  take  the
             findings of Judge Morrison as a starting point.  Secondly,  he
             failed to take account of relevant evidence. That is:

             a)   The fact that the premise of the Tribunal's  decision  in
                  AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212
                  (IAC) was that many applicants for asylum in the  UK  will
                  have left Iraq without their CSID.

             b)   In doubting the credibility of the appellant's claim that
                  his parents left Iraq in 2009, the judge  failed  to  take
                  into account the  appellant's  explanation  given  in  his
                  further submissions that his family were assisted to leave
                  Iraq for Syria by the UN  or  the  country  guidance  that
                  there has in the last decade been mass  displacement  from
                  Iraq as a result of deteriorating country conditions.

             c)   In reaching his finding at para 35,  that  the  appellant
                  had "done nothing" to locate his father beyond sending one
                  letter, the judge was mistaken as to the evidence  because
                  the appellant's evidence was that he had repeatedly  tried
                  to telephone his father without success and having had  no
                  success he then wrote to his  father.  Furthermore,  there
                  was no evidential basis for assuming  that  the  appellant
                  knew contact details for his father's neighbours in Jordan
                  or that the appellant knew people in the UK that might  be
                  able to assist him re-establish contact with his father.

             d)   The judge speculated at para 36  when  he  said  that  he
                  found it  "highly  unlikely  in  such  a  philoprogenitive
                  nation that his father and  mother  had  but  one  sibling
                  between them. Even  if  that  were  the  case  surely  his
                  grandparents and children (plural) who have  had  children
                  who  in  their  turn  have  had  children."  The   judge's
                  speculation  was  based  on  a  stereotype  of  a  nation.
                  Secondly, the judge was mistaken and failed to have proper
                  regard to the evidence, in that, the  appellant's  account
                  given in his original asylum claim,  as  accepted  by  the
                  respondent and Judge Morrison, was that  the  perpetrators
                  of the serious harm that the appellant feared in his  home
                  area were his extended family.

         (iii)    (Ground 2.b) It was procedurally unfair for the  judge  to
             adversely rely at para 34 on the fact that  he  had  not  been
             provided  with  the  tenancy  agreement   showing   that   the
             appellant's father lived in Jordan. The tenancy agreement  had
             been sent to the respondent as part of the appellant's further
             representations. If the  issue  had  been  raised  during  the
             hearing, the respondent may have been in a position to provide
             the tenancy agreement to the judge.

         (iv) (Ground 3) The judge erred in his consideration and assessment
             of internal flight.

Assessment

19. In her submissions on the respondent's behalf, Ms Aboni  accepted  that
    the judge had failed to give adequate consideration  to  the  issue  of
    internal relocation. However, she submitted  that  the  judge  had  not
    erred in law in assessing credibility. She submitted that he had  taken
    the findings of Judge Morrison as his starting point in line  with  the
    guidance in Devaseelan. In addition, she submitted that the  judge  was
    entitled to find that Judge Morrison had not positively  asserted  that
    the appellant was a credible  witness  and  that  he  was  entitled  to
    consider the appellant's claims that he was no longer in  contact  with
    his family and did not have assess to his CSID.

20. In her reply, Ms Smith accepted that the judge was entitled to consider
    the credibility of the appellant's evidence that he was  no  longer  in
    contact with his family and did not have access to his  CSID.  However,
    she submitted that the judge erred in his  approach  in  assessing  the
    appellant's credibility on these factual matters, in that, he erred  in
    not approaching the credibility assessment from the starting point that
    the appellant had previously given a truthful account.

21. In relation to ground 1, I have no hesitation in rejecting  Ms  Aboni's
    submissions and accepting Ms Smith's  submissions.  It  is  clear  that
    Judge Morrison  had  not  made  any  findings  concerning  whether  the
    appellant had left his CSID in  Iraq.  However,  the  fact  that  Judge
    Morrison had accepted the appellant's account of the reasons why he had
    been threatened by SI was a  relevant  consideration  in  deciding  the
    credibility of his evidence concerning his CSID and whether he had  any
    contact with any family members in Iraq. Although the  judge  said,  at
    para 20 of his decision, that "the starting point for my  deliberations
    must  be  the  previous  determination  of  Judge  Morrison",   it   is
    nevertheless clear from  para  31,  that  he  decided  to  examine  the
    credibility of the appellant's evidence on  the  factual  matters  that
    were in issue  before  him  "from  scratch,  without  any  precondition
    relating to the appellant's credibility".  This can only mean  that  he
    left out of account entirely the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  been
    accepted as credible in his accounts of the basis of his asylum claim.

22. In that regard, the fact that the respondent  had  not  challenged  the
    appellant's credibility was neither  here  nor  there.  Judge  Morrison
    decided the appellant's credibility based on the case as put to him  by
    both parties. Judge Morrison's  assessment  was  therefore  a  relevant
    consideration in assessing the factual matters that were  in  issue  in
    the instant appeal irrespective of whether or not  the  respondent  had
    challenged the appellant's credibility in the decision letter dated  14
    October 2008.

23. The judge considered that the fact that Judge Morrison had stated that,
    whilst he accepted that the appellant had  received  threats  from  SI,
    "there was no evidence as to SI's precise role and no evidence  of  any
    kind that he has  any  influence  outside  of  Kirkuk  other  than  the
    appellant's oral evidence" meant that Judge  Morrison  had  not  whole-
    heartedly endorsed the appellant's credibility. However, even  if  that
    was the case, it cannot justify disregarding  entirely,  as  the  judge
    plainly did, the fact that Judge Morrison had accepted the  credibility
    of the appellant's evidence that he had received threats from SI due to
    his acting activities and his relationship with M.

24. For  the  reasons  given  above,  I  am  satisfied  that  ground  1  is
    established.

25. Ms Aboni did not address ground 2.a or ground 2.b in her submissions. I
    have considered grounds 2.a and 2.b. I am satisfied that each and  very
    one of the points made in grounds 2.a and 2.b is established,  for  the
    reasons given in the said grounds and as summarised above.

26. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge erred in law in reaching his
    findings on the appellant's evidence as to the whereabouts of his  CSID
    and his parents and whether he has any family in Iraq.  This is plainly
    material to the outcome having regard to the country  guidance  in  AAH
    (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG  [2018]  UKUT  00212  (IAC)
    that the judge had to apply. It is also plainly material having  regard
    to the current country guidance in SMO,  KSP  and  IM  (Article  15(c);
    identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC).

27. Accordingly, I am satisfied that Grounds 1, 2.a and 2.b are material to
    the outcome. It is therefore not necessary for me to consider ground 3.



28. For the reasons given above, I set aside the decision of the  judge  in
    its entirety.

Issue (ii) - whether  the  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal or whether the decision on the appeal  should  be  re-made  in  the
Upper Tribunal.

29. Ms Smith submits that the appeal should be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing. Ms Aboni accepted that, if  the  decision
    of the judge was set aside  in  its  entirety,  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

30. In view of my decision to set aside the decision of the  judge  in  its
    entirety and having regard  to  the  country  guidance  in  SMO,  I  am
    satisfied that such is the extent of the fact-finding that is necessary
    in this case that a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal  is  the  right
    and fair course of action.

31. I therefore remit this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    decision on the appellant's appeal to be re-made by a judge other  than
    Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  N  Lodge.  In  addition,  fairness
    requires that the decision is re-made by  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Morrison.

Notice of Decision

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  errors
    on points of law such that the decision is set aside in  its  entirety.
    This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision  on
    the appellant's appeal to be re-made by a judge other than Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal N  Lodge  and  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Morrison.



DIRECTION

Within 14 days of this decision being sent to the  parties,  the  respondent
to file and serve a copy of the tenancy agreement referred to at  paras  25-
26 of the decision of Judge Lodge or a written explanation  of  the  reasons
for not doing so.


Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  Signed: 26 June 2020
