
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08235/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 March 2019                     |On 10 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                   M B O I
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs L Brakaj, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Iran  who  made  an  application  for
    international protection. He failed to attend an asylum interview on  5
    May 2016 and his claim was treated as withdrawn on 20 May 2016  and  he
    was  recorded  as  an  immigration  absconder.  He  submitted   further
    submissions again  claiming  asylum.  Ultimately  his  application  was
    refused on 6 June 2018.

 2. The Appellant  appealed  the  Respondent's  decision  and  following  a
    hearing at Birmingham, and in a decision promulgated on 8 August  2018,
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Row dismissed the Appellant's  appeal.
    The Judge found at paragraph 27 of his decision that there were aspects
    of the Appellant's case that  he  did  not  find  plausible  and  which
    affected the Appellant's general  credibility.  The  Judge  found  that
    albeit the Appellant was Iranian and of Kurdish  ethnicity  his  father
    was not involved in any way with the PJAK as claimed. Further,  he  did
    not find the PJAK suggested to the Appellant that he should join  their
    organisation, that the  Iranian  authorities  sought  to  question  the
    Appellant and issued a summons to bring him to court or that  the  said
    summons is a genuine document. He went on to find  that  the  Appellant
    had not exited Iran illegally.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. It was granted by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Blundell on 7 September 2018. His  reasons  for
    so doing were: -

         "1. The appellant seeks permission to appeal, in  time,  against  a
         decision which was issued by Judge Row on 8 August 2018, dismissing
         his appeal against the respondent's refusal of his second claim for
         international protection.

         2.The points made at [8] and [14] of the grounds are  arguable.  It
         is  firstly  arguable,  therefore,  that  the  judge   reached   an
         irrational conclusion when he found that the appellant  could  have
         approached PJAK for a letter confirming his father's membership  of
         that group. That finding was arguably irrational in  light  of  the
         appellant's expressed fear of that group. It is arguable, secondly,
         that the judge failed to give any,  or  any  adequate  reasons  for
         concluding that the summons was not genuine. It is far  from  clear
         that any such allegation was made by the respondent, as opposed  to
         submitting - - on a Tanveer Ahmed - basis - that the  document  was
         unreliable.

         3. Had it not been for those  two  points,  I  would  have  refused
         permission. I consider the remaining grounds to be  decidedly  less
         meritorious and poorly pleaded. Nevertheless, in  light  of  Ferrer
         [2012] UKUT 304 (IAC), I grant permission generally."

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5.  At  today's  hearing  Mrs  Brakaj  relied  upon  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal. In addition to those identified by Judge Blundell
    in paragraph 2 of his above-mentioned  decision,  she  also  emphasised
    ground 3 and the issue of whether the Judge applied adequate weight  to
    the independent evidence of a third party, the Appellant's mother. This
    was a written witness statement. She did not attend the hearing.

 6. Mr Diwnycz acknowledged that so far as ground 3 is concerned the  issue
    is what weight the Judge felt able to attach to such a statement  where
    the  evidence  cannot  be  tested  in  cross-examination.  However,  he
    conceded that for the reasons given in paragraph 2 of Judge  Blundell's
    decision there is here material errors which infect the totality of the
    credibility findings.

 7. I find that to be the case. On my analysis  the  Judge  has  materially
    erred. The Judge has reached an irrational conclusion in  finding  that
    the Appellant could have approached PJAK for a  letter  confirming  his
    father's membership of that group. It was irrational in the context  of
    the Appellant's expressed fear of the group. The Judge also  failed  to
    give any, or any adequate reasons for concluding that the  summons  was
    not genuine.

 8. On my own analysis the impact of these material errors is such that the
    decision cannot stand.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Row.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 6 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

