
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08177/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 November 2019                           |On 20 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                 KHIDER [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Toora
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant was born and 3 October 1996 and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Iran. He claims to be involved with the  Kurdish  Democratic  Party  of
    Iran (KDPI) and that he would face a  real  risk  of  persecution  upon
    return as a consequence. The Secretary of State, by a decision dated  6
    June 2018, refused the appellant's claim for international  protection.
    The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a  decision
    promulgated on 8 January 2019, dismissed the appeal. The appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside. My reasons for setting it aside are as follows.  First,  I  find
    that  the  judge  has  carried  out  an  inadequate  analysis  of   the
    appellant's  claims  to  be  at  risk  by  reason  of  having  attended
    demonstrations in London and Birmingham and also having an  account  on
    Facebook on which posts hostile to the Iranian  government  regime  may
    have been made. I stress  that  I  have  no  difficulty  accepting  the
    judge's findings which led him to conclude that the appellant is not an
    active supporter of the KDPI. Those findings shall  not  be  revisited.
    However, as regards the demonstrations/Facebook,  the  judge  wrote  no
    more than this:

    26. As far as the appellants sur place activities are concerned,  there
    is no evidence that his  attendance  at  demonstrations  in  London  or
    Birmingham on occasions will come to the attention of  the  authorities
    and there was no adequate evidence that merely because he  would  be  a
    failed asylum seeker this would unduly  worry  those  authorities.  The
    appellant also claims to have a Facebook existence  but,  although  the
    authorities may  monitor  Facebook  and  other  cyber  involvements  of
    opponents, I do not consider that the appellant would be identified  as
    a possible threat based upon my finding that he was not  involved  with
    the KDPI.

 3. The judge has not gone so far as to find that  the  appellant  did  not
    have any 'existence on Facebook' but rather that, because he is not, as
    he claims, a supporter of the KDPI, the authorities in Iran would  have
    no interest in him notwithstanding what  may  appear  on  his  Facebook
    account. That conclusion is  not  supported  by  the  relevant  country
    guidance, in particular HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] 430 (IAC). The  judge
    has not considered whether the authorities interrogating him on  return
    to Iran are likely  to  ask  to  see  his  Facebook  account,  how  the
    appellant may respond if they do, whether the appellant may take  steps
    to delete his Facebook account before returning to Iran,  what  affects
    deletion may have upon previous  posts  and  how  the  authorities  may
    respond should they link posts on the appellant's Facebook  account  to
    the  appellant  in  the  context  of  the  appellant  having  no  other
    opposition political profile. The judge's finding that the appellant is
    not involved with the KDPI, though itself  sound,  was  not  enough  to
    enable him to pass over the possibility that the Facebook postings  may
    expose the appellant to real risk on return.

 4. I set aside the decision. The judge's findings that  the  appellant  is
    neither a supporter nor does he have any  political  profile  with  the
    KDPI shall stand. The only issue which  remains  to  be  determined  is
    whether the appellant will be exposed to a real risk of persecution  on
    return to Iran on account of his sur place  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom, including any participation on Facebook.

Notice of Decision



The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
returned to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
decision at or following a hearing.





Signed                              Date 18 November 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane






































