

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/08412/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |            Decision & Reasons        |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On 23 October  2017                 |            On 24 October 2017        |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                                                                         A M
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. Khan, counsel instructed by Thompson & Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. The parties are, of course, well aware of the  case  advanced  by  the
      appellant and the reasons given by the  respondent  for  refusing  his
      asylum and human rights claim and so  there  is  no  need  for  me  to
      reproduce that here again.


   2. Having directed himself in terms of the country guidance given in MN &
      Ors (Ahmadis-country conditions-risk) Pakistan CG  [2012]  UKUT  00389
      (IAC), the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal,  on  the  basis  that  this
      appellant had no intention or wish to practice and manifest aspects of
      his faith openly in a manner not permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code.
      Having rejected the appellant's factual account of his experiences  in
      Pakistan, the key findings of  the  judge  in  this  respect  were  as
      follows:
           "... I find that the appellant is someone has  not  preached  or
           proselytised in public and  that  the  evidence  indicates,  not
           least including the appellant's own account, that he has  always
           preached in private since 1974. I find that  the  appellant  has
           failed to discharge the burden to  demonstrate  any  intentional
           wish to practice and manifest aspects of his faith openly  which
           would not be permitted by the Pakistani penal code.
           I find the appellant has demonstrated  significant  caution  and
           discretion in the way that he has practised his faith  and  that
           he would be able to do so further..."


   3. This line of reasoning is plainly problematic because it appears  that
      the judge had misunderstood what the appellant's  evidence  was  about
      these issues. In his witness statement  the  appellant  said  that  in
      Pakistan he had been active in preaching activities  until  1974  when
      the changes to the Penal Code meant that he  could  no  longer  do  so
      openly without facing criminal sanctions. Thus, on  his  account,  his
      use of caution and discretion in the practice of his religious beliefs
      was not a matter of choice but in order to avoid  being  subjected  to
      persecution. Having moved to the United Kingdom the appellant said  he
      was no longer constrained in his public manifestation of his faith and
      he was able  to  preach  openly  as  was  required  by  his  religion,
      something he would be unable to do if he were required  to  return  to
      Pakistan because, as he put it, he would have "fear of backlash".  The
      judge, however, appears to  have  relied  upon  the  decision  of  the
      appellant to cease the open practice of his religious beliefs in  1974
      as evidence that the appellant had no wish or  intention  to  practice
      those beliefs openly.


   4. This error was compounded by an error of fact made by the judge in his
      understanding of the evidence that was before him. At paragraph 56  of
      his determination where he said of  the  letters  from  the  Ahmadiyya
      Muslim Association UK:
           "Both  of  the  Association  letters  are  acknowledged  by  the
           appellant  to  contain  information  which  the  appellant   has
           provided to them, and which I therefore find  are  self  serving
           and of very limited evidential weight."
      But the statement in  one  of  those  letters  about  the  appellant's
      activities in the "preaching programme" in the United Kingdom was  not
      provided by the appellant himself but, as is clear from the letter, is
      something that was confirmed by the President of the  appellant's  own
      local branch of the Association.



   5. Thus, not only did the judge fall  into  error  in  relying  upon  the
      cessation of the open practice of his religion  by  the  appellant  in
      Pakistan following the 1974 changes to the Penal Code as evidence that
      he had chosen to exercise "caution and discretion" in the practice  of
      his faith, but he had also misunderstood the nature  of  the  evidence
      concerning the appellant's involvement in the United Kingdom  in  what
      has been referred to, correctly or otherwise, as preaching activities.




   6. This was potentially important, and so material, because in  assessing
      whether the appellant has discharged the burden of  demonstrating  his
      intention or wish  to  openly  practice  his  religion  on  return  to
      Pakistan the Tribunal observed at paragraph  122  of  MN  &  Ors  that
      evidence of an enquiry of the Association is  likely  to  be  relevant
      and, at paragraph 123:
           "... Behaviour since arrival in the UK may also be relevant..."


   7. There are other errors disclosed by this determination. In his witness
      statement the appellant spoke of how his son and  daughter  were  both
      recognised as refugees  in  the  United  Kingdom.  But  there  was  no
      corroborative evidence of that. The judge said, at paragraph 58 of his
      determination:
           "I find that the  absence  of  such  evidence  again  serves  to
           undermine the appellant's credibility ..."
      This morning Ms Ahmad did not seek to  suggest  that  the  appellant's
      assertion that his son and daughter had been  recognised  as  refugees
      was incorrect and so it appears that the judge  was  simply  wrong  to
      find the appellant's credibility  damaged  as  a  consequence  of  him
      having said that they were. There is no reason to suppose that finding
      of the appellant's damaged credibility did not feed  into  and  inform
      the finding of the judge that the  appellant's  stated  intention  and
      wish to practice his religion openly should he return to Pakistan  was
      not genuinely held.


   8. Drawing all of this together, I am entirely satisfied that  the  judge
      has fallen into material legal error. He appears not to have  engaged,
      at all, with the appellant's evidence of the reasons for the change in
      his behaviour in 1974 and it was not reasonably open to the  judge  to
      reach the conclusions he did, having left that out of account, to then
      point to the discretion and caution exhibited by the  appellant  while
      in Pakistan, and then to take no account of  his  involvement  in  the
      "preaching program" in the UK, mistakenly believing that there was  no
      independent confirmation of those activities. It does not  follow,  of
      course, that just because the appellant asserts an intention that must
      be accepted as genuinely held, but if it is  to  be  rejected  as  not
      being genuinely held, that must be on the basis of a correct and  fair
      assessment of the evidence as a whole. That has not happened  in  this
      appeal and so the decision of the judge cannot stand.


   Summary of decision:
   9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley made material errors of law and his
      decision to dismiss the appeal must be set aside. His determination is
      to be set aside in its entirety.

  10. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.


Signed           [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                               Date: 23 October 2017
