
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08854/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House,       |Determination Promulgated       |
|Newport                         |                                |
|On: 17 September 2018           |On 26 September 2018            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     SA
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms C Grubb, Counsel instructed by Qualified Legal
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity direction under Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in order to protect the  anonymity  of  the
    Appellant who claims asylum. This direction  prohibits  the  disclosure
    directly or indirectly (including by the parties) of  the  identity  of
    the Appellant. Any disclosure and breach of this direction  may  amount
    to a contempt of court. This direction shall  remain  in  force  unless
    revoked or varied by a Tribunal or Court.


 2. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Trevaskis in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a  citizen
    of Pakistan, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse asylum
    and issue removal directions.

 3. The application under appeal  was  refused  on  29  August  2017.   The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal came before Judge Trevaskis  on  11  October  2017  and  was
    dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The application was refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Froom but on renewal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Grubb  on  29
    November 2017 in the following terms

       The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Trevaskis) dismissed the  appellant's
       appeal against a decision to refuse  his  international  protection,
       humanitarian protection and human rights claims. The Judge  rejected
       the appellant's account and evidence that he is gay and would, as  a
       result, be at risk on return to Pakistan.  The  grounds  raise  four
       points.


       Grounds (2), (3) and (4)  are  arguable.  In  particular  the  Judge
       arguably  failed  adequately  to  identify  the  reasons   for   his
       conclusions just by referring to the respondent's refusal letter and
       explain (as a reasonable response) the basis for which he would have
       expected more from the appellant in expressing his "feelings".


       Ground (1) is not arguable. The Judge  was  entitled  to  take  into
       account the appellant's delay in claiming asylum applying s.8 of the
       2004 Act. This was not the case where, as in A and others, the  CJEU
       cautioned against taking into account the failure to mention a claim
       based upon sexual orientation when first claiming asylum.  Here,  it
       was the delay in making  the  first  claim  which  was  relevant  to
       credibility under s.8 of the 2004 Act.

       Consequently, I grant permission on Grounds (2), (3) and (4) only.




Background


 4. The history of this appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Pakistan born on 8 March 1990.  He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 11 April 2011 as  a  student  and  overstayed.  Having  been
    served with Notice of Removal he claimed asylum on  28  February  2017.
    The basis of his claim was that his sexual orientation  as  a  gay  man
    would cause him to face persecution on return to Pakistan.


 5. The Secretary of State refused the Appellant's claim not accepting that
    he was gay and consequently that he  would  face  adverse  interest  on
    return. The Judge  dismissed  his  appeal  making  adverse  credibility
    findings and concluding that the Appellant was not gay and would not be
    perceived as such.


Submissions


 6. At the hearing before me Ms Grubb appeared for  the  Appellant  and  Mr
    Howells for the Respondent.


 7. For the Appellant Ms Grubb said that the grounds of appeal refer to her
    skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal. Grounds (2), (3)  and
    (4) are interlinked. There is a failure to adequately identify  reasons
    for the findings at paragraphs 36 to 42  of  the  judgement.  The  main
    areas of concern are paragraphs 39, 40 and  41.  At  paragraph  39  the
    judge said that he would expect "an appellant in the  circumstances  to
    express more about their feelings as a gay man than the  appellant  has
    done" but the Judge does not make it clear what sort of feelings he  is
    referring to or the basis upon which he would expect such  feelings  to
    be shown. At paragraphs 68 of  A  and  others  v  Staatssceretaris  van
    Veilligheid en Justitie  C-148/13  the  CJEU  held  that  stereotypical
    notions should not be applied to applicants' claims. The Judge  appears
    to be presupposing that a certain standard of feelings are required  or
    that there was a "correct response". Paragraph 15 of  the  decision  is
    all that is recorded about feelings. However, the Appellant's statement
    goes into detail about his feelings and there is also  mention  of  the
    Appellant's feelings at interview. The Judge does not say  what  it  is
    about feelings that he would have expected  the  Appellant  to  express
    more or in what way his detailed expression of his feelings is lacking.




 8. At paragraph 41 of the decision the Judge says that there were a number
    of adverse credibility findings identified by  the  Respondent  in  the
    refusal letter and the Judge has considered the responses provided. The
    Judge is not satisfied that the responses are plausible but does not go
    into any further  detail.  In  fact,  the  Appellant  gave  a  detailed
    response to each and every point made by the Respondent and  the  Judge
    does not explain at all why any of these responses are  not  plausible.
    Nothing is reasoned.


 9. For the Respondent Mr Howells conceded that the errors of law contained
    in paragraphs 39 and 41 as explained in the grounds and referred to  by
    Ms Grubb in submissions were evident.


10. I said that the appeal would be allowed, and the matter remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be remade  and  I  reserved  my
    written decision.

Decision

11. Permission to appeal was granted on three grounds.  As  the  Respondent
    has conceded that a material error of law is made out I will deal  with
    them briefly in turn.


12. Firstly, it is asserted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  adverse
    credibility  findings  based  upon  its  own  perception  of  what  was
    reasonable contrary to Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223. The grounds point
    to A and Others (above) and to the Judge's statement at paragraph 39 of
    his decision "I would expect  an  appellant  in  the  circumstances  to
    express more feelings as a gay man than the appellant has done".


13. In my judgement this error of law is clearly made out.  Not  only  does
    the Judge fail to explain what feelings he would expect  the  Appellant
    to express but also, he  does  not  examine  the  Appellant's  feelings
    expressed in some  detail  in  the  interview  record  and  the  appeal
    statement and say why these clearly expressed feelings are insufficient
    or inadequate.


14. Within the same ground it is also asserted that  at  paragraph  41  the
    Judge dismisses the Appellant's explanations for the credibility issues
    raised in the refusal letter  with  the  simple  statement  "I  am  not
    satisfied that those explanations are plausible" without explaining why
    the explanations are not plausible.


15. In my judgment this reveals a further error of  law.  Despite  detailed
    explanations being given in the Appellant's witness statement  to  each
    of the Respondent's reservations not a single one of these explanations
    is examined and no reasoning at all is given for the Judge's conclusion
    that the explanations given are implausible.


16. Secondly it is asserted that the Judge failed to give anxious  scrutiny
    to the facts and matters raised by the Appellant.


17. Ms Grubb submitted that the grounds are interlinked and in my judgement
    for the reasons given above this ground is also made out. There  is  no
    indication in the decision that the Judge has considered  the  feelings
    expressed by the Appellant at interview or in his witness statement  or
    that he has considered the explanations given by the Appellant  to  the
    Respondent's reservations.


18. It must follow for the same reasons that the  third  ground,  that  the
    Judge did not set  out  the  reasons  for  making  adverse  credibility
    fidnings with a sufficient degree of particularity is also made out.


19. In my judgement the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in its  assessment
    of the Appellant's credibility and  for  this  reason  this  appeal  is
    allowed, and the matter is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    heard by a Judge other than Judge Trevaskis  for  the  decision  to  be
    remade with no findings preserved.


Summary

20. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law. I allow the appeal and remit the matter  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for hearing ab initio.








Signed:                                 Date: 24 September 2018

[pic]

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
