
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08081/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 April 2018                             |On 17 April 2018              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                     K K
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Burrett of counsel, instructed by J D Spicer
Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant was born on [ ] 2001 and it is his  case  that  he  is  a
    national of Eritrea. He fears persecution there on the basis of being a
    Pentecostal Christian  and  not  wishing  to  be  forced  to  undertake
    indefinite military service.  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  5
    January 2017 and made contact with the Home Office to make a claim  for
    asylum on 17 January 2017.

2.   His application was refused on 8 August 2017 and  he  appealed  against
    this decision. However, First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore  dismissed  his
    appeal in a decision, promulgated on 11 December 2017.   The  Appellant
    appealed against this decision and First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ransley
    refused him permission to appeal on 9 January 2018.

3.   Subsequently, Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul found that it  was  arguable
    that First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore erred in law in concluding that Ms
    Tadese was not a vulnerable witness and that  all  other  grounds  were
    arguable. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response on 19 March 2018.

THE ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   The Appellant had  been  accompanied  to  the  hearing  by  his  social
    worker. At the beginning of the hearing  I  provided  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer with copies of the documents which had  been  handed
    up at the last hearing and which were not in his file. Both counsel for
    the  Appellant  and  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  made  oral
    submissions and I have referred to the content  of  these  submissions,
    where relevant, in my decision below.   I  asked  counsel  to  restrict
    himself to the issues which were included in the grounds of appeal  and
    on which permission to appeal had been granted.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   In his decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge referred to a number  of
    documents which had been highlighted in the skeleton argument submitted
    on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.  These  included  the  Immigration  Law
    Practitioners' Association's Working with  children  and  young  people
    subject to immigration control: Guidelines for best practice,  and  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010: Child, vulnerable adult
    and sensitive appellant guidance.

6.   In the ILPA Guidelines paragraph 8.1 states that:

         "The principle of best interests means that there  is  a  need  for
         careful case  management  when  dealing  with  hearings  and  court
         appearances by  children  and  young  people  who  are  subject  to
         immigration  control  in  the  UK  because   of   their   potential
         vulnerability".


7.   It also states in paragraph 8.22 that:

         "The evidence provided by children and young people during hearings
         and court appearances should always  be  approached  with  caution.
         Depending on his or her age, a child or young person is less likely
         than an adult to recall dates, the order in which events  occurred,
         or why those events occurred. Children and young  people  may  also
         struggle to understand the significance of certain events,  and  so
         fail to mention them when first interviewed. If such details emerge
         under further questioning at the hearing, the  credibility  of  the
         child's account should not be undermined".


8.   Ms Tadese was a child, at the time  of  the  hearing  on  19  September
    2017, as she had been born  on  16  December  1999.   She  is  also  an
    Eritrean national, who is subject to immigration control,  as  she  had
    been granted asylum in the United Kingdom.

9.   Section 8 of the Guidelines contains detailed guidance as  to  how  the
    participation of children in asylum and immigration appeals  should  be
    facilitated. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shore  did   not  follow  this
    guidance and did not remind himself that this  witness  was  herself  a
    child. In contrast, in paragraph 100 of his decision he stated that  he
    was not a vulnerable witness. The Appellant's  skeleton  argument  drew
    the Judge's attention to the relevant guidance but the  Judge  did  not
    follow it. It was not sufficient to note her date  of  birth  and  then
    fail to follow  the  guidance.  It  was  also  not  necessary  for  the
    Appellant to request that she be treated as a vulnerable witness as the
    policy was very clear.

10.  The Joint Presidential Guidance notes in paragraph 1  that  it  applies
    to both appellants and witnesses. In paragraph 10.2 it  advises  judges
    that during a hearing he or she should:

    "i.  Speak clearly and directly to the  appellant/witness.  Demonstrate
         active listening.


    ii.  Use plain English and avoid legal and other jargon;  be  sensitive
         to  specific  communication  needs  for  reasons  of  language   or
         disability,


    iii. Ensure questions asked are open ended  wherever  possible;  broken
         down to avoid having more than one idea or point in  each  question
         and avoid suggesting a particular answer.


    iv.  Curtail improper or  aggressive  cross  examination;  control  the
         manner  of  questioning  to  avoid  harassment,   intimidation   or
         humiliation. Ensure that questions  are  asked  in  an  appropriate
         manner using a tone and vocabulary appropriate to  the  appellant's
         age, maturity, level of understanding  and  personal  circumstances
         and attributes. Pay special attention to avoid re-traumatisation of
         a victim of crime, torture, sexual violence


    v.   Be sensitive to the possibility  that  the  witness/appellant  has
         understood the question, and, if there  is  a  risk  of  confusion,
         check this


    vi.  Ensure that adequate breaks are given during the hearing; check at
         intervals throughout the hearing that the appellant is  comfortable
         and understands the proceedings; don't wait to be asked.


    vii. If there is no or inadequate representation it is  important  that
         you obtain clarification of all matters of which you are unclear.


    viii.    If an  individual  is,  during  the  course  of  the  hearing,
         identified  as  a  vulnerable  adult  or  sensitive   witness,   an
         adjournment may be required to enable expert evidence to be  called
         as to the effect of this on the individual s ability to give cogent
         evidence of the events relied upon. Allow  adequate  time  for  the
         representative,  if   there   someone,   to   consider   and   take
         instructions".


11.  This clearly did not happen in relation to Ms Tadese.  This  in  itself
    amounted to an error   of law in so  far  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did not comply with the published policy of the  Tribunal,  which
    indicated how child witnesses should be dealt with in order  to  ensure
    that a fair hearing was conducted. It also had a significant effect  on
    the Appellant's appeal as the Judge held it against the Appellant  that
    he had found Ms Tadese not to be a credible witness. This  was  despite
    the fact that he was  a  child  and,  therefore,  he  was  not  legally
    competent to conduct his own appeal. In such a situation, it would have
    been his legal representatives, and not him, who would have  taken  the
    decision to call Ms Tadese, as a witness

12.  It is also my view that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to  give
    sufficient reasons for finding in paragraph 100 that Ms Tadese was  not
    a credible witness. He  stated  that  her  witness  statement  was  not
    adequate but did not  identify  why  it  was  an  inadequate  document,
    especially when it represented the evidence provided by a child. He did
    not explain why it was unlikely that she should have heard  her  father
    speaking in  Tigrinya  with  the  Appellant's  father  or  why  it  was
    implausible that she could not remember when the Appellant left  Sudan.
    In addition, the fact that she had only been asked to provide a witness
    statement two weeks before the appeal hearing did not necessarily  give
    rise to any adverse findings about her  credibility.  No  evidence  was
    provided about the workload of the  Appellant's  legal  representatives
    and no evidence had been sought about when the Appellant and Ms  Tadese
    had met up again in London.

13.  The manner in which  Ms  Tadese's  evidence  was  treated  also  had  a
    significant effect on the Appellant's appeal, as it  was  her  evidence
    that he had lived in Assab in Eritrea, where Amharic was widely spoken,
    and that she also spoke Amharic as a first language having been born in
    Assab and then lived in Sudan.

14.  In paragraph 61, it is recorded that  the  Appellant  heard  a  pastor,
    called Henock, preaching. In paragraph 82 it was recorded that  the  Ms
    Tadese had said that the main  pastor  was  called  Tedros.  These  two
    statements are not mutually exclusive.

15.  For all of these reasons, I find there  was  a  lack  of  reasoning  in
    relation to  witness  evidence  which  could  potentially  support  the
    Appellant's case in relation to his nationality,  a  factor  which  was
    central to the Appellant's appeal.

16.  In paragraph 106 of his decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  stated
    that he preferred  the  Respondent's  interpretation  of  the  location
    evidence to the Appellant's interpretation.  This partially arose  from
    the fact that he had not found Ms Tadese to be a credible witness  and,
    for the reasons given above, I have found that his  reasoning  on  this
    point was unsustainable.

17.  The Respondent also relied on paragraphs 15.1.3  -  15.1.4  of  the  UK
    Fact Finding Mission Eritrea: illegal exit and national service, 7 - 20
    February 2016. The source of these findings were young  people  and  it
    was not clear what expertise they had to form these views and how  many
    young people  were  actually  spoken  to.  Given  the  source  of  this
    information it is difficult to know why it was  given  "preference"  to
    that provided by the University of  Cambridge  Language  Centre,  which
    stated that:

         "Amharic belongs to the Southern Semitic branch of the Afro-Asiatic
         family of languages. It is the official language and lingua  franca
         in Ethiopia where there  are  approximately  13  million  speakers.
         There are approximately another 13 million people who speak Amharic
         as a second language in Ethiopia and Sudan".


18.  The use of the word "preference"  also  suggests  that  the  Judge  was
    applying a balance of probabilities, as opposed to the requisite  lower
    standard of proof coupled with a holistic approach. The latter required
    him to give some weight to the evidence provided by the  Appellant  and
    Ms Tadese in the context of the except from  the  EASO  report  Country
    Focus, Eritrea, May 2015 which states that:

         "Amharic was the only official language between 1959 and 1991 while
         Eritrea was part of Ethiopia. It  is  still  used  in  addition  to
         Tigrinya as a first or second language by Eritreans who grew up  in
         Ethiopia (the 'Amiche') as well as in places where it was  dominant
         during the Ethiopian rule, such as Assab. This is  because  it  was
         the main port during the Ethiopian period and many Amharic speakers
         migrated to the city".


19.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore  did  err
    in law in his decision.

DECISION

(1)  The  Appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Shore's decision is set aside.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  other  than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore or Dr. Ransley, for a de novo  hearing.




Nadine Finch
Signed   Date 13 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

