
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08622/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th June 2020                    |On 24 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     SMS
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to directions dated 21 April  2020  indicating  a  provisional
    view that in light of the need to take precautions against  the  spread
    of Covid-19 and the overriding objective, it would  be  appropriate  in
    this case to determine the issue of whether the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision involved the making of an error of law and if so  whether  the
    decision should be set aside; the parties  agreed  with  no  objections
    being raised and both made written submissions on the issues raised  in
    the appeal.  This decision has therefore been determined on the  papers
    in light of those submissions and the full appeal file.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Chamberlain promulgated on  22  November  2019,  in
    which the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse  his
    protection and human rights claim (albeit accepted as  a  fresh  claim)
    dated 15 August 2019 was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Iraq, born on 3  March  1992,  who  last
    arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely on  9  October  2015.   His
    asylum claim was refused on 6  January  2016  and  his  appeal  against
    refusal was dismissed on 19 July 2016, becoming appeal rights exhausted
    on 20 October 2016.   The  Appellant  made  further  submissions  on  5
    January 2018 which were refused and made further submissions again on 4
    July 2019.  The Appellant is from Kirkuk (he is  Kurdish  and  a  Sunni
    Muslim) and his latest claim was  on  the  basis  of  fear  of  ongoing
    violence in his home town  and  risk  from  ISIS.   Further,  that  the
    Appellant did not have a CSID card and would not be able to obtain  one
    within a reasonable timeframe and he does not have family in Baghdad or
    any other support network.

 4. In the reasons for refusal  letter,  the  Respondent  referred  to  the
    dismissal of the Appellant's  earlier  appeal  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Loughbridge, with the findings that the Appellant previously  had
    a CSID card that was with his family, whom he was in contact  with  and
    that he could reasonably return to Baghdad or the  IKR  (in  particular
    Erbil where he went to university) and use his qualifications  to  gain
    employment.

 5. In accordance with the then  country  guidance  in  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds,
    internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT  00212  (IAC),  the  Appellant
    would not face an Article 15(c) risk on return to Kirkuk  (or  anywhere
    else in Iraq) and the  Respondent  went  on  to  consider  more  recent
    evidence about the position in Kirkuk, finding that he could return  to
    the IKR (but not Baghdad) if he did not wish to return to Kirkuk.   The
    Respondent considered that the Appellant  could  obtain  the  necessary
    documents from his family to obtain a new CSID in the United Kingdom to
    return and that he would be able to seek accommodation  and  employment
    in the IKR.

 6. The Respondent did not find that there was any  new  evidence  to  show
    that the Appellant would be at risk on return to Iraq generally  or  to
    the IKR specifically, including nothing to suggest any risk  from  ISIS
    or other terrorist groups; nor because of his  ethnicity  or  political
    opinion, nor his religion, and as such he was not entitled to asylum or
    humanitarian protection, nor would the refusal breach any of his  human
    rights under the European Convention on Human Rights.  In  relation  to
    private and family life, the Appellant had not established  any  family
    life in the United Kingdom and did not  meet  the  requirements  for  a
    grant of leave to remain under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 7. Judge Chamberlain dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  22
    November 2019 on all grounds.  The First-tier Tribunal  identified  the
    starting point in accordance with the principles in Devaseelan  as  the
    earlier decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Loughridge and went on to
    consider the further evidence in  this  appeal.   In  relation  to  his
    identity documents, the First-tier Tribunal did not  find  it  credible
    that the Appellant had lost contact with his family since the  previous
    appeal in 2016, nor that there was any reason why they would be  unable
    to send him his CSID from which he could obtain an Iraqi passport.  The
    Appellant would therefore have the practical means to relocate  to  the
    IKR and gave no reasons as to why  he  could  not  return  there.   The
    Appellant's claim not to have ever been to Erbil and studied instead in
    Koya, which was linked to the Erbil Polytechnic University  from  which
    he obtained his qualification was not accepted or found to be credible.
     The First-tier Tribunal found  that  although  the  Appellant  had  no
    family in the IKR, he was still in contact  with  family  in  Iraq  and
    would have friends and contacts in Erbil from his time studying  there.
    The Appellant was a healthy, well educated young man who had previously
    run his own business and would have the advantage  of  funds  from  the
    Voluntary Returns Scheme such that he would  be  able  to  find  stable
    employment (despite the high unemployment rate)  and  therefore  afford
    appropriate accommodation.

 8. The Appellant did not make any specific submissions in relation to  his
    private and family life, but this  was  considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in any event.  There was no evidence of any family  life,  the
    private life requirements were not met and overall, taking into account
    the factors in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002, his removal would not be disproportionate.



The appeal

 9. The Appellant appeals on two grounds as follows.  First, that the First-
    tier Tribunal materially erred in failing to take into account relevant
    considerations when concluding that the Appellant would be returned  to
    Baghdad with a CSID and passport in circumstances where he  is  not  in
    contact with any family and where he would be returned to Baghdad as  a
    Kurdish Sunni  Muslim  who  does  not  speak  Arabic.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons for finding that the Appellant
    could obtain the necessary documentation to  return  to  Kirkuk  and  a
    failure to follow the country guidance in  AAH  given  the  Appellant's
    accepted attendance at the Iraqi embassy  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    inability to attend an office in Baghdad with a male relative or in his
    home area given ISIS destroyed or damaged most of the registry  offices
    in areas they controlled.

10. Secondly, that the First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  in
    applying the wrong burden of proof by requiring the Appellant to  prove
    that he is not in contact with family members as opposed to  using  the
    lower standard of proof applicable  in  asylum  claims.   Further,  the
    First-tier Tribunal has failed to give adequate reasons for the adverse
    credibility  findings  reached  and  applied  the  wrong  approach   to
    credibility.

11. In the further written submissions on behalf of the Appellant  pursuant
    to the directions dated 21 April 2020,  three  issues  are  identified,
    first, whether the Appellant is at risk in Kirkuk for the  purposes  of
    Articles 15(b) and 15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive;  secondly,
    whether the Appellant would be able to obtain a CSID or INID  within  a
    reasonable timeframe on removal to Baghdad; and thirdly, whether it  is
    reasonable to expect  the  Appellant  to  relocate  to  the  IKR.   The
    submissions on each of these three issues are  however  directed  to  a
    substantive remake of the Appellant's appeal, making submissions as  to
    why  the  Appellant's  appeal  should  be  allowed  under  the  Refugee
    Convention.  The further written submissions do not in any way  address
    the issue of whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal materially
    erred in law, nor do they add to or expand upon the written grounds  of
    appeal in the original application for permission.

12. In written submissions on her behalf, the Respondent opposes the appeal
    and submits that there is no error of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  In summary, that the First-tier Tribunal approached the
    assessment of the evidence and of the Appellant's credibility  entirely
    lawfully  and  appropriately,  starting  with  the  findings   of   the
    previously First-tier Tribunal in 2016 and giving detailed  and  cogent
    reasons as to why the Appellant's claim to have lost contact  with  his
    family was not accepted.

13. Further, the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  were  in  accordance
    with the country guidance in AAH as well as the latest country guidance
    in SMO (Article 15(c); identity documents)  Iraq  CG  [2019]  UKUT  400
    (IAC), promulgated after the decision under appeal  but  replacing  all
    previous country guidance on Iraq.  There is  nothing  in  the  country
    guidance to support any suggestion that the Appellant would be at  risk
    of indiscriminate violence on return to the IKR, which has  been  found
    to be virtually violence free and with no Article 15(c) risk; and  none
    of the factors identified in SMO under a sliding scale would assist the
    Appellant's claim.

14. In relation to internal relocation, the Appellant  did  not  previously
    claim that internal relocation to the IKR would  be  unduly  harsh  and
    although  relied  upon  in  the  latest  written  submissions,  do  not
    constitute an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.



Findings and reasons

 1. I find no error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    either ground of appeal for the reasons set out below.  As to the first
    ground of appeal, both  the  written  grounds  of  appeal  and  further
    written submissions are drafted on the basis that the Appellant's claim
    in relation to having no contact with his family and  about  not  being
    able to obtain his identity documents from them is credible; such  that
    he would need to obtain a new CSID through the embassy or on return  to
    Iraq (either in Kirkuk or Baghdad).  Neither document acknowledges that
    the First-tier Tribunal did not find the  Appellant  credible  on  this
    point and neither engages with the reasons given  for  those  findings,
    the finding was that the Appellant was in contact with his  family  who
    could send him his CSID (as was the finding in 2016). As set out  below
    in relation to the second ground of appeal, there is no error of law in
    the First-tier Tribunal's approach to credibility

 2. In paragraphs 28 to 34  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  the
    Appellant's  evidence  in  relation  to  family  contact  and  identity
    documents is set out, followed by clear and detailed reasons as to  why
    this was not accepted.   The  reasons  included  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence was inconsistent as to when  he  last  had  contact  with  his
    family, which was on a core aspect of his claim; that he had failed  to
    answer questions about his  CSID  (as  to  whether  he  had  after  the
    dismissal of his previous appeal asked his family to send this to him);
    that he had failed to take any reasonable steps to try and  locate  his
    family and was vague about who from  Iraq  he  had  asked  about  this.
    These are cogent and sustainable reasons on the evidence available  for
    the finding that the Appellant is still in contact with his family  and
    that they could send him his CSID.

 3. On the basis of such findings, the Appellant would have his CSID in the
    United Kingdom and use that to travel back to Iraq and the IKR,  either
    directly or via Baghdad.  It is therefore unnecessary for the Appellant
    to obtain a new CSID from the Iraqi Embassy in the United Kingdom,  nor
    to obtain one in Kirkuk or Baghdad on return to Iraq and the grounds of
    appeal dealing with these aspects of the case could not in any event be
    material to the outcome.  In any event, there is no  error  of  law  in
    relation to those findings nor are they inconsistent with  the  current
    country guidance.

 4. In relation to the second ground of appeal that the First-tier Tribunal
    applied the wrong standard  of  proof,  there  is  nothing  express  or
    implicit in the decision which supports that claim.  The applicable law
    is set out in paragraphs 3 to 6 of the decision, including at paragraph
    6 an express self-direction and confirmation that the standard of proof
    is a low one, to a reasonable degree of likelihood.   In  circumstances
    where the starting point are the findings of the First-tier Tribunal in
    2016 that the Appellant was in contact with  his  family  who  were  in
    possession of  his  CSID  and  could  send  it  to  him,  applying  the
    principles in Devaseelan it is for an Appellant to  establish,  to  the
    lower standard of proof, that things have  changed  or  that  there  is
    further evidence such that the earlier finding is not sustainable.   As
    above, detailed reasons were given for rejecting the  Appellant's  most
    recent claim about family contact, none of which required the Appellant
    to prove a negative nor imposed a standard upon him  which  was  higher
    than the applicable low standard of proof.  For the  reasons  given  by
    the First-tier Tribunal, he failed to establish his case to  the  lower
    standard.

 5. Further, there is nothing on the  face  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision to support the claim that it erred in law in its  approach  to
    credibility and no failure to take into account guidance on this in the
    context of protection claims.  The approach taken was  entirely  lawful
    and the conclusions reached were open to the First-tier Tribunal on the
    evidence before it, with clear and detailed reasons given.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   G Jackson                           Date         14th June 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

