

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08217/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Birmingham Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 19th February 2019                   |On: 15th May 2019                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     SZI
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A. Authi, Aman Solicitor Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mrs H. Aboni,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION and REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq born  in  1986.  She  appeals  with
    permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Thomas)  to
    dismiss her human rights and protection appeal.


 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim for asylum was that she faced a real
    risk of 'honour'  based  violence  at  the  hands  of  her  father  and
    brothers. She is from Ranya, in the Sulaymaniyah governate of the  IKR.
    She stated that her family became disillusioned with her marriage to  a
    British national of Iranian origin because he wanted her  to  come  and
    live with him in the United Kingdom. Despite the fact that  the  couple
    already had a child together, her family insisted that she divorce  him
    and marry a suitor  of  their  choosing.  Fearing  forced  marriage  or
    violence she left with the child, travelled to Turkey  and  from  there
    onwards to the United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent had rejected that claim for want of credibility and  the
    Appellant exercised her right of appeal.

 4. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas upheld
    the decision of  the  Respondent,  giving  the  following  reasons  for
    rejecting the Appellant's evidence:

              i) She had failed to give a reasonable explanation for why she
                 did not claim asylum en route to the United Kingdom as  she
                 passed through other safe European countries;


             ii) It was not credible that her family, who had agreed to  her
                 marrying a man resident in the United  Kingdom,  would  now
                 expect the couple to live in the IKR rather than here;

            iii) It  was  not  credible  that  her  family  would  not  have
                 discussed their concerns with the Appellant's husband;

             iv)  The  Appellant  has  been  married  since  2011   and   no
                 explanation was given as to why the family have  not  taken
                 the feared action thus far;

              v) The Appellant did  not  seek  the  protection  of  the  IKR
                 authorities when it was open to her to do so;

             vi) The method by which the Appellant chose to  travel  to  the
                 United Kingdom undermines her  credibility.   It  is  clear
                 that they knew that she could not meet the requirements for
                 entry  clearance  as  a  spouse,  so  they   contrived   to
                 circumvent the immigration rules.

      These  findings  meant  that  the  appeal  fell  to  be  dismissed  on
protection
          grounds. As for the Appellant's  human  rights  appeal,  that  too
fell to be refused
      since she had not established that there would be any difficulties  in
her
      relocating to Iraq.

 5. The Appellant now appeals against that decision, submitting  before  me
    that in the course of its determination the First-tier  Tribunal  erred
    in law in that it failed to take material evidence into account,  erred
    in fact and failed to give adequate reasons.  For  the  Respondent  Mrs
    Aboni opposed the appeal on all grounds.


 6. In a written decision dated the 20th February 2019 I made the following
    findings.


 7. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal did fail to  take  material
    evidence into account when it overlooked the rather obvious point  that
    the Appellant claimed asylum here, rather than in, for instance, Greece
    or France because her husband is here and her  child  is  British.  The
    whole point of her leaving the IKR was to come  and  settle  with  them
    here. The Tribunal may not have regarded that as  a  good  reason,  but
    that is not what is articulated at paragraph 21 of  the  determination:
    the Tribunal there simply notes  that  no  reasonable  explanation  was
    offered.  I would further accept that the determination,  at  paragraph
    25, does not explicitly recognise the Appellant's case that her  family
    only latterly turned against  her  and  her  marriage.   Nor  does  the
    Tribunal address the country background  material  warning  that  young
    women facing gender-based violence  receive  little  succour  from  the
    Kurdish authorities. There also appears to  have  been  some  confusion
    about when and where the child applied for, and received,  her  British
    passport.

 8. None of these complaints amount, however, to a material error  of  law.
    That is because the  overall  decision,  that  the  Appellant  has  not
    discharged the burden of proof, is manifestly sustainable.  This was  a
    family who in 2011 had agreed to their daughter marrying an Iranian man
    with a British passport.  Although it would seem that  the  couple  did
    make some effort to settle in the IKR,  with  the  Appellant's  husband
    trying to establish a business there, it is patently obvious that there
    would always be a possibility of them  going  to  live  in  the  United
    Kingdom, or even Iran. The First-tier Tribunal was entitled to find  it
    peculiar, if I may put  it  like  that,  that  seven  years  after  the
    marriage the Appellant's family would suddenly demand that she  divorce
    simply on the grounds that her husband wanted to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom, the country of his nationality.   Had  the  determination  had
    regard to the country background material, as Mr  Authi  advocates,  it
    would have found it to be entirely consonant with its own  conclusions.
    The Country Policy and Information Note Iraq:  Kurdish  Honour  Crimes,
    published in August 2017, describes how women  are  expected  to  leave
    their natal family and move to wherever their husband is from:


         "Upon marriage, a woman leaves her birth homestead and moves to her
         husband's village. Traditionally, a woman did not  move  away  from
         the territory of her lineage since most marriages were  within  the
         lineage where members live a short distance  away.  However,  urban
         migration and diaspora relations resulted in contemporary marriages
         in which women  not  only  move  from  their  paternal  homes,  but
         frequently cross national borders...For boys  and  girls,  marriage
         establishes the passage to adulthood".
         [at 6.1.1]

 9. Research cited in the same document explains that  divorced  women  are
    regarded in Kurdish society as being "like a disease" [at 5.1.1].  Seen
    in this context  the  implausibility  of  Appellant's  account  becomes
    clear.

10. For those reasons I find that the First-tier Tribunal was  entitled  to
    dismiss the protection  appeal,  and  the  human  rights  appeal  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1), for the reasons that it gives. Any  error  in  the
    determination, as identified in the grounds, is not material.

11. The appeal was also dismissed in respect of Article 8 'outside  of  the
    rules'. At paragraphs 32-33 of the  determination  the  Tribunal  finds
    that it would be reasonable to expect the Appellant's young child  (and
    presumably her father) to travel back to the IKR  with  the  Appellant,
    thus dispensing with the Article 8 claim.  It is not at all clear  what
    the Respondent's position on this matter was, since at the date of  the
    refusal letter the entire relationship had been doubted.   At paragraph
    31 of its determination the Tribunal  had  however  accepted  that  the
    Appellant is married to her husband, and that their child is British (a
    British passport having been issued to her).  I note that the Secretary
    of State's ordinarily  assumes  the  position  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect a British child to leave the United  Kingdom:  had
    the HOPO been asked, and that position adopted, it is difficult to  see
    how the reasoning at paragraphs 32-33,  and  indeed  42,  could  stand.
    There is in fact published policy to that effect.

12. Given the significance of this issue for the disposal of the appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds I considered that further submissions  on  the  point
    were necessary, and invited the parties to make the same.

13.  By  their  letter  dated  the  22nd   March   2019   the   Appellant's
    representatives indicated that they wished  to  pursue  the  matter  on
    Article 8 grounds alone.

14. By his letter of the 23rd April 2019 the Secretary of  State  confirmed
    that it is indeed his policy not to normally  require  British  citizen
    children to leave the United Kingdom:

         "Given the findings regarding the Appellant's family relationships,
         the Tribunal is invited to re-make the decision  without  the  need
         for a further hearing, allowing the appeal  on  Article  8  grounds
         whilst maintaining the decision of  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal with regards to the protection claim".


15. I therefore uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the protection claim. By consent I set the  decision  on  human  rights
    aside and allow the appeal on human rights grounds.




      Anonymity

16. Having regard to the fact that this case involves a minor I am prepared
    to make the following direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders.


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
        Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
        contempt of court proceedings".




    Decision


17. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on
    protection grounds is upheld.


18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal on  human
    rights grounds is set aside by  consent.  I  re-make  the  decision  as
    follows: I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.


19. An anonymity order is in place.








                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                15th May
                                    2019
