
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08924/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th April 2019                    |On 17th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                  Jamal [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 2nd February  1982.   The
    Appellant claims  to  have  left  Mogadishu  and  travelled  to  Turkey
    arriving on 2nd October 2017.  He claims to have arrived in the  UK  on
    5th November and stayed in the airport until 6th November 2017 when  he
    claimed asylum.  However, it is noted that the Home Office has evidence
    that confirmed he disembarked from flight BA054  from  Johannesburg  on
    6th November 2017.  The Appellant's claim for asylum is based on a fear
    of persecution due to his political opinion.  It is accepted that he is
    a member of the Ashraf clan and that he is a Muslim.   His  application
    for asylum was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 4th July 2018.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Buchanan sitting at North Shields on  31st  August  2018.
    In a decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  27th  November  2018  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal  on  12th  February
    2019.  On 28th February 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge Blundell granted
    permission  to  appeal.   Judge  Blundell  noted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had rejected the  Appellant's  account  of  fearing  Al-
    Shabab but that at paragraph 30 he had recorded that this  finding  was
    not necessarily determinative and  went  on  to  consider  whether  the
    Appellant could return safely to  Mogadishu.   He  decided  that  issue
    adversely to the Appellant in light of  the  fact  that  he  had  spent
    months living there in 2014.  Judge Blundell  considered  that  it  was
    arguable that this finding  was  vitiated  by  a  failure  to  consider
    whether in the light of paragraph 25 of the Appellant's statement those
    favourable circumstances continued to exist at the date of hearing.

 4. On 26th March 2019 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The grounds submit that it was open to the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to find at paragraph 30 that,  "The  Appellant  had
    available (family) support (in Mogadishu) in 2014 and there was nothing
    before me to show that that would not be so now if he was  returned  to
    Mogadishu."

 5. The Rule 24 response goes on to  state  that  even  if  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did err (which is  not  accepted),  the  error  was  not
    material because the judge made an alternative finding at paragraph  33
    that the Appellant had a viable internal relocation option and that the
    grounds did not challenge this alternative finding.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel, Mr Collins.  Mr Collins is familiar with  this  matter  having
    been the author of the Grounds  of  Appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Ms Holmes.

Submission/Discussion

 7. Mr Collins starts by stating that paragraph 3 of the Rule  24  response
    is misguided and that the question to be asked is "can  a  person  from
    outside Mogadishu safely return there?"   He  points  out  that  it  is
    accepted in the determination that the  Appellant  is  from  Shalanbood
    which is some two hours away  from  Mogadishu.   He  takes  me  to  the
    judge's findings in particular to paragraph 30 which Mr  Collins  urges
    me to read in its entirety and which I confirm I have done and to cross-
    reference that paragraph with the Appellant's statement  in  particular
    at paragraph 16 and paragraph 25.  He submits that it is clear from the
    Appellant's  evidence  within  his  witness  statement  and  his   oral
    testimony that there is no-one presently in Mogadishu who  is  able  to
    support him and he submits it is speculative to say  that  because  the
    Appellant had support in 2014 that he would have had some support there
    some four years later in 2018 and that the Tribunal should believe  his
    statement that he has no-one there now who could help him.  He asked me
    to look at the Appellant's case as set out  at  paragraphs  13  and  15
    pointing out that the Appellant's wife had fled to Kenya and is now  in
    a refugee camp and that at paragraph 13 it is recorded  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge that the Appellant had stated he could not live  in
    Mogadishu as he had no family or friends there or anyone to  help  him.
    He submits that the evidence set out at paragraphs 13 and  15  was  not
    rejected and was before the judge.

 8. He takes me to his Grounds of Appeal and the law as set out in MOJ  and
    Others (return to Mogadishu) Somalia [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC)  which  he
    submits remains good law.  He submits that what  is  clear  from  those
    passages is that the crucial issue is whether a  minority  clan  member
    would have access to family support in Mogadishu.  The  issue  in  this
    particular case is whether or not the Appellant has family in Mogadishu
    who can support him.   He  submits  that  the  situation  is  that  the
    Appellant now no longer has anyone there and the essential question  to
    be asked is does the Appellant have family to turn to in Mogadishu  and
    that the judge's finding is speculative.  He submits that the  evidence
    needs to be properly heard and asked me to remit the matter back to the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

 9. Ms Holmes in response submits that broadly speaking the judge  did  not
    find the Appellant's evidence to be credible and  that  the  judge  did
    take account of all the evidence but quite simply did not  believe  the
    Appellant.  She takes me to the contentions made at paragraph 30  where
    the judge makes conclusions that the Appellant has not established  his
    case with regard to family support to the lower standard  of  proof  to
    which he is subject.  Effectively, she submits that this is a matter of
    mere disagreement.  She submits that what the  Appellant  has  said  at
    paragraph 25 of his witness statement does not matter.  The bottom line
    is the judge did not believe the Appellant therefore there is no error.
     She submits that the judge has looked at everything and made  findings
    that were open to him.

10. In a brief response Mr Collins submits  that  the  judge  has  to  make
    proper reasoned findings and that he has  failed  to  engage  with  the
    evidence that was before him as to whether or not the Appellant can  go
    to Mogadishu.  Authority says that he could be at risk and  he  reminds
    me that his wife and children have gone to Kenya therefore the  closest
    of family members certainly cannot be in Mogadishu.   He  submits  that
    the decision requires a reasoned finding  which  quite  simply  in  his
    submission is not there.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

13. The starting point in this appeal relates to  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant and his testimony.  The approach adopted by the judge is  set
    out at paragraph 29 of his decision.  There is nothing  wrong  in  that
    approach.  A proper approach to credibility would require an assessment
    of the evidence and of the general claim and in asylum claims  relevant
    factors would be the internal consistency of the  claim,  its  inherent
    plausibility and the external factors of the sort  typically  found  in
    country guidance.  It appears that  it  was  clear  that  in  2014  the
    Appellant had available support in Mogadishu.  The judge has found that
    there was nothing before him to show that that would not be  so  if  he
    was returned now.  The issue is consequently very much  a  fact-  based
    issue.  The issue  is  whether  or  not  on  return  to  Mogadishu  the
    Appellant would be placed  at  a  real  risk  of  persecution.   It  is
    accepted that the Appellant is a member of  the  Ashraf  minority  clan
    from Shalambood and not Mogadishu.  Guidance is given in paragraphs 340
    to 342 of MOJ.

14. Consequently, this case turns on whether or not the judge was  entitled
    to make findings that if the Appellant were returned  to  Mogadishu  he
    would have family available for support.  The issue may well  not  have
    arisen if the Appellant had not returned in 2014 and that it  had  been
    accepted that at that time there was support.  It is  clear  that  that
    support could not have been from his wife and children who  are  it  is
    believed and contended in a refugee camp in Kenya.  The issue before me
    is solely whether or not the judge has  erred  in  law  in  making  his
    findings.  I do not believe that he has.

15. Mr Collins makes strong contentions that the judge has not made  proper
    reasoned findings and has failed to engage with the evidence  that  was
    before him.  That simply is not the case.  The judge heard the evidence
    not the Upper Tribunal.  The judge made findings on  credibility.   The
    evidence is set out in detail, in particular at paragraph 27,  and  the
    issue as set out in  MOJ  is  thoroughly  addressed  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 30.  The judge has given reasons as to why he  has  made  his
    findings and concluded that there is nothing before him  to  show  that
    the Appellant would  not  have  the  available  support  on  return  to
    Mogadishu now that was available in 2014.  Having made that finding  to
    which he was entitled to the judge had gone on to conclude that in such
    circumstances the Appellant could return to Mogadishu.  The  judge  was
    consequently entitled to reach his conclusions and has  given  reasoned
    findings.  In such circumstances  I  find  that  the  submissions  made
    amount to little more than disagreement with the conclusions reached by
    the judge and the appeal is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal of the Appellant is dismissed and the decision of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 15 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 15 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

