
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA081072016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 May 2017                                 |On 8 May 2017                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     MM
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. Miah, Counsel instructed by Sony Sadaf Haroon,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born in 1984. He  arrived  in
    the UK on 10 January 2010 as a Tier 4 student. He was  granted  further
    leave to remain as a student but  on  14  August  2014  his  leave  was
    curtailed on  the  basis  of  alleged  deception  in  relation  to  his
    obtaining and use of an English language certificate.

 2. After notice of removal was served on him on 28 September 2015 he  made
    a claim for asylum on 14 January 2016.  His  claim  was  refused  in  a
    decision dated 14 July 2016.

 3. His appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    R. Cooper ("the FtJ") on 2 December 2016 following which she  dismissed
    the appeal on all grounds.

 4. The basis of the appellant's claim for asylum is that he is  gay.  When
    his family learnt of his sexuality they  threatened  to  kill  him.  He
    fears return to Bangladesh  on  account  of  his  sexuality,  from  his
    family, the community and the State.

    The decision of the FtJ

 5. The following is a summary of the FtJ's decision and  her  conclusions.
    The appellant and two witness gave evidence. One of the witnesses,  SA,
    was said to be a celebrity in the Bangladeshi community  and  performed
    internationally.

 6. The appellant's case was that in October 2015 he told his parents  over
    the phone that he was gay as they were pressuring him  to  marry.  They
    threatened to kill him if he returned to Bangladesh.

 7. The FtJ concluded that the appellant had not given a  credible  account
    of being gay. She did not accept his claim that he had  made  a  sexual
    advance to his cousin, that his mother and brother  had  threatened  to
    kill him or that he lives with (the witness) SA or that he has sex with
    him and LR, another witness. She found that the appellant's  attendance
    at LGBT meetings, events  and  venues  was  for  the  sole  purpose  of
    bolstering an untrue claim.

 8. At [44] she referred to having observed the appellant and his witnesses
    giving evidence for over an hour. Although the appellant had  generally
    given direct answers, largely without hesitation, his oral evidence and
    screening interview were substantially different in  form  and  content
    from his witness statement. To  summarise,  she  contrasted  the  "very
    great detail" of his witness statement with his answers to questions.

 9. She found that there were inconsistencies between his evidence and that
    of SA. Although the appellant was said to have been largely  consistent
    as to the core elements of his claim (which were summarised),  the  FtJ
    said that his account was  at  times  lacking  in  detail,  there  were
    inconsistencies when the  claim  was  subjected  to  scrutiny  and  his
    general credibility was damaged by the lateness of the claim.

10. Both the appellant and SA said that they had met in November 2015, that
    the appellant had lived in SA's flat since January 2016, that they  had
    separate rooms and had a non-exclusive  sexual  relationship.  However,
    she said that the appellant was initially thrown by the question  about
    whether or not they used contraception. His answer that  they  used  it
    "sometimes" was inconsistent with that of SA who said  that  they  used
    condoms every time they had sex. Although the appellant had  said  that
    they sometimes used his condoms and at other times  SA's,  he  did  not
    know where SA kept the condoms. SA's evidence however,  was  that  they
    always used his, SA's, condoms.

11. At [47] the FtJ said that there were inconsistencies about  the  nature
    of the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  SA.  In  the  asylum
    interview he said that he loved SA and wants to be his  boyfriend,  and
    that he appeared to present to his GP that he had a  partner.  However,
    in his witness statement he claimed to be in an open relationship  with
    both SA and LR, enjoying his freedom and making up for lost time.  That
    was also inconsistent with SA's evidence that they  have  sex  but  are
    happy not being in a relationship.

12. At [48] she said that although the appellant's claim to have lived with
    SA since January  2016  was  confirmed  by  SA  and  supported  by  the
    appellant's bank statement, it  was  surprising  that  SA's  letter  of
    support dated 24 May 2016 (which she quoted) stated simply that he  had
    known the appellant since November 2015, they have regular contact  and
    spend time together "as sex partner" and that  they  regularly  go  gay
    clubbing. That did not indicate that the appellant lives  with  him  in
    the property.  The letter from one SR, who gave  the  same  address  as
    that of SA, did not state that the appellant had been residing with him
    and SA for the previous six months. Other letters from his GP and Barts
    Health NHS at the relevant  time  gave  a  different  address  for  the
    appellant.

13.  The appellant's account of an incident with his cousin  was  found  to
    lack credibility because of inconsistency in the  account  and  because
    the appellant was unable to give even a rough estimate  for  when  that
    incident happened.

14. The FtJ referred to further inconsistency in the  account  in  that  he
    said in evidence that he had not  expressed  his  sexuality  to  anyone
    other than his cousin in Bangladesh, whereas in his asylum interview he
    said that he was verbally abused at school when he wanted to touch  his
    friends.

15. Likewise, the FtJ did not find credible the appellant's explanation  of
    why, in the light of  his  evidence,  he  only  had  his  first  sexual
    experience and involvement in the gay community in 2010,  after  having
    been in the UK for five years, and having said that he  fully  realised
    that he was gay when he came to the UK. She did not find  it  plausible
    that he would not have had the means to seek out people  from  the  gay
    community of find information about gay venues,  or  make  contact  on-
    line.

16. The alleged threats from his family were not found to be  credible  for
    the reasons given at [52] of the FtJ's decision.

17. The FtJ said at [53] that she found both SA and  LR  evasive  at  times
    when their evidence was challenged in cross-examination.  She  referred
    to LR accepting that he had given evidence in  eight  or  nine  similar
    asylum claims based on sexual orientation.  She found  his  description
    of his relationship with the appellant to be inconsistent.

18. Other statements that were unsigned and where  the  witnesses  did  not
    attend without explanation, were given no weight. The FtJ said that the
    letters consisted mainly of hearsay evidence.

19. She considered the documentary evidence that the  appellant  relied  on
    but concluded that it attracted little weight, for the reasons given at
    [57]. She noted that it all post-dated the application  for  asylum  in
    January 2016, the evidence being of attendance at LGBT events or clubs.
    She noted that a number  of  receipts  from  gay  pubs  or  clubs  were
    'declined'  or  'voided',  indicating  that  no  financial  transaction
    actually took place.

20. At [58] she referred to the fact of the claim for  asylum  having  been
    made some five years after he came to  the  UK,  and  then  only  after
    curtailment of his student visa in September 2014 and after the service
    of  notification  of  removal  as  an  overstayer.  The   (threatening)
    telephone call from his family is said to have been  received  a  month
    after he was served with notice of removal. He is said to have had  his
    first sexual relationship a month  before  his  asylum  claim,  and  he
    claimed to have started living with  SA  at  around  the  time  of  his
    screening interview. Although he and LR are said  to  have  met  around
    March 2016, the first sexual encounter between them  is  said  to  have
    taken place only after the asylum interview.

    The grounds and submissions

21. In summary, the grounds contend that the FtJ applied the wrong standard
    of proof in relation to  her  comparison  of  the  appellant's  witness
    statement with  his  oral  evidence  and  screening  interview.  It  is
    asserted that it was unfair of the FtJ to compare a  written  statement
    where a person has the benefit of legal representation  and  assistance
    in the preparation of the witness statement, with answers to questions.

22. The grounds assert that the  FtJ  was  wrong  to  rely  on  answers  to
    intrusive questions, for example in relation to the use of condoms, and
    leading to confusion on the part of the appellant. Reference is made to
    the decision of the CJEU, cited in the grounds as A (C-148/13),  B  (C-
    149/13) and C (C-150/13), Article  4  of  the  Qualification  Directive
    (2004/38) and Articles 3 and 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights  in
    relation to the assessment of credibility.

23. It is said in the grounds that the FtJ's assessment of  credibility  is
    otherwise flawed, for example in relation to what the appellant said to
    his GP. The assessment of the appellant's account of the development of
    his sexuality was flawed, it is contended, in particular in relation to
    her reliance on the appellant's evidence as to dates or time-scales.

24. The FtJ had not explained why she rejected the appellant's  explanation
    of the timing of his asylum claim. It is lastly asserted that  the  FtJ
    did not assess the appellant's credibility 'in the round'.

25. On behalf of the appellant in submissions, the grounds were relied  on.
    In summary, it was further contended that the witness LR had  explained
    his  attendance  at  other  hearings  to  give  evidence.  It  did  not
    necessarily follow that because he had given evidence in other cases he
    was not credible.

26. In terms of the use of condoms, the appellant's evidence was consistent
    and in such situations people do not behave in a "strategic fashion".

27. As to delay, the appellant had explained the timing of  his  claim  for
    asylum and that he was not aware of whether he would qualify for asylum
    as coming within the Geneva Convention. As a lay person  he  could  not
    reasonably have been expected to know.

28. The error of  law  on  the  part  of  the  FtJ  in  the  assessment  of
    credibility was material because of the criminal law in  Bangladesh  in
    relation to homosexuality. Even if the law is not enforced, society and
    the police take it upon themselves to enforce it.

29. Mr Melvin relied on the respondent's 'rule 24' response.  He  submitted
    that there was a very high threshold in establishing irrationality. The
    FtJ had made clear findings and had looked at all the evidence  in  the
    round.

30. She was entitled to take into account the circumstances  in  which  the
    asylum claim was made, that is  after  his  leave  was  curtailed.  The
    appellant is educated to university standard, so it is not the case, as
    had been suggested, that he is uneducated and would not have been  able
    to establish that he would have been able to claim asylum on account of
    being gay. None of the evidence before  the  FtJ  preceded  the  asylum
    claim. It all arose afterwards.

31. In any event, the background evidence did not support  the  claim  that
    the appellant would be at risk  from  the  authorities  in  Bangladesh,
    given that the authorities do not prosecute people for being gay.

32. In reply, Mr Miah submitted that even if the authorities do not seek to
    prosecute  those  in  the  appellant's  situation,  the  definition  of
    persecution is very wide.

33. It was not inconsistent for LR to have said in evidence that he and the
    appellant only had sex twice yet had said in his witness statement that
    they were not boyfriends but just enjoyed sexual trysts.

    Conclusions

34. Dealing with the grounds in turn, I do not consider that there  is  any
    merit in the contention  that  the  FtJ  failed  to  apply  to  correct
    standard of proof to the assessment  of  the  appellant's  credibility.
    There was an appropriate self-direction in relation to the standard  of
    proof at [9] and [10] of the decision. At [43] the FtJ  again  referred
    to the lower standard of proof, and  at  [57]  and  in  the  concluding
    paragraph of the decision at [58]. In addition, looking at the decision
    overall, and the detailed findings, it is not  apparent  that  the  FtJ
    applied a standard of proof that was higher  than  the  lower  standard
    referred to in her self-direction.

35. The FtJ's assessment of the appellant's  account  in  relation  to  his
    witness statement at [44] is not tainted by any error of  approach,  as
    the grounds contend. It is to be noted that in the opening sentence  of
    that paragraph the FtJ  said  that  she  had  had  the  opportunity  of
    observing the appellant and his witnesses giving evidence for  over  an
    hour. She set out their evidence in detail,  and  plainly  had  a  good
    grasp of the various facets of their  evidence.  She  was  entitled  to
    contrast the detail given in the witness statement  from  his  evidence
    otherwise.

36. The argument in relation to the decision in A, B, C v  Staatssecretaris
    van Veiligheid en Justitie (C-148-150/13) is not fully developed in the
    grounds, and nor was it in submissions. The point however,  relates  to
    the questions that the appellant was asked about the  use  of  condoms,
    dealt with by the FtJ in her reasons at [46] and which I have  set  out
    at [10] above.

37. The grounds state that the attempt at a hearing  to  seek  details  of,
    understand and assess details of "designated times" of intimacy when  a
    condom would be appropriate, is one "that would quite possibly lead  to
    discomfort in an appellant which may be interpreted in many  ways"  and
    that the FtJ followed an incorrect approach.

38. In A, B, C v Staatssecretaris van  Veiligheid  en  Justitie,  the  CJEU
    concluded as follows:
           "Article 4(3)(c) of Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April  2004  on
           minimum standards for the  qualification  and  status  of  third
           country nationals or stateless persons as refugees or as persons
           who otherwise need international protection and the  content  of
           the  protection  granted  and  Article 13(3)(a)  of  Directive
           2005/85/EC  of  1 December  2005,  on  minimum  standards   on
           procedures in Member States for granting and withdrawing refugee
           status, must be interpreted as precluding, in the context of the
           assessment by the competent national authorities,  acting  under
           the supervision of the courts, of the  facts  and  circumstances
           concerning the declared sexual orientation of an  applicant  for
           asylum, whose application is based on a fear of  persecution  on
           grounds of that  sexual  orientation,  the  statements  of  that
           applicant and the documentary and other  evidence  submitted  in
           support of his application being subject  to  an  assessment  by
           those  authorities,  founded  on   questions   based   only   on
           stereotyped notions concerning homosexuals.
           Article 4 of Directive 2004/83, read in the light of Article 7
           of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, must
           be interpreted as precluding, in the context of that assessment,
           the competent national authorities from  carrying  out  detailed
           questioning as to the  sexual  practices  of  an  applicant  for
           asylum.
           Article 4 of Directive 2004/83, read in the light of Article 1
           of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, must
           be interpreted as precluding, in the context of that assessment,
           the acceptance by those authorities  of  evidence  such  as  the
           performance by the applicant for asylum concerned of  homosexual
           acts, his submission to 'tests' with a view to establishing  his
           homosexuality or, yet, the production by him of  films  of  such
           acts.
           Article 4(3) of  Directive  2004/83  and  Article 13(3)(a)  of
           Directive 2005/85 must be  interpreted  as  precluding,  in  the
           context of that assessment, the competent  national  authorities
           from finding that the statements of  the  applicant  for  asylum
           lack credibility merely because the applicant did  not  rely  on
           his declared sexual orientation on the  first  occasion  he  was
           given to set out the ground for persecution."

39. To summarise, the CJEU concluded that the assessment of credibility  in
    relation to sexual orientation in asylum claims precludes the asking of
    questions  based  on  stereotyped   notions   concerning   homosexuals,
    questioning  in  terms  of  sexual  practices,  assessment  by  way  of
    submission of the applicant to 'tests' to  establish  homosexuality  or
    reliance on films of homosexual acts, or the rejection  of  credibility
    "merely" because an applicant did  not  rely  on  his  declared  sexual
    orientation on the first opportunity when making the asylum claim.

40. It must by now be obvious that in an assessment  of  credibility  of  a
    person's  sexual  orientation  great  care  must  be  taken  to   avoid
    stereotypes, to ask  questions  sensitively  taking  into  account  the
    individual's  personal  circumstances,  background  and  culture,   and
    usually, if not always, to avoid  detailed  intimate  questioning.  The
    value of the latter sort of questioning is likely to be  limited  given
    the nature, breadth and individual experience of sexuality.

41. In relation to the questions that were asked about the use of  condoms,
    I do consider that it would probably have been better had the questions
    not been asked, because of the many potential pitfalls associated  with
    such questions. However, it is not suggested, and there is  nothing  to
    indicate, that the questions led to "discomfort" for this appellant  as
    speculated in the grounds. The issue that the FtJ dealt  with  in  this
    respect was one of straightforward inconsistency in the account.

42. As a matter of principle, it is also worth noting that in  A,  B,  C  v
    Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en Justitie, it was said that assertion
    by a person as to their sexuality may require  confirmation  [51],  and
    that an assertion of sexual orientation may permissibly be  subject  to
    an assessment process [52]. In other words, it is for the applicant  to
    establish the veracity of the claim.

43. The grounds do not reflect the FtJ's conclusions on this issue. The FtJ
    did not make, or seek to make, any assessment of when use of  a  condom
    may be  appropriate.  Nothing  to  that  effect  is  evident  from  her
    decision.

44. The evidence of what the appellant  said  to  his  GP  about  having  a
    partner and the FtJ's assessment of this at [47] as being  inconsistent
    with other evidence, forms but a fraction of the FtJ's  conclusions  on
    credibility. In any event, the FtJ was perfectly entitled  to  conclude
    that telling the GP that he has a partner in SA and stating to  similar
    effect in his asylum  interview,  was  inconsistent  with  the  witness
    statement where he states that he is in an open  relationship  with  SA
    and LR, was enjoying his freedom and was making up for lost  time.  The
    statements may not necessarily be inconsistent, but  on  the  facts  of
    this case, considering all of the evidence, the FtJ concluded that they
    were, and there is no error of law in her having done so.

45. It is not correct to assert that there was an "over  reliance"  on  the
    part of the FtJ on fixed dates for certain events. In this context, the
    grounds refer to [49] of the FtJ's decision. However, in that paragraph
    the FtJ referred to the appellant's inability  to  give  even  a  rough
    estimate, even to within a couple of years, for when he told his cousin
    about his sexual feelings. She  found  that  that  would  have  been  a
    significant event in the development of the appellant's sexual identity
    or awakening which he ought to be able to remember  as  to  date,  even
    roughly. Furthermore, the appellant's account of that incident with his
    cousin was itself inconsistent.

46. Again, the  grounds  mischaracterise  the  FtJ's  conclusions  in  this
    respect. She did not, as the grounds suggest, question the  clarity  of
    his recollection of his age and the dates for when he became  aware  of
    his attraction to boys. The grounds extrapolate the particular findings
    of the FtJ in relation to a specific event into findings that  the  FtJ
    never made, namely in terms of  general  findings  on  the  appellant's
    emerging sexual awareness.

47. Contrary to what is asserted in the grounds, the FtJ  did  explain  why
    she found that the timing and circumstances of  the  appellant's  claim
    for asylum adversely affected the credibility of the claim.  It  was  a
    claim made five years after his arrival in the UK, after curtailment of
    his student visa and after notification of removal. The  FtJ  concluded
    that the sequence of events was indicative of a claim constructed to as
    a means to remain in the UK after failing to establish  entitlement  to
    remain as a student.

48. Furthermore, it was relevant that  the  documentation  relied  on,  the
    alleged threatening phone call from  his  family,  his  apparent  first
    sexual relationship and the time when he started living  with  SA,  all
    occurred at about the time of, or after, his claim for asylum.

49. The FtJ gave a variety of reasons for rejecting the credibility of  the
    appellant's account, in terms of  inconsistency,  plausibility  and  in
    relation to the circumstances of the  claim.  She  saw  and  heard  the
    witnesses give evidence. Neither the grounds nor the submissions reveal
    any error of law on the part of  the  FtJ  in  her  assessment  of  the
    appellant's credibility. Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.

     Decision

50. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appeal therefore stands.












Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 4/05/17
