
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/08004/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |          Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 9 November 2017                    |          On 28 November 2017         |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                         Mr Khaled Nabhan El-Chamma
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins of Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of the  Palestinian  Authority,
    resident in Lebanon.  He was born on 1  January  1994.   The  appellant
    appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of   the
    respondent dated 19 July 2016 to refuse to grant the  appellant  asylum
    and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.  In a  Decision  and
    Reasons promulgated on 27  February  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chana dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals, with permission from the Upper Tribunal, on  the
    following grounds:

    Ground 1: that the  judge's  findings  are  based  on  speculation  and
    conjecture rather than proper analysis of the evidence;

    Ground 2: that the judge's findings at [32] that it  was  not  credible
    that the appellant would have a box outside the university,  attempting
    to collect money for Syrian refugees, ignores  the  evidence  that  the
    university was of some 800 students and if the  judge's  analysis  were
    correct then if there was a  risk  of  danger  no  student  protest  or
    opposition political activity would ever take place anywhere;

    Ground 3:  that  the  judge's  findings,  at  [35]  were  confused  and
    confusing as it was not the appellant's evidence that the  police  told
    his friend's father that his Hezbollah had arrested the appellant's two
    friends but rather one of the boys' fathers made enquiries and was told
    by the police they had not detained them.  That  being  the  case,  the
    friend's father assumed it must be Hezbollah, which is said to  tie  in
    with the background material as to the arbitrary way  that  this  group
    acts in Lebanon;

    Ground 4:  that the judge erred in finding against the appellant due to
    his failure to mention in the screening interview the  essential  basis
    of his claim;

    Ground 5: that the judge's approach was inadequate as the  judge  found
    the appellant's account to be  a  complete  fabrication  which  was  to
    ignore that the Secretary of State had  accepted  large  parts  of  his
    claim, in particular that  the  appellant  was  a  Palestinian  refugee
    habitually resident in Lebanon; that the  appellant  cannot  return  to
    Palestine; and that the appellant attended university in Lebanon.

    Error of Law

 3. For the reasons set out below I am not satisfied that an error  of  law
    has been disclosed in the judge's findings.

Grounds 1 and Ground 2

 4. Mr Collins submitted on a  number  of  occasions  that  the  judge  had
    misunderstood the appellant's account  that  it  is  not  that  he  was
    standing with a placard in front of  the  university  but  rather  that
    there was a box to collect money for Syrian refugees and  that  it  was
    pure speculation on the judge's part that it was not credible that  the
    appellant would be attempting to collect money from  students  for  the
    Syrian refugees.  It was also submitted that this must be considered in
    the context of the appellant, who was a Palestinian refugee and that it
    was entirely credible that a   Palestinian refugee student  would  have
    helped other refugees.

 5. However, the judge recorded, at [24], that the appellant was asked  how
    he collected money for Syrian refugees outside the university  and  the
    judge clearly recorded the appellant's answer that  there  "was  a  box
    outside and stopped university students asking for help for 'our Syrian
    refugees' brothers'".  The judge also noted that there was no political
    propaganda or anything else attached to this work.  The judge therefore
    considered the evidence in its proper context.

 6. However, it was open to the judge to make the findings  that  she  did,
    considering the evidence in the round in what was a careful  and  well-
    reasoned decision;  in particular bearing  in  mind  that  it  was  the
    appellant's evidence that he was aware that  the  university  was  very
    much pro-Hezbollah and was aware that Hezbollah material was posted  on
    the walls and of the need to be secret about his lack  of  support  for
    them and that he was aware that Hezbollah  were  dangerous  and  anyone
    caught or perceived to be against them "would have their heads broken".
     In this context the judge was entitled to reach the  finding  she  did
    that it was not credible that the appellant would have  a  box  outside
    the university gate, attempting to  collect  money  from  students  for
    Syrian refugees.

 7. Equally, there was nothing perverse about that  reasoning.   The  judge
    had recorded earlier in the decision the appellant's evidence including
    that the appellant and two other friends  had  delivered  some  "relief
    stuff" to Syrian refugees  and  that  the  appellant  was  subsequently
    warned not to help Syrian refugees but nevertheless continued with  his
    work.  The judge also recorded the appellant's evidence that he was not
    open about his dislike of the Hezbollah (at [23]).   In  light  of  the
    evidence it was open to the judge to make the  findings  she  did  that
    this appellant would not have openly done what he claims to have done.

 8. Equally, at [33] the judge noted that the appellant claimed that on the
    first occasion a dead soldier had been brought to the  university  with
    fanfare and that the appellant had been sitting at  a  table  with  two
    friends when he questioned why students should cheer this individual as
    a hero when the dead soldier had been killing Syrians.   The  appellant
    indicated that he was given looks by the student who overheard him  but
    he was not threatened.  The judge found that this evidence demonstrates
    that the appellant  was  not  reported  by  the  student  and  that  he
    continued to help Syrian refugees by collecting money for them  outside
    the university.  Given that the appellant was aware that Hezbollah were
    dangerous and that one of  the  students  was  giving  him  threatening
    looks, it was open to the judge to find  in  the  context  of  all  the
    evidence that it was not credible that the appellant would have gone on
    to collect money outside the  university.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge's reasons were cogent and more  than  adequate,  as  to  why  she
    rejected the appellant's claim  that  he  had  a  box  outside  of  the
    university, collecting money for Hezbollah.

Ground 3

 9. Although the ground of appeal asserted that  the  judge's  findings  at
    [35] were confused and confusing, I am of the view that the grounds (at
    paragraph 8) misrepresent the judge's findings.  It is stated in  those
    grounds that it was not the appellant's evidence that the  police  told
    his friend's father that Hezbollah had  arrested  the  appellant's  two
    friends.  Rather, one of the boys' fathers made enquiries and was  told
    by the police they had not detained them.   That  being  the  case  the
    friend's father assumed it must be Hezbollah.  That in  fact  "ties  in
    with the background material before the Tribunal as  to  the  arbitrary
    manner in which Hezbollah act in Lebanon".  It is difficult to see what
    the quarrel is with  the  judge's  findings  as  the  judge  accurately
    recorded the evidence before her as follows:

         "When questioned further, the appellant said he was aware  that  it
         was Hezbollah who took these friends because he checked with one of
         their fathers who had checked with the police who had arrested  his
         two friends but the father was unable to find them there.  He  said
         that the police informed the father that they had not arrested  his
         two friends."

10. The judge went on to find that this evidence was  not  consistent  with
    background evidence that the Lebanese police do not give information as
    to who they have arrested as they arbitrarily arrest people.   Contrary
    to the grounds, these findings are not confused or  confusing  and  the
    judge gives clear and adequate reasons as to why  she  found  that  the
    appellant's claim was at best speculation that if the  police  did  not
    take his two friends then Hezbollah must have taken  them.   The  judge
    noted that background evidence stated that there  were  many  organised
    criminal entities, terrorist groups and gangs in Lebanon  (and  I  note
    that there are  references  to  gangs  including  at  page  25  of  the
    appellant's bundle and, including at pages 45 and 47 of the appellant's
    bundle, references both to Hezbollah as  one  (not  the  only)  of  the
    autonomous militant groups and to other militant groups).  It was  open
    to the judge in this context of all this evidence to find that  it  was
    speculative to state that it must have been Hezbollah  that  had  taken
    the appellant's friends.

11. Although Mr Collins referred to the lack of reference as  to  precisely
    which background information was relied  on  he  did  not  specifically
    dispute  that  such  evidence  was  before  the  judge,  nor  was  this
    specifically disputed in the grounds of appeal before  me.   I  am  not
    satisfied that any material error of law was disclosed in ground 3.

Ground 4

12. This related to paragraph 9 of the appellant's grounds of appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal and in particular the judge's findings at [36]  to  [38]
    that the appellant  had  failed  to  mention  at  the  first  available
    opportunity the essential basis of his claim.  The judge  recorded  the
    appellant's answer at question 4.1 of his screening interview in detail
    at [36] of the Decision and Reasons.  This discloses that the appellant
    went into some considerable  detail  where  he  was  asked  to  briefly
    describe the reasons why he could not  return  to  his  country.   This
    included that he has to live in a camp, that  he  has  no  right  to  a
    doctor, no right to buy property, that he is Sunni and lives in a  Shia
    area, that the Shia do not like his name, that he has no  rights,  that
    he had three operations and  had  to  pay  for  them,  that  there  are
    explosions and the authorities blame everything  on  the  Palestinians,
    that if he marries and has children  there  is  nothing  for  them  and
    finally that he was helping Syrian refugees and it was interpreted that
    he was against the regime.  He also indicated that there was no-one  to
    stand up for him and that he was helping Syrian refugees find homes  in
    the camp.

13. It was open to the judge to note and find that there was no mention  at
    the screening interview that he feared the  Hezbollah  and  no  mention
    that he was threatened by Hezbollah, who pointed guns to his head.

14. Mr Collins relied on YL (Rely on  SEF)  China  [2004]  UKIAT  00145  as
    authority that it must be remembered that a screening interview is  not
    done to establish a claim in detail and that a screening interview  may
    well be conducted when the asylum seeker is tired after a long  journey
    and these things have to be considered when any inconsistencies between
    the screening interview and the later case are evaluated.  Although not
    cited by Mr Collins, this was confirmed by the Court  of  Appeal  YL  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 450.  It was also noted that 'asylum  seekers  are
    still expected to  tell  the  truth  and  answers  given  in  screening
    interviews can be compared fairly with answers given later'.

15. Although Mr Collins pointed to the fact that  the  screening  interview
    notes that the appellant had just arrived in  the  country,  the  judge
    took into account all the evidence and would therefore have been  aware
    of this fact.  The judge also considered  the  appellant's  explanation
    that he was only  asked  to  give  an  outline  of  his  asylum  claim.
    However,  as  noted  by  the  judge,  the  appellant  went  into   some
    considerable detail in the screening  interview  and  it  was  in  this
    context that it was open to the judge to make an adverse finding as  to
    the appellant's failure to mention Hezbollah and the  specific  threats
    that he claimed occurred including being held at gunpoint or  that  his
    friends were captured by Hezbollah.

16. The fact that it must be taken into consideration  that  the  screening
    interview is only a very  brief  outline  of  the  case  and  that  the
    circumstances must be taken into consideration  did  not  preclude  the
    judge from finding that the appellant  did  not  provide  what  he  now
    claims was the full truth and a core aspect of his claim.  It must also
    be noted that the judge did not consider this matter in  isolation  and
    specifically noted that it was considered in the round, at [38] of  the
    Decision and Reasons.

    Ground 5

17. In relation to the fact that the judge found the appellant's  claim  to
    be "a complete fabrication" whereas the respondent  had  accepted  that
    the appellant was a Palestinian refugee habitually resident in Lebanon,
    that he could  not  return  to  Palestine  and  that  he  had  attended
    university in Lebanon, the judge did  not  specifically  dispute  these
    matters and it is evident from a  fair  reading  of  her  Decision  and
    Reasons that her finding of a complete fabrication was in  relation  to
    the appellant's account of his claimed difficulties.  Even if that were
    not the case I accept that these matters do not go to the core  of  the
    appellant's claim, which the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  gave  cogent,
    coherent and  ultimately  sustainable  reasons  for  not  accepting  as
    credible.

    Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

