

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/08333/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18 June 2018                         |  On 25 June 2019                  |
|                                        |                                   |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                    R S W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 2  October  1985.   She
    claimed asylum on 11 February 2016.   Her  claim  was  refused  by  the
    respondent. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and First-
    tier Tribunal Judge L Mensah ("the FTTJ") dismissed her appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  K
    Swaney in the following terms:

         "...

         2. The grounds assert that the  Judge  erred  in  failing  to  have
         regard to material evidence; in failing to  assess  credibility  in
         the round; and in failing  to  properly  consider  the  appellant's
         claim under articled 3 of the ECHR on medical grounds.

         3. It is arguable that the judge's  assessment  of  credibility  is
         flawed, as although the judge accepts that  the  appellant  suffers
         from PTSD and has self-harmed in the past and states that this  has
         been taken into account in the assessment of credibility, there  is
         no further finding or reasons as to the  potential  impact  of  the
         appellant's mental health on her credibility.

         4. The grounds of appeal disclose an arguable  error  of  law.  The
         grant of permission is not limited. ..."

 3. At the outset of the hearing before me, I observed that  the  FTTJ  had
    made a positive finding at [13] that the appellant had  been  diagnosed
    with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder ("PTSD") and had "taken  this  into
    account when considering her  overall  credibility".   I  referred  the
    parties to the expert psychiatric evidence, Dr Chiedu Obuaya's  report,
    before the FTTJ.  This  makes  no  such  diagnosis.  Indeed  Dr  Obuaya
    specifically states that the appellant did not describe  core  symptoms
    of PTSD [38]. He diagnosed a mild  depressive  episode  and  stated  at
    [41]: "she does not,  in  my  clinical  opinion,  meet  the  diagnostic
    criteria for a separate diagnosis of PTSD ... in its own right".   Thus
    the FTTJ made a mistake of fact as to the appellant's mental health and
    had regard to that unsustainable finding when assessing the appellant's
    overall credibility.

 4. Mr Tarlow, for the respondent, conceded that, in light of this mistake,
    he could not defend the findings of the FTTJ.  He accepted  the  FTTJ's
    decision contained a material error of law.

 5. The parties were in agreement that the decision of the FTTJ  should  be
    set aside and the matter remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh  decision  to  be  made,  without  any  findings  of  fact  being
    preserved. That is the appropriate course because the the  decision  of
    the  FTTJ  contains  a  material  error  of  law.  The  assessment   of
    credibility is flawed because it is based, in part, on that mistake  of
    fact. The decision is not sustainable on the evidence.

Decision

 6. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  a
    material error on a point of law.  The  decision  is  set  aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,
    pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v), before  any  judge  aside  from
    FTTJ L Mensah.

 7. The appellant is entitled to anonymity in these proceedings and I  make
    a direction accordingly.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 18 June 2019


Anonymity Direction - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 18 June 2019

