
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08783/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2nd January 2018                       |On 13th February 2018             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                    [N H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Saeed of Aman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Kuwait born  on  [  ]  1976.   After
    living in Iraq, the Appellant entered the UK illegally on 3rd  February
    2016 and applied for asylum that day.  That application was refused for
    the reasons given in an Asylum Decision dated  3rd  August  2016.   The
    Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Paul (the Judge) sitting at Taylor House on 18th  April  2017.
    He decided to dismiss the appeal on asylum and humanitarian  protection
    grounds for the reasons given in his Decision dated  18th  April  2017.
    The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 18th October
    2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant's case was that he was at risk on  return  to  Kuwait  as
    somebody who had lived in Iraq from 1992 until he came to the  UK.   In
    Kuwait therefore he would be at risk as an undocumented Bidoon who  did
    not have Kuwaiti citizenship.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeal because he did not find the Appellant to
    be credible.  There were inconsistencies in his account which the Judge
    also described as very vague.  The Judge was therefore not satisfied as
    to the true status and origins of the Appellant.

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Saeed argued that the Judge had  erred  in
    law in coming to this  conclusion.   He  referred  to  the  grounds  of
    application and submitted that the Judge had accepted the criticism  of
    the Appellant's  evidence  made  in  the  Respondent's  refusal  letter
    without analysis and without sufficient reasons.  The Judge had  failed
    to take into account the Appellant's evidence by way of rebuttal.   The
    Judge failed to follow the  Respondent's  original  position  that  the
    Appellant was from Kuwait.  The Judge failed to make any finding as  to
    whether the Appellant was deported from Kuwait.  The Judge referred  to
    a Country Advice from the Australian Government,  but  failed  to  deal
    with objective evidence submitted by the Appellant in his Bundle to the
    effect that the Appellant would not be able to obtain Kuwaiti nor Iraqi
    citizenship.  The Judge also failed to deal with  documentary  evidence
    such as a marriage certificate  and  a  letter  from  a  local  Mukhtar
    showing that the Appellant was a Bidoon.

 6. In response, Ms Ahmad submitted that the arguments made  on  behalf  of
    the Appellant were speculative.  The Judge came  to  conclusions  which
    were open to him on the evidence before him  and  which  he  adequately
    explained.  It is trite law that the Judge did not have  to  deal  with
    every item of evidence before him in the Decision.  As decided in  SSHD
    (Appellant) v AH (Sudan) and Others (FC) (Respondents) [2007] UKHL  49,
    for there to be an error of law something more  was  needed  than  just
    that the decision would appear harsh.

 7. I find an error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    set aside.  The decision of  the  Judge  is  based  entirely  upon  his
    finding as to the credibility of the Appellant but in my judgment  that
    finding is not flawless.  At paragraph 25 of the  Decision,  the  Judge
    relied upon the criticisms of the  Appellant's  evidence  made  in  the
    Respondent's refusal  letter  without  a  detailed  analysis  of  those
    criticisms  and  without  taking  into  account  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant by way of rebuttal.  The Judge also described the evidence of
    the Appellant as very vague again without a detailed analysis  of  that
    evidence, and in any event the Appellant's case was not dependent  upon
    what he had experienced in Kuwait and Iraq but upon his claim to  be  a
    Kuwaiti Bidoon.  The fact that the Appellant  was  a  Kuwaiti  was  not
    disputed by the Respondent.  The Judge erred in law by not dealing with
    documentary evidence showing the Appellant to be a Bidoon.   Looked  at
    as a whole, the Judge failed to give sufficient reasons for his finding
    as to the credibility of the Appellant.

 8. I decided not to remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal but  to
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  the  decision  in  the
    appeal to be remade there.  This is in accordance with paragraph 7.2(b)
    of the Practice Statements as proper findings of fact  are  yet  to  be
    made.

Notice of Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside that decision.

    The decision in the appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity.  I was not
    asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Date 9th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

