
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/08278/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 October 2017                        | On 24 October 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Mr G S P
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Tapfumaneyi, Legal Representative, PT Law &
Associates

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State and the respondent
    is Mr G S P.  However, for the purposes of this Decision and Reasons  I
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal  where
    Mr G S P was the appellant.

 2. Mr G S P, a citizen of Zimbabwe, entered the UK on 28 August  2002  and
    subsequently claimed asylum which was refused  and  his  appeal  rights
    exhausted in May 2003.  On  2  June  2016  Mr  G  S  P  lodged  further
    submissions which were refused on 6  July  2016.   In  a  Decision  and
    Reasons promulgated on 29 March 2017 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Thew dismissed the appellant's further appeal  on  asylum  grounds  and
    humanitarian protection, but allowed the appeal on human  rights  under
    Appendix FM, EX.1(a).

 3. The respondent appealed on the basis  that  it  was  argued  the  judge
    failed to resolve conflicts of fact including at paragraphs 46  and  27
    of the Decision and Reasons, which undermined the positive  credibility
    findings made in favour of  the  appellant's  partner,  Ms  A,  without
    which, neither party disputed, that the judge could not  have  found  a
    genuine and subsisting  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
    child, which was the basis of the appeal being allowed  under  Appendix
    FM.

 4. It was further submitted that  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  give
    adequate reasons as to why he found the appellant's  relationship  with
    his daughter to be genuine and subsisting and that the judge had failed
    to take into consideration the lack of evidence.

 5. It was submitted by the  respondent  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest that the appellant had a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with his daughter or that he intended to maintain one  in  the  future.
    The respondent also submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  had  failed
    to consider Section 117B.  However, Mr Tufan before me  quite  properly
    withdrew this ground as the appeal was allowed under Appendix FM.

 6. Mr Tufan accepted that at paragraph [36] of the  Decision  and  Reasons
    the judge set out that she had analysed all the evidence before her and
    concluded that although the appellant had not established that  he  was
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms A  that  was  akin  to
    marriage she, on a balance of probabilities, that he was living at  her
    premises and that he had established that it was more likely  than  not
    that he was in a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with
    their daughter.  The judge went on to find that since the child's birth
    whilst the appellant had not been living with the child  initially,  he
    had been in constant contact with her and that he had shown a  parental
    interest in her upbringing.

 7. Mr Tufan questioned the findings at [46] submitting that a finding that
    the appellant had unrestricted access to his daughter did not mean that
    they had a subsisting relationship, particularly given that  the  judge
    indicated that there was no evidence  from  the  school  and  that  the
    appellant did not pay maintenance.  However it was open to the judge to
    find, for the reasons she gave,  that  she  did  not  accept  that  the
    relationship between the appellant and his  partner  was  one  akin  to
    marriage or that it was genuine and subsisting,  whilst  still  finding
    that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his
    daughter.  The judge found the Ms A to be a credible witness  including
    as to the course of her relationship with  the  appellant.   The  judge
    found that she was more realistic, in the judge's findings at [31],  as
    to the nature of the relationship between the appellant and  Ms  A  and
    preferred her evidence as to the amount of time that he had spent  with
    her when she was living  at  the  previous  address.   The  judge  also
    preferred her evidence that he was staying there prior to May  2016  on
    one to two days a week.

 8. Although it was  submitted  that  there  was  an  alleged  conflict  in
    paragraph [27] where it was Ms A evidence that she had told the council
    that she was not with her child's father anymore I accept that this was
    in the context of her general evidence about the  financial  assistance
    she was receiving from the council and does not undermine  the  judge's
    adequate findings, including at [35], that he had been  living  at  the
    same address as his partner and his daughter since May 2016.  The judge
    also found at [34] that it was credible in Ms  A's  evidence  that  the
    appellant was in very regular contact with his daughter  even  when  he
    was not living with her and that there were photographs covering a span
    of years.  The fact that these do not cover each and  every  period  of
    the child's life does not invalidate the judge's  findings  which  were
    considered in the round and open to her.  It was a matter for the judge
    what weight she attached to those photographs  and  there  was  nothing
    irrational about her approach.

 9. Mr Tufan conceded that whilst there was a challenge from the author  of
    the grounds of appeal he himself had no further  substantive  challenge
    other than to rely on those grounds.

10. The fact that there was no evidence from the school and that the  judge
    criticised the evidence of the appellant in general does not  make  the
    judge's findings contradictory in respect of the underlying finding  of
    Ms A's credibility and that on a balance of probabilities the appellant
    had established that he was in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with his daughter.  I am also not satisfied that there is any merit  in
    the argument that the judge failed to identify  whether  the  appellant
    would continue to have a relationship with his daughter given that  the
    judge accepted Ms A's evidence that the appellant's  relationship  with
    his daughter was a genuine one.  On a balance of probabilities there is
    no error in the judge assuming that such a genuine and  subsisting  was
    likely to continue.




    Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no error of law  such
    that it should be set aside  and  is  preserved.   The  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date:  19 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  19 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
