
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08433/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard on 12th of September 2017      |Heard on 9th October 2017            |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                              MR NABAZ IBRAHIM
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Bexson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran of Kurdish ethnicity born  on  26th
      of May 1998. He appeals against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Broe sitting at Birmingham on 28th of February 2017  who
      dismissed his appeal against a decision of the Respondent  dated  28th
      of July 2016. That decision was to refuse the Appellant's  application
      for asylum. The Appellant left Iran in or about  October  or  November
      2015 and arrived illegally in United Kingdom on 2nd of  February  2016
      via a lorry drop. He made a claim for asylum on  the  same  day  after
      being encountered by immigration officers and being served with papers
      as an illegal entrant. It was the refusal of this application on  28th
      of July 2016 which has given rise to the present proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

   2. The Appellant's case was set out by the Judge at paragraphs 11  to  14
      of the determination. At interview the Appellant told  the  Respondent
      that he used to live in the village where he was born,  Dola  Tou,  in
      Sardashat, Iran. He lived with his parents, a brother  and  a  sister.
      The area was well known for farming and smuggling as the  border  with
      Iraq was about 3 or 4 hours away  on  foot.  The  Appellant  told  the
      Respondent that he was illiterate and was involved in smuggling  goods
      across the border because he needed  money  to  feed  his  family.  He
      smuggled alcohol from Iraq to Iran and took rice, sugar and oil in the
      opposite direction. His father looked after a shop which was  attached
      to their house. The Appellant  travelled  by  back  roads  across  the
      mountains to avoid the Iranian authorities who had issued an execution
      penalty against him.


   3. The area through which he passed was controlled by a group of  Kurdish
      fighters opposed to the  Iranian  authorities.  They  would  stop  the
      Appellant and ask him to bring them food and cigarettes. They did  not
      pay him because that was the price of their permission to cross  their
      territory. One day when he was smuggling goods he  became  aware  that
      the Iranian intelligence service, the Etalaat, had been to  his  home.
      He went back and  his  mother  told  him  that  his  father  had  been
      arrested. When his father came home he told the Appellant to leave the
      country because of  the  order  issued  by  the  Iranian  intelligence
      service. The Appellant had been betrayed by man in the village who was
      an Etalaat spy.


   4. The Respondent did not  accept  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
      account particularly because it was not considered plausible that  the
      Appellant had been unable to avoid the Kurdish fighters but  was  able
      to avoid the Iranian authorities when there was  only  one  route  the
      Appellant could use.


   5. About three weeks before the hearing at first instance  the  Appellant
      had set up a Facebook page on which he put downloads from  a  Facebook
      account. These downloads were critical  of  the  Iranian  regime.  The
      Appellant argued that the Iranian authorities would be aware  of  this
      Facebook page and would have an adverse interest in  him  upon  return
      because of it.

The Decision at First Instance

   6. The Judge did not find the Appellant to be  a  credible  witness.  The
      Appellant had  given  contradictory  accounts  in  his  interview  and
      statement about the smuggling of alcohol. Smuggling was regarded as  a
      serious matter in Iran and the Appellant would  be  expected  to  know
      whether or not he had smuggled alcohol into Iran.  The  contradictions
      in the account undermined his credibility. The Judge  also  found  the
      Appellant had been inconsistent about whether he had been paid by  the
      Kurdish fighters for the cigarettes he gave them  or  whether  he  had
      been forced to deliver cigarettes to them for free. The Judge did  not
      accept the Appellant was of interest to  the  authorities  or  that  a
      warrant for his execution had been issued. It was unlikely that if the
      Appellant's father had been arrested at his home the Etalaat would not
      also have searched the premises and discovered the contraband goods in
      the shop.


   7. Turning to the sur place  claim  the  Judge  noted  how  recently  the
      Appellant had created a Facebook page and considered it  was  no  more
      than a last-minute attempt to bolster the claim and no credit attached
      to the Appellant for that. At paragraph 37 the Judge  wrote:  "in  any
      event having given careful consideration to the documents I note  that
      there is no reference to the Appellant. The page is in the name  Nabaz
      Yusfee and he is not named as a contact or friend. I am satisfied that
      there is no reason for the authorities to  connect  the  Appellant  to
      this account".


   8. The Judge cited the Upper Tribunal case of  AB  and  others  (Internet
      activity-state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 257 noting that this  was
      not a country guidance case but was  reported  so  that  the  evidence
      considered by the Tribunal to do with  anti-regime  Internet  activity
      would be in the public domain.  In  AB  the  Tribunal  had  found  the
      material put before it did not disclose a sufficient evidential  basis
      for giving country guidance about the possible reception in  Iran  for
      those returning without a regular passport in relation to the interest
      the authorities the authorities might  have  in  Internet  activities.
      These might be revealed by an examination of blogging  activity  or  a
      Facebook account. The Tribunal found that some monitoring of  Internet
      activity outside Iran did occur but overall it was very  difficult  to
      make any sensible  findings  about  anything  which  could  convert  a
      technical possibility of something being discovered into a  real  risk
      of it being discovered.


   9. The Judge cited paragraph 472 of the decision in  which  the  Tribunal
      concluded that the mere fact that a person is extremely discreet  when
      blogging in the United Kingdom would not necessarily  mean  that  they
      would come to the attention of the authorities in Iran. If there was a
      lapse of discretion they could face hostile  interrogation  on  return
      which might expose them to risk. The more active a person had been  on
      the Internet the greater the risk. It was not relevant if a person had
      used the Internet in an opportunistic way (as the Judge had found  the
      Appellant had done in this case). This  was  because  the  authorities
      were not interested in a person's motivation.  Where  the  authorities
      had taken an interest, claiming asylum would be viewed negatively.  It
      might not of itself lead to persecution but it might enhance the risk.


  10. The risk could arise when a person returned to Iran without their  own
      passport as they would be questioned and could  be  asked  to  provide
      information enabling the authorities to gain access to their  Facebook
      page. In this case however the Judge found the Appellant did not  have
      a Facebook page in his own name. If the Iranian authorities  had  been
      able to monitor the account provided, there  would  be  no  reason  to
      connect it to the Appellant. The Judge rejected  the  claim  that  the
      Appellant would face interrogation upon  return  potentially  exposing
      him to risk. He dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

  11. The Appellant appealed against this decision concentrating  solely  on
      the rejection of the sur place claim. It was argued that the Judge had
      failed to consider that the Appellant's Facebook page may  already  be
      monitored by the Iranian government. The Appellant's profile and posts
      on the Facebook account were set to public access. The  public  nature
      of the posts meant that the Iranian authorities might already be aware
      of them as they monitored such activity. The Judge had also failed  to
      consider properly or at all the evidence contained within the Facebook
      account.  The  Iranian  authorities  were  not   interested   in   the
      motivations behind adverse Internet blogs or  posts.  That  they  were
      public and critical of the government would be sufficient to place the
      Appellant at risk. The recent dates on the entries would not  dissuade
      Iranian authorities from viewing the entries as hostile to the regime.


  12.  The risk factors in this case were the  previous  illegal  exit  from
      Iran, the length of time he had spent out of  the  country,  the  fact
      that he had claimed  asylum  and  the  content  or  substance  of  the
      Internet activity. The Appellant would return on  a  special  passport
      meaning that he would be  questioned  at  the  airport  and  would  be
      required to access his Facebook  account.  In  such  circumstances  he
      would have no choice but to log into his own account and the  material
      would be linked to him irrespective of the spelling of his name on his
      Facebook account. The Appellant's photograph appeared on the  Facebook
      profile. This would  identify  the  Appellant  as  the  owner  of  the
      Facebook page. Further photographs appeared on subsequent posts.


  13. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Designated Judge Shaerf on 26th of July 2017. In  granting  permission
      to appeal he wrote that the Judge had arguably erred in law by failing
      to  address  the  relevant  paragraphs  in  AB  when  considering  the
      likelihood that the  Appellant  would  be  required  to  disclose  his
      Facebook entries at the airport on return. The Respondent  replied  to
      the grant of permission arguing that the Judge  had  directed  himself
      correctly.

The Hearing Before Me

  14. In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me to
      determine in the first place whether there was a material error of law
      in the determination such that it felt to be set aside and the  matter
      reheard. If there was not, then the decision at first  instance  would
      stand. In oral submissions counsel for the Appellant argued  that  the
      issue was whether the Appellant's Facebook account would place him  at
      risk upon return. The Judge had erred in his findings about what would
      happen on return to Iran. There were a wide  range  of  factors  which
      would lead to the risk (see paragraph 12 above).  The  Judge  had  not
      considered those factors adequately or at all. The Appellant would  be
      questioned at the airport and he would have to give up access  to  his
      Facebook account. It was wrong for the Judge to find that the Facebook
      account was not in the Appellant's name. Yusfi was his  surname,  that
      was the name he had given to social  services,  his  college  and  the
      doctor. He had provided his full name in his asylum claim.  That  name
      had been referred  to  in  documents  from  the  Appellant's  previous
      solicitors Messrs Solomons.


  15. Counsel's second point was that the Judge had failed to  consider  the
      risks to the Appellant already existing from his use of  his  Facebook
      account. Motivation was immaterial, if  the  posts  were  public  they
      could be accessed by people in Iran and the authorities could  already
      be aware of them. The posts contained direct criticism of the  Iranian
      government, there were cartoons and satirical blogs.  That  would  put
      someone at an enhanced risk. The Judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
      content of the account itself since the settings were set  to  public.
      The Appellant would be linked to his account.


  16. In reply the Presenting Officer referred to the rule 24 response which
      I have  summarised  above.  At  first  instance  the  Judge  knew  the
      Appellant as Ibrahim. The Facebook page was  in  another  name  Yusfi.
      What was before the First-tier Judge that  could  lead  to  the  Judge
      identifying the Appellant as Yusfi? That name did not  appear  in  the
      SEF interview. The Judge had done nothing wrong, he had considered the
      leading authority of AB. Since the Facebook account  was  not  in  the
      Appellant's name it did not matter if there had been previous viewings
      of the site. Given what was in front of the Judge was difficult to see
      how the Judge had fallen into error. The Judge described the  Facebook
      account but the Appellant had failed to tie up his claim with what was
      on Facebook. The Appellant was not named in those documents.


  17. In  reply  counsel  argued  that  the  Respondent  was  aware  of  the
      Appellant's additional name. There was a document  which  referred  to
      the Appellant's surname dated July 2016, it was a report  from  social
      services. The case should be sent back for a  fresh  hearing  for  the
      Appellant to  produce  further  evidence  that  it  was  his  Facebook
      account. The Appellant had not had an education in Iran but  he  could
      communicate on  Facebook  because  he  had  a  detailed  knowledge  of
      English. The Appellant it was argued had not had  a  fair  hearing  at
      first instance. A lot of points had not been engaged with.

Findings

  18. The Judge did not find the Appellant to  be  a  credible  witness  and
      rejected the Appellant's account of  being  at  risk  from  smuggling.
      There was no appeal in relation to  that  aspect  of  the  claim.  The
      onward appeal before me was pursued on the basis that  the  Judge  had
      erred in rejecting the sur place  argument.  Three  weeks  before  the
      hearing and in an effort to bolster an otherwise weak asylum claim the
      Appellant (or someone else)  set  up  a  Facebook  account  containing
      criticism of the Iranian regime. Based on information before the Judge
      the account could  not  be  linked  to  the  Appellant  and  thus  the
      Appellant would not be at risk upon return even if he came  back  from
      United Kingdom after making an unsuccessful claim for asylum since  he
      could not be linked to the relevant Facebook account.


  19. The reason for this conclusion was because the Facebook account was in
      a different name to the one the Appellant  was  using  in  the  appeal
      proceedings. The Judge pointed  out  in  his  determination  that  the
      Appellant had made a statement only in response  to  the  Respondent's
      refusal letter not one setting out the claim in full. The significance
      of that statement is that it does not mention the Appellant's claim to
      have a surname of Yusfi. Indeed, it does not  appear  that  the  Judge
      hearing the Appellant's appeal had any information at all to link  the
      Appellant with the Facebook account produced very late in the day.


  20. At the very least an explanation why the Appellant  was  now  using  a
      different name could reasonably have been expected. The evidence which
      the Appellant has  sought  to  produce  after  receiving  the  adverse
      decision of  the  First-tier  does  not  in  any  event  take  matters
      significantly further. The Appellant produces a card indicating he  is
      attending a college but there is no date given as to  when  that  card
      was applied for. The Appellant argues that the  Facebook  account  has
      his photographs on it but if the Facebook account is not in  fact  the
      Appellant's that too does not take matters significantly further.  The
      only document of any significance the Appellant  can  point  to  is  a
      photocopy of a case review conducted by social services in 2016  which
      mentions the name the Appellant now gives as his surname.  Without the
      context in which this document appeared it is  difficult  to  see  how
      much weight could be placed on it. Although I was told that  the  name
      Yusfi had appeared in correspondence  from  the  Appellant's  previous
      solicitors I was not shown any such correspondence  and  again  it  is
      hard to give weight to this without seeing it in context. I would make
      two points on this aspect of the claim. The first is  that  the  Judge
      certainly did not see any correspondence and hence made  no  error  of
      law in concluding that the name Yusfi  could  not  be  linked  to  the
      Appellant. Secondly it  is  not  at  all  clear  why  the  Appellant's
      previous solicitors should use this name when the  present  solicitors
      evidently did not.


  21. The Appellant did not give the name Yusfi when making  his  claim  for
      asylum either in his SEF or in his substantive  asylum  interview.  He
      gives no detail about this alleged surname, for example the full names
      of his parents or how he comes to know that  is  his  surname.  It  is
      difficult to avoid the conclusion which the Judge came to that the sur
      place claim was a wholly opportunistic one in which the Appellant  was
      seeking to bolster his asylum claim by seeking  to  associate  himself
      with the work of another person or persons opposed to the regime.


  22. Having analysed the risk posed to those found in  Internet  activities
      contrary to the regime the Judge concluded that  the  Appellant  would
      not be at risk since it was not his Facebook account. In my view  that
      was a conclusion which was open to the Judge on  the  evidence  before
      him. The evidence which the Appellant now wishes  to  put  forward  to
      show that he has always been known by the surname  Yusfi  fails  under
      the principles in Ladd v Marshall. The evidence could and should  have
      been put to the Judge at the hearing. Instead the Appellant put  in  a
      statement not using the claimed surname.


  23. I have grave reservations whether the further evidence  the  Appellant
      seeks to put in would in fact make any difference to the result  since
      I do not consider that the further evidence has any probative value of
      any force. The Appellant told the Judge that he was illiterate. It may
      well be that the Appellant has a good command of written English given
      his studies in this country. That does  not  explain  however  how  he
      would have been able to put together a  Facebook  account  written  in
      Farsi, a language he can neither read nor write and which he  has  had
      no opportunity to study since coming to this country. It is  difficult
      to see how he would know what the Facebook account says and whether it
      really is critical of the regime.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that
      others have put that Facebook account together for the benefit of  the
      Appellant's claim as the Judge considered.  That  too  undermines  the
      credibility of the Appellant's claim that it is his Facebook account.


  24. I do not consider that the Judge misdirected himself  in  relation  to
      the authority of AB. The Upper Tribunal themselves have not  indicated
      that that case is country guidance because they were not in a position
      to give a definitive view. The Appellant's  motive  in  setting  up  a
      Facebook account, to bolster a weak asylum  claim,  is  irrelevant  in
      considering the risk to the Appellant if  the  authorities  are  aware
      that the Appellant has been engaged in Internet activity  contrary  to
      the regime or if such activity becomes exposed upon return. In neither
      of those eventualities did the Judge consider that the Appellant would
      be at risk.


  25. Firstly, the Appellant could  not  be  identified  from  the  Facebook
      account because it was not in the Appellant's name. Thus, even  though
      whoever is responsible for the Facebook account has done their best to
      boost the claim by setting the  account  to  be  read  by  anyone  the
      authorities could not reasonably be expected to be able  to  link  the
      account with the Appellant. Secondly, upon  return  the  Appellant  is
      obliged to tell  the  truth.  The  truth  is  that  this  is  not  the
      Appellant's Facebook account but  has  been  set  up  by  others.  The
      Appellant  can  indicate  to  the  Iranian  authorities  that  he   is
      illiterate in Farsi and could not therefore have prepared the Facebook
      account itself.


  26. I do not consider that the Judge has made any material error of law in
      his determination. It is not sufficient to reject a sur place he claim
      because it was made in bad faith but it is sufficient  to  reject  the
      claim on the basis that it cannot be shown that the  Facebook  account
      in question is the Appellant's account. The Judge  certainly  did  not
      have sufficient information before him to safely conclude it  was  the
      Appellant's account and he cannot be criticised for remarking  in  the
      determination that this account was not in the Appellant's name. It is
      wholly speculative for the Appellant to seek to set aside  a  cogently
      worded determination on the basis that he might have further  evidence
      which he could and should have produced earlier to support the  claim.
      The Appellant's remedy if he has one is to make a fresh claim  to  the
      Respondent but that would have to satisfy the appropriate  legal  test
      as to whether the Appellant truly has fresh information not previously
      before the Respondent relevant to the outcome. There is  no  error  in
      the Judge's determination and I dismiss the Appellant's onward appeal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 22nd day of September 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 22nd day of September 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
