
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08197/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2019              |On 21 January 2019              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                            Mr MUHEB ULLAH HASAN
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza, Counsel (instructed by JKR Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Permission to appeal was granted by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         McGeachy on 29 November 2018 against the decision  to  dismiss  the
         Appellant's protection appeal made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Housego in a decision and reasons promulgated on 20 August 2018.

      2. The Appellant is a national of  Bangladesh,  who  had  entered  the
         United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student in 2011.  Subsequently
         his leave to remain was curtailed on two occasions, and an  Article
         8 ECHR application was refused.  He  was  due  to  be  returned  to
         Bangladesh  in  2016  but  absconded.   Another  Article   8   ECHR
         application made in 2017 was refused in 2018.  On  4  January  2018
         the  Appellant  claimed  asylum  on  the  grounds  of  his   sexual
         orientation, which was refused on 13 June 2018.

    3.     Judge Housego found that the Appellant was not credible,  for  a
         number of reasons: see [65] of his decision and reasons where those
         reasons are set out in detail.  Thus the appeal was dismissed.

    4.     Permission to appeal was refused by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Juliet Grant-Hutchison on 20 September  2018  but  was  granted  by
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachey  because  it  was  considered
         arguable that the judge had applied too high a standard of proof to
         the Appellant's sexual orientation claim.

    5.     Mr Reza for the Appellant relied on the  grounds  submitted  and
         the grant of permission to appeal.   The  judge  had  accepted  the
         credibility of three witnesses  who  attended  the  hearing,  which
         evidence corroborated the Appellant's claim.  One witness had  been
         accepted to have had sexual relations with the Appellant: see  [64]
         of the determination. The judge had not given reasons why  he  gave
         their evidence no weight, given the  sexual  orientation  issue  on
         which the whole appeal depended.  The judge had demanded too high a
         standard of proof.  The appeal should be allowed and  the  decision
         remade in the Appellant's favour, given the positive findings  made
         about the corroborating witnesses.

    6.     Mr Bramble for the  Respondent  submitted  that  the  complaints
         about the determination took the Appellant's case no further.   The
         judge had explained why he could ultimately give little  weight  to
         the witnesses.  Their evidence emanated from the Appellant, who was
         not at all credible. There was no material  error  of  law  in  the
         First-tier Tribunal's determination and the judge's  findings  were
         sustainable.  The appeal should be dismissed.

    7.     There was nothing which Mr Reza wished to add by way of reply.

    8.     The grant of permission to appeal was in the tribunal's view  an
         over generous one, effectively accepting that it was arguable  that
         an  experienced  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  a
         fundamental and egregious error by applying too high a standard  of
         proof.  Such allegations are routinely made in  generic  permission
         to appeal applications such as that lodged in the  present  appeal.
         Such allegations should only be made where they can be supported by
         closely reasoned argument, not by  extracts  from  a  determination
         taken wholly out  of  their  essential  context.   The  Appellant's
         abusive immigration history and belated protection claim speaks for
         itself.

    9.      Judge  Housego  set  out  the  burden  and  standard  of  proof
         accurately and in  considerable  detail  at  [6]  to  [11]  of  his
         determination.  He also referred specifically to HJ  (Iran)  [2010]
         UKSC 31, and LC (Albania) [2017] EWCA Civ 351,  decisions  relevant
         to the factual enquiry he was  obliged  to  undertake.   The  judge
         reminded himself of the lower standard of proof applicable  in  his
         final review of the evidence: see [67] of his determination.  There
         is simply no substance to the assertion that the judge applied  too
         high a standard of proof when assessing the evidence before him.

    10.    Indeed, the grounds submitted on  the  Appellant's  behalf  bore
         little relation to the determination.  Contrary to  the  assertions
         made, the judge explained exactly why he  gave  no  weight  to  the
         evidence of the three witnesses, the first  two  of  whom  only  he
         described as "credible".  (His intended meaning for  "credible"  in
         this  context  was  "seemingly  honest"  or  perhaps   "worthy   of
         consideration".)  The source those witnesses  identified  of  their
         belief that the Appellant was gay was the  Appellant  himself  -  a
         source who was found by the judge to be thoroughly dishonest. There
         was no description of any personal observation or knowledge of  the
         Appellant's behaviour by the witnesses.  Their  evidence  attracted
         little weight and was far from sufficient to corroborate the claims
         of the Appellant, who was himself almost entirely unreliable.

    11.    The last of the three witnesses who appeared at  the  First-tier
         Tribunal hearing claimed he had had "occasional"  sexual  relations
         with the Appellant.  Importantly, the evidence of this witness  was
         not found by the judge to be credible nor was it so described.  The
         judge merely indicated that this claim was the "best point" for the
         Appellant because the testimony of the witness  and  the  Appellant
         matched.  Hence, it required careful consideration, which  it  duly
         received: see [67] of the determination.  The judge went on to find
         that the Appellant's unreliability was overwhelming.  He took  care
         to consider the case on an alternative basis, and  found  that  the
         appeal still fell to be dismissed.

    12.    In the tribunal's judgment the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
         reached careful and  sustainable  findings,  in  the  course  of  a
         thorough,  balanced  determination,  which  securely  resolved  the
         issues and  applied  the  correct  lower  standard  of  proof.  The
         tribunal accepts the submissions made by Mr Bramble.  The  tribunal
         finds that there was no error of law and the onwards appeal must be
         dismissed.




      DECISION

      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      There was no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      decision and reasons, which stands unchanged.




      Signed      Dated 10 January 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
