
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/08645/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 17 October 2018                       |On 7 November 2018                     |
|                                         |                                       |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                                   MR V W
                        (anonymity has been directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Walsh, Counsel for Luqmani Thompson & Partners
                  Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:  Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  6  July  1974.   His
    asylum appeal was refused on 30 December 2011 and the appeal was  heard
    by Immigration Judge Grant on 22 March 2012 and was  dismissed  on  all
    grounds.  The appellant chose to remain in the UK illegally and  lodged
    further submissions which the respondent decided amounted  to  a  fresh
    claim.  The further submissions appeal was heard by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Geraint-Jones QC on 19 April 2018 and  was  dismissed  on
    all grounds in a decision promulgated on 11 May 2018.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor  on  18  September  2018.
    The permission states that  the  grounds  make  a  number  of  detailed
    criticisms of the Judge's approach to the decision  making  process  in
    this case, in relation to his consideration of  the  relevance  of  the
    fresh claim, the standard of proof which he applied, his  recording  of
    the appellant's case and a failure to refer to objective evidence.  The
    permission states that all of these may be argued.

 3. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 4. The grounds of appeal state that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  acted
    outside his jurisdiction by remaking the respondent's 2017 decision  to
    accept the appellant's submissions as a fresh claim. The Judge rejected
    the claim and on that basis refused to depart from the findings of  the
    previous Tribunal. The respondent had made the decision that it  was  a
    fresh claim because the appellant's brother-in-law, on the  same  facts
    as the facts in this appellant's claim has been granted refugee  status
    in the United Kingdom. I asked for submissions relating to  the  power,
    if any, of the First- tier Tribunal Judge to  remake  the  Respondent's
    decision.

 5.  Although  this  is  the  appellant's  appeal  the  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that the Judge acted outwith his jurisdiction  but  submitted
    that this is not necessarily a material error of law although it is  an
    error of law.  He submitted that the Judge  was  careful  to  say  that
    there was no reasoned decision of the respondent and it  is  not  clear
    why the fresh claim was accepted as such.  He submitted that the  Judge
    is entitled to his own view but the error in this case is only material
    if it adversely affects the decision of the  Judge,  and  he  submitted
    that the Judge directed himself appropriately, in  particular  relating
    to the case law.

 6. He submitted that the Judge has rejected the  fresh  claim  and  stated
    that there is therefore no right of  appeal.   The  Presenting  Officer
    referred to paragraph 47 of the decision in which the Judge  refers  to
    the statement given by the appellant's brother-in-law Mr S.  The  Judge
    states that he is surprised that  the  evidence  that  the  appellant's
    brother-in-law has been granted  refugee  status  was  not  before  the
    Tribunal Judge  at  the  first  hearing  but  when  the  chronology  is
    considered it is clear that the brother-in-law's claim was  made  after
    the First-tier Tribunal's hearing in this claim.

 7. Counsel made his submissions referring me to  the  respondent's  bundle
    which contains medical  evidence  on  the  appellant's  brother-in-law.
    This arrived after the appellant's First-tier  hearing.   This  medical
    evidence refers to the Appellant's brother-in-law having  scars,  burns
    etc and he submitted that clearly the Judge did not  realise  that  the
    brother-in-law came to the United Kingdom  and  received  his  decision
    after our appellant's claim had been decided.

 8. Counsel submitted that the Judge was acting outwith  his  jurisdiction.
    The respondent decided that there is a fresh  claim  and  he  submitted
    that if the appellant is returned, his brother-in-law's activities  and
    the fact that he has been granted refugee status in the  UK,  may  well
    put the appellant in danger when he  arrives  at  the  airport  in  Sri
    Lanka.   I  was  asked  to  consider  the  detailed  statement  of  the
    appellant's  brother-in-law  in  the  respondent's   bundle   and   the
    appellant's statement made two years ago in  which  he  refers  to  his
    brother-in-law being in one of the camps in Vavuniya, in Sri Lanka  and
    having no one to help him. The appellant stated that he had  to  go  to
    Vavuniya to the camp to meet his sister, (this  brother-in-law's  wife)
    and then had to return a month later with clothes for  his  sister  and
    some money.  He mentions his brother-in-law in this statement  and  the
    fact that his brother-in-law was in the LTTE.  Counsel  submitted  that
    because the appellant had helped  his  brother-in-law  the  authorities
    thought the appellant was involved in the LTTE as well and it is  clear
    that there is a link between the appellant and his  brother-in-law  and
    that  link  was  first  referred  to  two  years  ago  and  before  the
    appellant's hearing in 2018.

 9. Counsel submitted that for the Judge to say that there was  no  mention
    of the appellant's brother-in-law in his evidence is not true  and  the
    fact that he has been granted refugee status cannot be put to one side.
     He submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  put  it  to  one
    side.  Counsel submitted that at paragraph 8 of Judge  Geraint-  Jones'
    decision he states that he will not be revisiting the facts set out  by
    Judge Grant and considering them  afresh.  He  goes  on  correctly,  to
    disagree with the appellant's representative when she states that every
    fact alleged by the appellant's brother-in-law must  be  found  in  the
    appellant's   favour.   Counsel    submitted    that    this    is    a
    mischaracterisation  of  the  appellant's  claim.   Immigration   Judge
    Grant's decision cannot be ignored, it must be the starting point  when
    assessing the credibility of the fresh claim.  Reference is made in the
    decision, to Counsel asking Judge Geraint-Jones to  recuse  himself  as
    the Judge appeared to have made up his mind on the issues of  the  case
    before having had a chance to consider them.  Counsel at  this  hearing
    submitted that the Judge clearly narrowed his view very early on in the
    case and that paragraph 15 of the decision cannot be correct. The Judge
    states that the appellant is seeking a second bite of the  cherry,  not
    on the basis of new primary facts, but  on  the  basis  of  seeking  to
    challenge  the  findings  of  fact  which  he  has  previously   failed
    successfully to challenge on appeal.  Counsel submitted  that  that  is
    what the appellant is doing but he  is  entitled  to  do  that  as  the
    respondent has decided that there is a fresh claim.  He submitted  that
    the starting point is the  first  decision.   The  appellant  is  still
    asserting that he should be granted refugee status.

10. I was referred to paragraph 20 of the decision.  Counsel submitted that
    the standard of proof referred to therein is too high and at  paragraph
    22 the standard of proof, being used by the Judge is too high.

11. I was referred  to  paragraph  35  of  the  decision  which  refers  to
    Professor Good's second report to which  the  Judge  gives  no  weight.
    This is because the Judge does not accept that there is a fresh  claim.
    Counsel submitted that there is clearly  a  fresh  claim  as  only  the
    respondent can make that decision and that Judge Grant's decision  must
    be the starting point in Judge Geraint-Jones' decision.   This  is  not
    how Judge Geraint Jones dealt with the matter.

12. I was referred to the case of  Devaseelan  at  paragraphs  25  and  26.
    Counsel submitted that there is no  good  reason  to  depart  from  the
    findings in Devaseelan.  He submitted that because of the way the First-
    tier Judge dealt with this case he reached a different decision to that
    which might well have been reached by a different Judge.  He  submitted
    that there is a material error of law in Judge Geraint-Jones' decision.



13. Counsel submitted that it is clear from paragraph 42 onwards  that  the
    Judge has made up his mind about how he is going to decide  the  claim.
    This is before he has considered the rest of the evidence.  Articles  2
    and 3 had still to be considered at this stage.  Counsel submitted that
    Judge Geraint Jones did  not  follow  the  correct  procedure.   I  was
    referred to the respondent's bundle, in particular  the  facts  therein
    about the appellant being detained after he was suspected of helping to
    get his brother-in-law's and his sister's release.  He  submitted  that
    Professor Good's expert report should have been given weight as  it  is
    logical and deals with the issues in the claim.   Much  of  the  report
    supports the appellant's evidence but what Judge Geraint  Jones  states
    is that he  does  not  believe  what  the  appellant  states.   Counsel
    submitted that a new assessment should have been made by the Judge.  He
    also referred to the Judge commenting that the appellant's  sister  and
    brother-in-law would have been unlikely  to  survive  the  fighting  in
    Vavuniya but Counsel submitted that many Tamils did  survive  and  were
    put  into  IDP  camps,  so  the  judge  has  clearly  reached  a  wrong
    conclusion.  The Judge also finds that the  appellant  is  unlikely  to
    have been able to visit his sister but the expert  states  that  family
    visits  were  permitted.   He  submitted  that  the  expert  report  is
    consistent with the appellant's evidence and the appellant's brother-in-
    law's escape from prison and his description of how it happened  could,
    according to the expert, have happened in this way.

14. Counsel submitted that Professor Good's second report should have  been
    given weight and should  not  have  been  sidelined  by  the  Judge  as
    inadmissible.

15. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge was not obliged  to  go
    behind the previous findings and that Judge  Geraint  Jones  refers  to
    Devaseelan at paragraphs 40 and 41 of his decision but  finds  that  no
    new facts have been presented or proved  and  he  submitted  that  this
    justifies him departing from the established starting point.

16. He submitted that the fresh claim issue is purely a red herring and  is
    not material. The Judge clearly believes that this appellant  will  not
    be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

17. Counsel submitted that at paragraphs 40 and 41 when  the  Judge  states
    that he will not be taking the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  as  his
    starting point this must be an error of law.   He  submitted  that  the
    Judge has taken the wrong route and has made his  decision  without  an
    open mind.

18. He asked to me to find that there is a material error  of  law  in  the
    Judge's decision and that the claim should be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for rehearing.



Decision and Reasons

19. The respondent has found that the fact that he appellant's  brother-in-
    law has been granted refugee status is sufficient for this  appellant's
    claim to be considered as a fresh claim particularly as  the  appellant
    referred to his brother-in-law in his previous statements and explained
    how he helped his sister and brother-in-law and  that  is  why  he  was
    arrested and badly treated. It is not for  the  Judge  to  decide  that
    there is no fresh claim and that is what the Judge  has  done  in  this
    case.

20. Because he has done this he has approached the case in the  wrong  way.
    He has stated at paragraph 41 that he is justified  in  departing  from
    the established starting point.

21. This is an error and the Judge has acted outwith his jurisdiction.

22. There is also an error of law as it is clear that the Judge made up his
    mind what his decision was going to be before he considered Articles  2
    and 3 of ECHR.  All the facts in the case have to be considered in  the
    round and the Judge has not done this.  The Judge has dealt  with  this
    claim with a closed mind. Because of this  and  because  he  has  acted
    outwith his jurisdiction there must be a material error of law  in  the
    decision.

Notice of Decision

As I find that there are material errors of law in the  Judge's  decision  I
direct that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   None  of
its findings are to stand other than as a record of what was  said  on  that
occasion.  It is appropriate in terms of Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007
Act and of Practice Statement 7.2  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for an entirely fresh hearing.

The members of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to consider the case  are  not
to include Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Warren Grant  or  Judge  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Geraint Jones.

Anonymity has been directed.


Signed                                  Date 30 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge IAM Murray
