
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09466/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st June 2019                    |On 27th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     AAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Bayoumi (instructed by Ferial Saada Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in this case in
relation to a Decision and Reasons of Judge Russell in the First-tier
Tribunal, promulgated on 16th April 2019 after a hearing at Taylor House in
February 2019.

The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt and had made a protection claim based
on his political opinion.  The judge, possibly because there was a long
time between his hearing the appeal and determining it, has made a number
of errors in the judgment, including apparently misunderstanding the basis
of the claim; with regard to the timing of the Appellant's claim and
concerning his presence in the UK at the time he was supposedly wanted in
Egypt, all of which are factual errors.  For example, there was a clear
explanation from the Appellant as to why he was not in Egypt at the time of
his prosecution, namely that he had left Egypt prior to his being wanted by
the authorities.  That explanation was entirely overlooked by the judge.

The Secretary of State concedes that the judgment is tainted by a material
error of law and that no findings can be preserved.

The Secretary of State's concession is entirely appropriate and on that
basis, I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's judgment in total and, given
that it has to be a full rehearing on all the facts and the objective
evidence, it is appropriate to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.  The
appropriate hearing centre is Taylor House and it should be a full
rehearing with no findings preserved.  I also note that an anonymity
direction was made and I will continue that.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the First-tier Tribunal's  Decision
and Reasons is set aside and the matter remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
for a full rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed [pic]                            Date 25th June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


