
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09907/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2019                          |On 27th March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    [M N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt born on 12th  November  1981.   The
    Appellant claims to have left Egypt on 27th  March  2017  and  to  have
    travelled for work purposes to Kuwait by  plane.   After  spending  ten
    months in Kuwait the Appellant on 30th January 2018  travelled  on  his
    own Egyptian passport with valid visitor visa on  a  direct  flight  to
    Heathrow and claimed asylum on  arrival.   The  Appellant's  claim  for
    asylum is based on his contention that he is a political activist and a
    member of the 6th April Movement, one of the  opposition  groups  which
    campaigned for the overthrow of the Mubarak regime in  2011.   In  2017
    when he lost his job and decided to leave Egypt, the Appellant took  up
    an opportunity to work in Kuwait.  Whilst in Kuwait he discovered  that
    the authorities there had refused to renew his work  visa  and  fearing
    that he would be sent back to Egypt he left for the UK claiming asylum.
     His fear of return is that he will  be  arrested  on  account  of  his
    political opinion.

 2. The Appellant's application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 30th
    July 2018.  The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal  Hanbury  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  12th
    September 2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on  1st  October
    2018 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 10th October 2018  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds are extensive.  On  10th  October  2018  Judge
    Boyes refused permission to  appeal.   On  5th  November  2018  renewed
    Grounds of Appeal were lodged  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   These  would
    appear to mirror those that were lodged originally.

 4. On 8th January 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Coker  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Coker considered that it was arguable  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had failed to make reasoned findings and had failed
    to consider the evidence in the  round.   She  noted  that  there  were
    references in the decision  to  scepticism  and  doubt  and  that  such
    references are arguably not reasons.  Further, she considered  that  it
    was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  have  critical
    regard to the expert's report, the Appellant's sur  place  activity  or
    risk on return.

 5. On 21st January 2019 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  Opposing the appeal, the Rule 24 response states
    that the judge considered the Appellant's asylum claim  in  respect  of
    whether the documents and videos were all genuine and found  that  even
    if they were, the Appellant was not of interest to the  authorities  in
    either country.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel, Ms Harris.  Ms Harris is extremely familiar with this  matter.
    She appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and she is  the  author  of
    the Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of  State  appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, Mr Melvin.

Submission/Discussion

 7. Ms Harris relies on her Grounds of Appeal.  She acknowledges that  they
    amount effectively to a skeleton argument and  she  does  not  wish  to
    expand on them in any great detail, relying on them  and  pointing  out
    that they are self-explanatory.   She  emphasises,  however,  that  the
    judge has failed to make any credible  findings  and  that  it  is  not
    appropriate for a judge not to make his  own  findings  but  merely  to
    adopt those of the Secretary of State.

 8. Ms Harris has attempted to shorten the proceedings  before  me  by  not
    verbatim reciting her Grounds  of  Appeal/skeleton  argument.   It  is,
    however, perhaps  appropriate  to  record  the  main  thrust  of  those
    arguments   within   the   Submission/Discussion   section   of    this
    determination.  Her first contention is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  has  failed  to  conduct  an  assessment  of   the   Appellant's
    credibility and that paragraph 17 onwards of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision purports to be the judge's findings when in fact  very
    few findings are actually made and that paragraph 17 is a rehearsal  of
    the Respondent's position and the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not go
    on to give reasons  why  he  either  agrees  or  disagrees  with  those
    arguments.

 9. Ms Harris goes on to point out that whilst it is accepted and  referred
    to by the judge that an asylum claim must  be  assessed  to  the  lower
    standard of proof, when it comes to assessing the  evidence  the  judge
    has materially erred in law  by  failing  to  apply  it  and  that  the
    standard of proof applied in this case places too high a burden on  the
    Appellant.

10. Ms Harris in her skeleton points out the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has
    accepted at paragraph 22 that there is no way  that  certain  documents
    provided by the Appellant could be verified.  She further contends that
    the judge has not set out clearly which documents he  is  referring  to
    but in any event, if there is no way to verify them it is not explained
    why this is something to be held against the Appellant.

11. In addition, I note that there are further submissions made with regard
    to purported errors of law made by the judge highlighted as  being  co-
    operation between Kuwaiti and Egyptian  authorities,  the  authorities'
    failure to cancel ID and driver's licence, and risk on return, all upon
    which she relies.  In particular,  she  emphasises  that  at  no  point
    within the judge's decision are findings made about how  significant  a
    person's involvement would have to be in order to be at risk on  return
    as a member of the April 6th Movement and that the judge has failed  to
    carry out a critical assessment of the expert report of Dr Rebwar Fatah
    which evidences that since 2014 there has been an  increased  crackdown
    on dissidents.

12. Finally the judge, she submits, failed to make findings  regarding  the
    Appellant's sur place activities save to  state  that  "even  if  these
    documents and videos are  all  genuine,  I  have  concluded  that  that
    Appellant is not of interest to the  authorities  in  either  country".
    For all the above reasons she  considers  that  there  are  substantial
    material errors of law in the decision and asked me to remit it back to
    the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

13. In response, Mr Melvin on behalf of the Secretary of State  points  out
    that there has been an acceptance by the Secretary of  State  that  the
    Appellant was detained on two occasions but  points  out  that  if  the
    authorities were not interested in  the  Appellant  then  the  question
    arises as to why he would be now.  He submits that the findings made by
    the judge at paragraphs 17 to 22 are ones that were open to the  judge,
    and that the findings made with regard to the Appellant's membership of
    the April 6th Movement are ones that the judge was  perfectly  entitled
    to reach.  He points out that the  Appellant  was  able  to  travel  to
    Kuwait and that this is a factor that the judge was  entitled  to  take
    into account.  He agrees that in the event that I am against him in  my
    assessment, then this appeal should be remitted back to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.

14. In brief response, Ms Harris comments that the findings of the judge at
    paragraph 21 are still based without reasons.   She  submits  that  the
    test must be on a lower standard and points out that the Appellant  was
    detained for four hours on leaving Egypt and only released on the basis
    that he did not ever return.  She further comments that it  is  not  an
    issue extant before the Tribunal whether the Appellant  can  or  cannot
    return to Kuwait.

The Law

15.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

16. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

17.  I  am  satisfied  on  having  heard  the  submissions  of  both  legal
    representatives, having read the judgment and  the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    that the judge has failed to consider the evidence in the round and  to
    make findings that are reasoned.  I  accept  that  a  full  and  proper
    assessment of the Appellant's credibility has not taken  place  and  in
    reaching that conclusion, I take into account the findings made by  the
    judge  at  paragraphs  17  to  21  inclusive.   A  proper  approach  to
    credibility requires an assessment of the evidence and of  the  general
    claim.   In  asylum  claims  relevant  factors  will  be  the  internal
    consistency of the claim, the inherent implausibility of the claim, and
    the consistency  of  the  claim  with  external  factors  of  the  sort
    typically found in country guidance.  I accept that that  analysis  has
    not been fully applied in this particular case.

18. At paragraph 21 the judge has  taken  the  Respondent's  assessment  of
    credibility and made findings about risk on return on that basis  only.
    I accept that he has not made his own  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    credibility, failed to make findings  about  any  of  the  explanations
    given in the Appellant's witness statement or in oral evidence  dealing
    with the issues raised  by  the  Respondent,  and  does  not  make  any
    findings to explain why certain aspects of the Appellant's account  are
    accepted while others are rejected.  I agree with the  contention  made
    in her written submissions by Ms Harris that it is  necessary  for  the
    judge to give reasons why some aspects of the Appellant's evidence have
    been accepted and other aspects have been rejected.   This  failure  to
    properly apply the assessment of credibility is an error of law  and  I
    find it to be material.

19. Turning to the issue of the standard of proof, the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge unfortunately refers  to  being  sceptical  with  regard  to  the
    documents produced by the Appellant.  I accept  Ms  Harris'  submission
    that the judge is required to take account of and give  weight  to  the
    evidence of the Appellant that the judge has failed to  analyse,  which
    evidence is probably in his view true and to give a  detailed  analysis
    of the evidence upon which the judge is purportedly sceptical.  In such
    circumstances it is sustainable to  contend  that  the  judge  has  not
    applied, despite referring to it in his decision, the correct  standard
    of proof.

20. Further,  when  considering  the  assessment  of  documents  and  video
    evidence the First-tier Tribunal Judge  does  appear  to  conflate  the
    documents as being unverifiable with them being documents that can have
    no weight attached to them.  I do accept that a document that cannot be
    verified might still be a document that can be relied upon in line with
    the principles set out  in Tanveer Ahmed.

21. Finally, I accept that there does not appear to be at any point in  the
    decision any findings  made  by  the  judge  about  how  significant  a
    person's involvement would have to be in order to be at risk on  return
    as a member of the April 6th Movement.  Also, the judge has not carried
    out any  form  of  critical  assessment  of  the  expert's  report.   I
    acknowledge that the Appellant has been found to be involved  with  the
    April 6th Movement because he has been arrested for his involvement  on
    two previous occasions and that it is  appropriate  that  this  element
    should have been considered further particularly alongside the expert's
    report.

22. Finally,  the  judge's  consideration  of  the  Appellant's  sur  place
    activities are scant in the extreme and findings made by the judge  are
    minimal.  I accept that the judge is not required to recite every piece
    of evidence but  in  an  issue  of  this  nature  it  would  have  been
    appropriate to do so.

23. Overall, there are consequently a number of errors of law  particularly
    regarding the assessment  of  the  Appellant's  credibility.   In  such
    circumstances, I find the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  to
    be unsafe and I set aside the decision and remit the back to the First-
    tier Tribunal with appropriate directions.



Decision and Directions

On finding that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contains
material errors of law:-

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside.

 2) The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  sitting  at
    Taylor House on the first available date 28 days hence with an  ELH  of
    three hours with none of the findings of fact to stand.

 3) That the appeal is to be before any Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    with the exception of Immigration Judge Hanbury.

 4) That there be leave to either party to file and/or serve an  up-to-date
    bundle of such subjective and/or objective  evidence  upon  which  they
    seek to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

 5) That an Arabic (North  African)  interpreter  do  attend  the  restored
    hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
