
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09998/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2020                              |On 19 March 2020              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                     MK
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr G Brown, instructed by Arshed & Co
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lewis promulgated 29.11.19, dismissing  on  all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    1.10.19 to refuse his claim for international protection on  the  basis
    of a well-founded fear of persecution on return to Pakistan on  grounds
    of sexual orientation as a gay man.

 2. Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Manuel  refused  permission  to
    appeal on 7.1.20, suggesting that the largely generic  grounds  was  no
    more than an exercise in sophistry, and that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was entitled to draw the inferences made and that full and secure
    reasons had been given for dismissing the appeal on adverse credibility
    findings.

 3. However, when the application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Canavan granted permission  on  21.1.20.  Judge  Canavan
    noted that the grounds were not well particularised and  that  some  of
    the points were weak. However, it was found at least arguable that  the
    judge may have erred in assessing the credibility  of  the  appellant's
    claim to be a gay man.

 4.  In  particular,  Judge  Canavan  found  it  at  least  arguable   that
    insufficient weight was given  to  the  finding  that  the  appellant's
    claimed partner MR had  been  found  to  be  "an  honest  and  reliable
    witness" by First-tier Tribunal Judge Thorne  in  MR's  own  protection
    appeal, in assessing what weight should be given to  MR's  evidence  in
    the appeal of MK. "It is arguable that  there  was  nothing  inherently
    implausible  about  MR's  explanation  that  he  did  not  mention  the
    appellant as his partner when his appeal  was  heard  soon  after  they
    first began seeing one  another  and  the  relationship  was  not  well
    established. It is at least arguable that the judge failed to conduct a
    holistic assessment of the evidence given that  he  accepted  that  the
    appellant shared accommodation with MR, that  MR  was  found  to  be  a
    credible witness and was granted protection status  based  on  his  own
    sexual orientation and that there was at least one  other  witness  who
    gave  evidence  in  support  of  the  claim."  However,  Judge  Canavan
    considered the grant of permission a "borderline  decision"  but  found
    the  grounds   sufficiently   arguable   to   justify   more   detailed
    consideration at a hearing.

 5. The respondent's Rule 24 response, dated 31.1.20,  submits  that  Judge
    Lewis directed himself appropriately. It is submitted that the  grounds
    are without merit in attempting to provide an explanation for the delay
    in the appellant making an asylum claim. It is pointed out that at [30]
    the judge noted that at  the  relevant  time  the  appellant  was  good
    friends with a man who had already been granted refugee status  on  the
    basis of being a gay man. It is submitted that in  those  circumstances
    it was open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge to find that the appellant
    would have been aware of the asylum system in the UK. It  is  submitted
    that the remainder of the grounds are no more than a disagreement  with
    the findings of the Tribunal.

Error of Law

 6. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 7. The according of weight to evidence is a matter for the  judge.  It  is
    not an arguable error of law for a judge to give too little or too much
    weight to a relevant factor, unless the exercise is irrational. Nor  is
    it an error of law for a judge to fail to deal with every factual issue
    of argument. Disagreement  with  a  judge's  factual  conclusions,  the
    appraisal  of  the  evidence  or  assessment  of  credibility,  or  the
    evaluation of risk does not give rise to an  error  of  law.  Unless  a
    judge's assessment of proportionality  is  arguably  completely  wrong,
    there is no error of law. Nor is it an error of law for a judge not  to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after the decision or for  no
    account to have been taken of evidence not  put  before  the  tribunal.
    Irrationality is  a  very  high  threshold  and  a  conclusion  is  not
    irrational just because some alternative explanation has been  rejected
    or can be said to be possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every
    possible alternative inference consistent with truthfulness  because  a
    judge has concluded that the story proffered is untrue. However,  if  a
    point of evidence of significance has been  ignored  or  misunderstood,
    that may be a failure to take into account a material consideration.

 8. The appellant made a previous protection  claim  in  2016,  the  appeal
    against the refusal of which was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Malik in 2017 and subsequently by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  2018.  The
    impugned decision arose from further submissions made in September 2018
    and the issue of judicial review proceedings,  leading  to  the  latest
    decision of 1.10.19.

 9. In essence, the appellant claimed that he is a gay man and that  he  is
    or was at the time of the appeal hearing in a relationship with MR, who
    was found to be gay in his own protection claim appeal in 2017 and  who
    has since been granted refugee status on that basis.

10. In the previous appeal decision from 2017 relating to  this  appellant,
    he was found  to  lack  credibility.  Pursuant  to  Devaseelan  (Second
    Appeals - ECHR -  Extra-territorial  Effect)  Sri  Lanka  [2002]  UKAIT
    00702, the respondent  and  Judge  Lewis  were  entitled  to  take  the
    previous findings of fact as the starting point for consideration of  a
    protection claim made on the same basis of sexual orientation, as it is
    clear from [7] and [17] of the decision that  Judge  Lewis  did.  Judge
    Malik found that the appellant had fabricated the core  of  his  claim,
    making a false asylum claim.  Judge  Malik  was  aware  and  took  into
    account that AY had been granted refugee status  on  the  basis  he  is
    homosexual. Although the appellant's present case is that he met MR  in
    June 2017 and became friends at that time there was no reference to  MR
    in the 2017 appeal and MR was not called as a witness. In  his  witness
    statement the  appellant  maintains  that  he  did  not  enter  into  a
    relationship with MR until the end of  August  2017.  However,  in  the
    appeal hearing before Judge Lewis the appellant relied  on  photographs
    of him with MR taken in June 2017 and another in July 2017, as well  as
    others showing them kissing in August 2017.

11. From [19] and [25] of the decision it  is  clear  that  Judge  Thorne's
    decision in relation to the supporting witness MR  was  considered  and
    taken into account; it was not ignored. However, it was for Judge Lewis
    to make his own decision on the evidence and the judge was not  in  any
    way bound by the findings of Judge Thorne. Judge Lewis heard  the  oral
    evidence of not just the appellant but MR and a  further  witness,  AY,
    who had also given evidence on  the  appellant's  behalf  in  the  2017
    appeal hearing, and was able to form his own assessment of the evidence
    and the appellant's sexual orientation claim.  From  [25]  onwards  the
    judge considered the claim and the supporting evidence. AY was  granted
    refugee status as a gay man in 2015.  Both  MR  and  AY  supported  the
    appellant's claim to be a gay man. It is not the case  that  the  judge
    ignored the fact that both AY and MR had been found to be gay in  their
    own respective asylum claims. The judge is  not  bound  to  accept  the
    evidence of either witness merely because either or both of  them  have
    been found credible in their own protection claim appeals. It  was  for
    example, possible that MR was gay but was not being truthful about  his
    relationship with the appellant. In that regard, MR at his  hearing  in
    September  2017  made  no  reference  to  any  relationship  with  this
    appellant and did not produce evidence relied  on  in  the  appellant's
    most recent appeal and which was already in existence at  the  date  of
    MR's appeal. The judge considered MR's explanation for this, set out at
    [33] but at [34] found the evidence not credible,  for  cogent  reasons
    set out therein. His explanation for that was that 'we did  not  accept
    each other in that regard.' That was obviously  inconsistent  with  the
    situation sought to be conveyed by the photographs and this appellant's
    claim that by the end of August  2017  they  were  in  a  relationship.
    Further reasoning for rejecting the appellant's  account  is  given  at
    [35] of the decision. These are all matters addressed by the First-tier
    Tribunal in 2019 and amount to cogent reasoning supporting the findings
    of Judge Lewis.

12. The renewed grounds assert that the findings on the  central  issue  of
    whether the appellant is gay are unsafe. It is pointed out that when AY
    said he met the appellant in August 2016 was only two months before the
    appellant's arrest and therefore only a  two-month  window  that  would
    have allowed the appellant to become aware of how to claim asylum.  The
    fact remains that this was one of the  reasons  Judge  Malik  gave  for
    rejecting the credibility of the appellant's account;  the  explanation
    was not believed.

13. It is further argued that having found at [31] that the  appellant  and
    MR were cohabiting is a finding more than that two people  merely  live
    together. It is submitted that cohabitation often involves  a  romantic
    or sexually intimate relationship on a long-term  or  permanent  basis.
    However, the judge gave cogent reasons for finding that  although  they
    were living together or cohabiting, that did not demonstrate that  they
    were in a sexual relationship.

14. Further grounds criticise the judge's  treatment  of  the  photographs,
    suggesting that they showed the development of  the  relationship  with
    MR. However, for the reasons  explained  above,  the  judge  found  the
    photographs inconsistent with the evidence of MR and  did  not  accept,
    applying the lower standard of proof, that they were taken on the dates
    claimed by the  appellant.  Further,  at  [34]  the  judge  noted  that
    although the photos showed the appellant and MR embracing on dates said
    to be in August 2017, this was at a time when MR's account was that  he
    and the appellant "did not accept each other in  that  regard"  at  the
    time when he gave evidence in support  of  his  own  asylum  appeal  in
    September 2017, in which he had produced photographs  of  himself  with
    another allegedly gay man but did not produce any  of  the  photographs
    now relied on which are allegedly from July and August 2017.  Also,  as
    stated above,  it  was  the  appellant's  case  that  they  were  in  a
    relationship by the end of August 2017 but MR did not disclose any such
    relationship to Judge Thorne. About that he now says that  he  was  not
    asked about any current relationship and they were  "still  getting  to
    know each other." Given the above, there can be  little  surprise  that
    Judge Lewis found the claim entirely incredible. I  am  satisfied  that
    all of the challenged findings were entirely open to the judge  on  the
    evidence. That the  judge  did  not  specifically  put  points  to  the
    appellant about the dates of the photographs during  the  hearing  does
    not demonstrate any material error of law as the inconsistency  in  the
    evidence was plain on its face.

15. The remaining grounds are no more than a  mere  disagreement  with  the
    decision. In MR (permission  to  appeal:  Tribunal's  approach)  Brazil
    [2015] UKUT  00029  (IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal  held  that,  "A  judge
    considering an application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal must avoid granting permission on what, properly analysed,  is
    no more than a simple quarrel  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's
    assessment of the evidence." This is such  a  case.  In  my  view,  the
    grounds were rightly described  by  Designated  Judge  Manuell  as  "an
    exercise in sophistry."


16. The only point of any weight in Mr Brown's submissions was the argument
    that the fact that MR had  been  found  credible  and  granted  refugee
    status on the basis of sexual orientation should carry some  weight.  I
    agree but find that it has  been  adequately  taken  into  account  and
    appropriate weight given. The difficulty for the argument is  that  the
    judge has given very  clear  and  compelling  reasons  to  reject  MR's
    credibility on the issue that he has been in a  relationship  with  the
    appellant. The judge did not go behind the finding of Judge Thorne that
    MR is a gay man. As pointed out above, it does not  necessarily  follow
    that he must be believed  about  being  in  a  relationship  with  this
    appellant. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal were  entirely  open
    and sustained by cogent reasoning.


Decision

17. For the reasons set out above, the making of the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on a point of  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.

     Signed


         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated 12 March 2020







Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed.


     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated: 12 March 2020

