
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09480/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 April 2019                   |On 1 May 2019                      |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     MRA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Harvey (counsel) instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    To preserve the anonymity order deemed  necessary  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge C  Burns  promulgated  on  22/01/2019,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 10/06/1979 and is a national of  Bangladesh.
On 19/07/2018 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's  protection
claim.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge C Burns  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 22/03/2019 Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Kamara granted permission to appeal stating, inter alia,

    "It is arguable that the Judge failed to make findings  on  a  material
    matter, specifically whether court documents could be relied  upon,  in
    line with the expert evidence  to  that  effect.  Secondly,  the  Judge
    arguably failed to adequately evaluate  the  expert's  claim  that  the
    person who prepared the respondent's document verification  report,  in
    relation to the FIR, attended the wrong police station."

The Hearing

6.    (a) For the appellant, Ms Harvey moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  She
told me that this case turns almost entirely on consideration of  documents.
Two of the documents are newspaper articles, the third document  is  an  FIR
and the fourth document is an arrest warrant. The evidence before the  Judge
included of evidence two experts, yet the Judge preferred evidence from  the
respondent's DVR. Ms Harvey told me that the Judge's  consideration  of  the
expert evidence was flawed and does not follow the guidance given in  Mbanga
v SSHD [2005] INLR 377. She told me that the Judge's decision to prefer  the
respondent DVR is unsafe and unsustainable.

(b)   Mr Harvey told me that there is an evident  conflict  in  the  Judge's
decision when the last sentence of [8] of the decision is compared with  the
Judge's finding at [28]. She told me that the finding at [28] is  wrong.  Ms
Harvey produced  correspondence  from  the  respondent  to  the  appellant's
solicitors, dated 17 September 2018,  which  confirms  that  the  respondent
holds the original 24 pages of the FIR report produced by the  appellant  at
interview. In addition, letters  of  24  and  25  September  2018  from  the
respondent  confirm  that  the  respondent  holds  the  original   newspaper
clippings.

(c)   Ms Harvey took me through the respondent's documentation  verification
report and compared what is contained there with the expert  reports  relied
on by the appellant. She then took me to [64] of the decision  and  told  me
that the Judge does not reconcile the accepted fact that the author  of  the
document verification report went to the wrong  police  station  to  examine
records of FIR. Ms Harvey relied on the guidance  given  in  both  Mbanga  v
SSHD [2005] INLR 377 and Tanveer Ahmed (Starred) 2002 UKIAT 00439.

(d)   Ms Harvey asked me to set the decision aside and remit  this  case  to
the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

7.    Mr  Walker  told  me  that,  having  received  confirmation  that  the
respondent holds the original documents,  he  could  no  longer  defend  the
decision and that [64] of the decision contains a clear  error  of  law.  He
joined with Ms Harvey in asking me to set the decision aside  and  to  remit
this case to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Analysis

8.    At paragraph 24 of Mbanga v SSHD [2005] INLR 377 Wilson LJ said

    "What the fact finder does at his peril is to  reach  a  conclusion  by
    reference only to the applicant's evidence and then, if it be negative,
    to  ask  whether  the  conclusion  should  be  shifted  by  the  expert
    evidence."

9.    The appellant relied on two expert reports. Between [38] and [41]  the
Judge summarises Dr Amundsen's report. In the final  sentence  of  [40]  the
Judge focuses on Dr Amundsen's narration that there are many forged  letters
confirming party membership & many forged FIRs to be  found  in  Bangladesh.
Between [42] to  [45]  of  the  decision  the  Judge  considers  the  report
prepared by Dr Hoque. In his report,  Dr  Hoque  finds  that  the  documents
relied on by the appellant are genuine and that  the  document  verification
report relied on by the  respondent  is  fundamentally  flawed  because,  to
check the records of FIR, the author of  the  document  verification  report
visited the wrong police station.

10.   The Judge considers the document verification report produced for  the
respondent between [46] and [48].

11.    At  [64]  the  Judge  is  critical  of  Dr   Amundsen's   conclusion,
incorrectly saying that Dr Amundsen had not considered whether  or  not  the
documents examined could have been  produced  as  a  package  of  fraudulent
documents. There is an unresolved conflict between  the  second,  third  and
fourth sentences of [64].

12.   Both parties now  agree  that  the  appellant  has  produced  original
documents which are still in the hands of the respondent. The  existence  of
the original documents undermines the Judge's findings at [64]. The  Judge's
analysis of the expert  reports  is  incomplete.  The  Judge's  findings  in
relation to the DVR at [64] are inadequately reasoned

13.   The Judge starts [65] with a  bold  statement  that  she  prefers  the
respondent's DVR evidence. That bold statement is not  adequately  reasoned.
The Judge does not properly explain why she  rejects  the  evidence  of  two
experts, so that the  Judge's  findings  at  [64],  [65]  and  [66]  contain
material errors of law.

14.   Parties agents agree that the Judge's findings at [64], [65] and  [66]
are unsafe and should be set aside. Because the  Judge's  decision  contains
material errors of law I set it aside.   I consider whether  or  not  I  can
substitute my own decision. There was an inadequacy of fact finding  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. I find that none of the First-tier Judge's findings  of
fact can be preserved. One of the central issues in this case is whether  or
not the appellant  faces  politically  motivated  prosecution.   That  is  a
question which cannot be answered without further evidence and  clear  fact-
finding. I am asked by both parties' agents to remit this  case  the  First-
tier Tribunal. The material error of law  in  the  decision  relates  to  an
inadequacy of fact finding. I cannot substitute my own decision.  A  further
fact-finding exercise is necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

15.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

16.   In this case I have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of  the  findings  of
fact are to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

17.   I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at  Birmingham
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge C Burns.

Decision

18.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by material  errors
of law.

19.   I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 22 January  2019.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.




Signed      Date 25 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

