
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09735/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 11 December 2018                |On 13 December 2018                     |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                    APMM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopolou, Counsel, instructed by Montague
                    Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal I Howard (the judge), promulgated on  24  September  2018,
         dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
         dated 20 July 2018 refusing his protection and human rights claim.



Background

      2. The appellant, a national  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
         (DRC), was born in 1974. He entered the UK on 21 May 2018  pursuant
         to a grant of entry clearance as a visitor issued  on  14  February
         2018. The appellant was refused leave to enter on  arrival  and  he
         claimed asylum on 24 May 2018.

      3. I summarise the basis of the appellant's asylum claim. In  February
         2011 he became an active member of the Union Pour La Democratie  Et
         Le Progres Social (UDPS), an opposition  political  party.  He  was
         first detained in 2011 during an anti-government protest, taken  to
         a police station with other protesters, stripped and beaten to such
         an extent that he required hospital treatment. He was subjected  to
         harassment between 2011 and 2015 and, on one occasion, he claims to
         have been the victim of politically motivated looting.

      4. The appellant was arrested and  detained  in  January  2015  during
         another  political  protest,  accused  of  plotting  to  kill   the
         President, but released after 3 days on payment of a bribe made  by
         his family  and  political  colleagues.  The  appellant  was  again
         arrested in December 2016 because of his involvement in  a  further
         political protest. He was detained and beaten  for  a  week  before
         being released on payment of a bribe made by his wife. In his  oral
         evidence at the First-tier Tribunal hearing he claimed to have been
         arrested briefly in July 2017 but was released  on  his  way  to  a
         detention centre. He was then detained on 31 December 2017  for  12
         days and sexually assaulted. The  appellant  was  aided  by  prison
         guards in escaping in January 2018 and he travelled to his  uncle's
         home in Kinsasha where he remained for 5 days travelling  to  Congo
         Brazaville until he came to the UK.

      5. The respondent accepted the appellant's nationality but  found  his
         account incredible. The respondent noted that an application for  a
         'Mult D Exempt Official' visa (a diplomatic visa) was made  in  the
         name  of  the  appellant  on  15  November  2017,  and  that   this
         application was  withdrawn  on  10  January  2018.  The  respondent
         pointed to a number of inconsistencies in the information  provided
         by the appellant in his screening  interview  and  his  substantive
         asylum  interview.  The  respondent  considered   the   appellant's
         evidence relating to his position within the UDPS and the  ideology
         of the party to be vague and generalised.

      6. The appellant appealed the respondent's decision to the  First-tier
         Tribunal pursuant to  s.82  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      7. The judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant  and  considered
         several documents including,  inter  alia,  a  statement  from  the
         appellant signed and dated 30 August 2018,  a  letter  from  Difuma
         Ngombo (Senior Representative of the UDPS/UK) dated 29 August 2018,
         an Amnesty international annual report on the  DRC  for  2017/2018,
         and the Country Policy and Information Note (CPIN) on the DRC dated
         November 2016. The judge did not seperately set  out  the  evidence
         provided by the appellant at the hearing but referred  to  elements
         of the appellant's evidence in the section headed 'Findings'.

      8. There was no dispute between the parties that, if the appellant was
         a member of the UDPS and had previously been persecuted,  he  would
         be a refugee. From [17] to [30] the judge set out various  elements
         of the  appellant's  claim  and  the  evidence  relating  to  those
         elements. The judge made short comments in relation to some of  the
         elements but made few explicit findings of fact.  One  of  the  few
         examples of a clear adverse credibility  finding  appears  at  [23]
         where the judge did not accept  that  the  appellant's  explanation
         relating to the signing of a withdrawal  for  the  diplomatic  visa
         application.

      9. At [26] the judge noted that the appellant was  asked  to  describe
         the UDPS and its aims and objectives during  his  asylum  interview
         but found the appellant's knowledge  "...  was  not  comprehensive"
         despite him being a member  for  6  years,  attending  the  monthly
         meetings and being involved in a mobilising role. At [27] the judge
         made reference to a Rule 35 report stating that the scarring on the
         appellant's face,  abdomen,  arm  and  legs  were  consistent  with
         violent assault, but found that "nothing in  the  medical  evidence
         speaks to the context of the assaults."

     10. At [29] the judge found that the absence of Difuma Ngombo, who  was
         said to be present in the UK, detracted from the  weight  he  could
         attach to the UDPS letter, and noted that the appellant had amended
         one of the dates of his alleged detention to match  that  contained
         in the UDPS letter. At [30] the judge stated,  "the  foregoing  are
         significant anomalies and  inconsistencies  in  what  should  be  a
         straightforward account. As  a  consequence  I  did  not  find  the
         appellant a credible witness." The appeal was dismissed.

The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision

     11. The grounds contend that the judge failed to adequately reason  his
         decision. It was not clear what the judge meant, at [26],  when  he
         found  that  the  appellant's  knowledge  of  the  UDPS  was   'not
         comprehensive'. The judge failed to  record  the  appellant's  full
         answer in interview when he was asked to describe  his  role  as  a
         mobiliser. The judge's finding that the  Rule  35  report  did  not
         'speak to the context of the assaults' was inaccurate  as  specific
         reference was made in the Rule 35 report to  the  circumstances  of
         the  assault.  The  judge  failed  to  consider   the   appellant's
         credibility within the context of the country background  evidence,
         and the judge failed to give due weight  to  the  letter  from  the
         Senior Representative of the UDPS.

     12. At the 'error of law' hearing I went through the  determination  in
         detail with both representatives. Ms Panagiotopolou relied  on  her
         grounds and submitted that the  judge  failed  to  make  plain  his
         assessment of the various elements of the appellant's account, that
         he failed to  approach  the  Rule  35  report  and  the  background
         evidence available to him as being supportive  of  the  appellant's
         claim, and that he failed to adequately engage with the content  of
         the UDPS letter. Mr Duffy accepted that there  were  problems  with
         the determination, but submitted that the  appellant's  claim  also
         contained significant problems and that  the  judge's  findings  of
         fact, some of which were implicit, were ultimately sustainable.

     13. After due deliberation I indicated my satisfaction, albeit  by  the
         narrowest of margins, that the decision was  infected  by  material
         errors on points of law.

Discussion

     14. In any appeal, but particularly those involving protection  claims,
         it is necessary for a judge to clearly set out, albeit  in  summary
         form, the  evidence  given  at  the  hearing,  including  the  oral
         evidence, and to make clear findings of  fact  in  respect  of  the
         issues in dispute. It  is  good  practice  for  the  core  findings
         necessary for the disposal of the appeal to be explicitly  made.  I
         am not satisfied that the judge  has  made  clear  and  unambiguous
         findings in respect of the  issues  in  dispute,  or  that  he  has
         provided adequate reasoning in support of any findings that may  be
         said to have been necessarily implicit from reading the decision as
         a whole. A significant number of the paragraphs from [17]  to  [29]
         contain descriptions of the appellant's account that are devoid  of
         any clear findings or reasoning.

     15. For example, at [17] the judge records the appellant's  account  of
         his arrest in 2011. The judge notes that, when asked  in  interview
         for the name of the hospital where he received  treatment,  he  was
         unable to name it. It is unclear whether the judge  is  drawing  an
         adverse inference. It is likely that he is doing  so  but,  in  the
         absence of an explicit adverse inference, there remains  some  room
         for doubt, particularly given the absence of any explanation for an
         adverse finding. In his answer at Q63 the appellant  said  that  he
         attended a private centre, and there was no follow-up question.  In
         the circumstances it was necessary for the judge to make clear  his
         adverse inference and to supply brief reasons in support.

     16. At [19] the judge records  the  appellant's  alleged  detention  in
         January 2015, noting that he was accused of plotting  to  kill  the
         president  and  that,  notwithstanding  the  seriousness   of   the
         allegation, he was subsequently released  and  heard  nothing  more
         about the allegation. Again, it is not wholly clear that the  judge
         was drawing an adverse inference, and there was no explanation from
         the judge why he considered this to be  a  factor  undermining  the
         appellant's credibility.

     17. At [21] the judge records some of the appellant's evidence relating
         to his detention on 31 December 2017, but notes that  the  Rule  35
         report made no mention of sexual assault. The  judge  then  records
         the appellant saying he was ashamed to do so. Once more, there  are
         no clear adverse credibility findings and  no  clear  reasoning  in
         support of any implicit adverse credibility finding.  Nor  has  the
         judge engaged with the appellant's claim that he was too ashamed to
         disclose his sexual assault when the Rule 35 report  was  prepared.
         Nor was there any reference to or consideration of the respondent's
         Asylum Policy Instructions on late disclosure of sexual assault.  I
         am satisfied that this alone is a mis-direction on a point of law.

     18. At [24] the judge sets out the appellant's evidence relating to his
         last release from detention but fails to  make  any  clear  factual
         findings. If the judge did find  the  appellant's  account  of  his
         release incredible it was incumbent on him to explain why.

     19. At [26] the judge found that the appellant's knowledge of the  UDPS
         was 'not comprehensive' having regard to  his  answers  during  his
         asylum interview. I accept that the judge's finding  is  brief  and
         unsupported by any concrete examples. I am  not  however  persuaded
         that this alone would constitute an error of  law.  It  is  readily
         apparent from the transcript  of  the  asylum  interview  that  the
         appellant was unable to give any detail relating  to  the  aims  or
         ideology of the UDPS (see, for example, Qs 39 and 42). I am however
         concerned that the judge failed  to  record  the  appellant's  full
         answer when asked what he  meant  by  'mobilising'.  At  Q  38  the
         appellant explained that, in addition to teaching people about  the
         objectives and ideology of the party, he would ask them  to  attend
         marches, protests and meetings. This was a fuller answer then  that
         intimated in the determination and is more in keeping with the term
         'mobilising'. I am satisfied the judge failed to take into  account
         this relevant evidence.

     20. At [27] the judge seemingly draws an adverse inference on the basis
         that the medical evidence did not  speak  to  the  context  of  the
         assaults. I'm satisfied that this is inaccurate as  the  author  of
         the  Rule  35  report  does  give  a  brief  description   of   the
         circumstances in which  the  appellant  claims  his  injuries  were
         caused (at F36 of the respondent's bundle). But in any event, it is
         not apparent from the decision that the judge approached  the  Rule
         35 report as evidence supportive of the  appellant's  claimed  ill-
         treatment given that the author of the report found the appellant's
         injuries consistent with their claimed causation. Whilst the  judge
         was under no obligation to conclude that the injuries were in  fact
         caused in the manner claimed, the judge had to at least  take  into
         account this evidence as supportive of the appellant's  claim.  I'm
         satisfied that the judge's failure to approach the Rule  35  report
         as evidence capable of supporting the appellant's claim constitutes
         a material misdirection in law.

     21. Whilst the judge was undoubtedly entitled to attach less weight  to
         the UDPS letter from Difuma Ngombo given the inability to test  his
         evidence, the judge failed  to  engage  with  the  content  of  the
         letter. There was no suggestion that  the  letter  itself  was  not
         genuine. In his letter Mr Ngombo describes how he was contacted  by
         the appellant's legal representatives and asked to give an accurate
         account of his UDPS membership and activities. Mr Ngombo  describes
         how he contacted the General Secretary of the UDPS to  obtain  this
         information and how he was directed to the President of  Federation
         of Tshangu, the area where the appellant was a member.  The  letter
         suggests that  official  UDPS  investigations  were  undertaken  to
         confirm the appellant's political activities. Whilst the judge  was
         not  obliged  to  accept  these  assertions  it  was   nevertheless
         necessary for him to at least engage with the evidence.

     22. I am additionally satisfied that the judge erred in law by  failing
         to  consider  the  appellant's  credibility  by  reference  to  the
         background evidence before him. The CPIN on the DRC: 'Opposition to
         the government', summarised, at 2.2.1  to  2.2.3,  that  opposition
         members were harassed  and  arrested  and  prevented  from  holding
         public rallies, that the state on occasion used excessive  violence
         to disperse political gatherings  and  demonstrations  against  the
         government, and that the authorities tended to be unpredictable and
         volatile  during  times  of  political   tension   and   reportedly
         arbitrarily detained  and  in  some  cases  ill-treated  scores  of
         opposition leaders and  activists.  This  background  material  was
         consistent with the general circumstances surrounding each  of  the
         appellant's claimed arrests and periods of detention, and therefore
         supportive of his account. It is not apparent that the  judge  took
         this into consideration when assessing the appellant's credibility.

     23. The judge does identify a number of  powerful  factors  capable  of
         undermining the  appellant's  credibility,  including  the  factors
         identified at [22], [23] and  [25].  However,  having  cumulatively
         considered the various legal  errors  described  above,  I  am  not
         satisfied that the judge would inevitably have found the  appellant
         incredible. I therefore find, albeit by a very narrow margin,  that
         the errors of law are material.

     24. Both parties were in agreement that, if a material error of law was
         uncovered, it was appropriate to remit the matter back to the First-
         tier Tribunal to be heard by a  different  judge.  Given  that  the
         identified errors of law  render  unsafe  the  judge's  credibility
         findings, I agree that the matter should be remitted to the  First-
         tier Tribunal to be heard by a judge other than Judge I Howard.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  with  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo  by  a
judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I Howard.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               11 December 2018

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
