
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: pa/09736/2016
                                                               pa/09917/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5 June 2017                           |On 12 July 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                              1) hm (pakistan)
                              2) us (pakistan)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    none
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Ahmad, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants have  appealed  from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Iain Ross sitting at Taylor House on 18  October  2016)
    dismissing their appeals against the decision of the Secretary of State
    to refuse to grant them international or  human  rights  protection  on
    account of their claimed  sexual  orientation.  They  claimed  to  have
    entered into a genuine marriage in the UK as a gay couple.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal found that the marriage was one of convenience, and  that
    neither of the appellants was gay.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an
    anonymity  direction,  and  I  consider  it  is  appropriate  that  the
    appellants continue to be accorded anonymity for these  proceedings  in
    the Upper Tribunal.



The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2.  Designated  Judge  Macdonald  refused  permission  to  appeal  as   he
    considered that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  given  clear  and
    coherent reasons for concluding that the appellants were not gay. On  a
    renewed application to the Upper Tribunal, a Deputy  UT  Judge  granted
    the appellants' permission to appeal as she considered that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge might have applied too high a standard of proof.



Withdrawal

 3. The appellants instructed new solicitors on 1 June 2017, who  wrote  to
    the Upper Tribunal on 2 June 2017 to say that their clients  wished  to
    withdraw their appeals.



Discussion

 4. Paragraph 17 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    states that a party may give notice of the withdrawal of its  case,  or
    any part of it:  (a) at any time  before  a  hearing  to  consider  the
    disposal of the proceedings; or (b) orally at a hearing.

 5. Sub-paragraph 2 of paragraph 17 provides as follows:

         "Notice of  withdrawal  will  not  take  effect  unless  the  Upper
         Tribunal consents to  the  withdrawal  except  in  relation  to  an
         application for permission to appeal."

 6. As was pointed out by Resident Senior Immigration Judge Southern (as he
    then was) in an explanatory memorandum, the  rule  does  not  enable  a
    party to withdraw his appeal.  The rule only enables a  party  to  give
    notice of the withdrawal of its case on appeal, or  any  part  of  that
    case.

 7. I treat the appellants' request as a request to  withdraw  their  case,
    and I grant them permission to do this. The consequence is  that  their
    error of law challenge is not made out,  and  their  appeals  from  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal are dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  These appeals to  the  Upper  Tribunal
are dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

