
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09356/2017 (A)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via BT Meet Me  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 August 2020                     |On 11 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     M Q
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Nicolaou, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
This  appeal  is  brought  on  protection  grounds.   Accordingly,   it   is
appropriate that the Appellant's details be protected.  Unless and  until  a
tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No
report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
Appellant or any member of his family. This direction applies  both  to  the
Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. By a decision promulgated  on  30  July  2019,  the  Tribunal  (the
         President and Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor) found an error of
         law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  promulgated  on  28
         December 2017.  The Tribunal set aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision and gave directions for a resumed hearing before the Upper
         Tribunal.  The appeal was originally linked with  appeal  reference
         PA/542/2018 in order to consider an issue  raised  in  the  grounds
         concerning an  asserted  obligation  for  the  Respondent  to  make
         specific enquiries in cases raising an Article 3 ECHR ground  based
         on  health  problems.   This  ground  was  also  raised  in  appeal
         PA/542/2018 and is one which was thought to merit  guidance  to  be
         given by a Presidential panel.

      2. The hearing of this appeal was however adjourned at  the  start  of
         the day listed for the hearing  before  the  Tribunal  for  reasons
         given in the Tribunal's adjournment decision and  directions  dated
         14 October 2019.  The hearing of this appeal was stayed pending the
         country guidance decision in AS (Afghanistan).    A  direction  was
         given that a case management review hearing be listed on the  first
         available date after fourteen days from the  promulgation  of  that
         decision.

      3. The country guidance decision has now been reported (AS (Safety  of
         Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT 00130 (IAC).   In  addition,  the
         legal issue for which the case was initially listed for guidance to
         be given has now been resolved by the Tribunal's  decision  in  AXB
         (Art 3 health; obligations; suicide) Jamaica [2019] UKUT 397 (IAC).
          The case of Paposhvili v Belgium which was under consideration  in
         that case has also now been considered by the Supreme Court  in  AM
         (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] UKSC
         17.

      4. The appeal came before me again therefore on 3 August  for  a  case
         management review.

      5. Ms Nicolaou submitted that the appeal ought now to be  remitted  to
         the First-tier Tribunal for re-making  of  the  decision.   As  she
         pointed out, the appeal was retained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
         guidance to be given on the Paposhvili issue.   That  guidance  has
         now been given.  Furthermore, the Tribunal has also now given  very
         recent country guidance in relation to Afghanistan and  Kabul  more
         specifically.  The Appellant does not therefore contend that  there
         are complex legal issues to be determined but rather says that  the
         substance of his entire claim needs to be examined in  the  context
         of those decisions.

      6. Ms Nicolaou outlined  the  issues  which  are  to  be  resolved  as
         follows:

          1)  The  credibility  of  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim.    The
             Appellant  relies  on  the  Convention  reason  of   political
             opinion/ imputed political opinion but may also wish to  argue
             that he is a member of a particular social group following the
             Tribunal's decision in DH  (Particular  Social  Group:  Mental
             Health) Afghanistan [2020] UKUT 00223 (IAC).   That  will  add
             yet a  further  issue  to  the  asylum  claim  which  has  not
             previously been considered or determined.

          2) Mental health issues.  In addition to the  issue  whether  the
             Appellant is a member of a particular social group, the mental
             health issues have to be  considered  in  the  context  of  an
             Article 3 claim as well as for  their  relevance  to  internal
             relocation.  Although the Appellant comes from Kabul province,
             the Appellant contends that requiring him to relocate to Kabul
             city engages the internal relocation issue  which  has  to  be
             considered against the most  recent  country  guidance  in  AS
             (Afghanistan).

          3) Article 8 ECHR. This is being argued in the  context  of  very
             significant obstacles under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
             Immigration Rules and more widely.

          4) Whether there is a risk  of  serious  harm  under  Article  15
             Qualification Directive.  Although Ms Nicolaou  accepted  that
             this has been dealt with in the most recent country  guidance,
             she also submitted that  there  might  be  further  background
             evidence on which reliance may be placed but in any event that
             the Appellant's particular vulnerability  due  to  his  mental
             health needs to be considered.

      7. Ms Nicolaou indicated that the Appellant has recently been assessed
         by the Helen Bamber  Foundation  and  that  an  updated  report  is
         expected  in  September  2020.   That  will   also   consider   the
         Appellant's ability to give oral evidence.  Ms Cunha accepted  that
         if the Appellant were able to give  oral  evidence  that  it  might
         change the complexion of the case (as  he  was  not  able  to  give
         evidence before the First-tier Tribunal previously)  and  that,  if
         that were the position,  it  would  be  appropriate  to  remit  the
         appeal.  Otherwise she expressed concern about the delay which  may
         arise from a remittal.  I note that the  appeal  has  been  in  the
         system since 2017, principally because the 2017 decision which  was
         set aside by the Presidential panel in July 2019 was challenged  up
         to the High Court and  permission  was  granted  only  following  a
         "Cart" judicial review.  There has been no previous remittal.

      8. Ms Cunha suggested that  it  might  be  appropriate  to  await  the
         outcome of the further medical evidence to see if the Appellant  is
         going to give evidence before a decision is taken whether to remit.
          Ms Nicolaou opposed that suggestion.  In  any  event,  I  did  not
         consider it appropriate to convene a further case management review
         after that evidence is  filed  in  circumstances  where  there  are
         concerns about delay.

      9. Ms Nicolaou also indicated that the Appellant's representatives are
         currently evaluating the  evidence  following  the  recent  country
         guidance decision and may need to obtain further updating  evidence
         or reconsider the contents of bundles and documents following  that
         review.  Although Ms Cunha did not presently consider it  necessary
         for the Respondent to submit further evidence, she  indicated  that
         this could not  be  ruled  out  in  response  to  whatever  further
         evidence is presented by the Appellant.   As  she  rightly  pointed
         out, the Respondent will  need  an  opportunity  to  consider  that
         evidence and it would be appropriate to  order  skeleton  arguments
         prior  to  the  hearing  to  ensure  that  both  parties  have  the
         opportunity to consider their cases and review their positions.

     10.  Having  considered  the  submissions,  I  determined  that  it  is
         appropriate to remit this appeal.   One  of  the  circumstances  in
         which the Practice Direction provides that  it  is  appropriate  to
         remit is where there needs to be extensive fact-finding.  Given the
         multiplicity of issues being raised and the prospect of yet further
         evidence in a case which is already heavily documented as  well  as
         the possibility that the Appellant will wish and be  able  to  give
         oral evidence for the first time (and where his credibility on more
         or less all aspects of his claim is disputed in any event), this is
         a case where there is very extensive  fact-finding  required.   The
         First-tier Tribunal may wish to  hold  a  further  case  management
         hearing following remittal but, I hope, will  be  assisted  by  the
         outline of what further evidence may be expected and the summary of
         the issues.




    DECISION

    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge R Cooper  promulgated  on  28
    December 2017 having been set aside by  the  decision  of  the  Hon  Mr
    Justice Lane, President, sitting with UTJ Norton-Taylor promulgated  on
    30 July 2019, I remit this appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
    determination of the appeal before a Judge other than Judge R Cooper.




    Signed   L K Smith     Dated: 3 August 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
