
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09468/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 February 2019                           |On 22 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                SHAMSHAD [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Saunders of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant born on 1 January 1999  and  a  national  of  Afghanistan
    appealed against a decision of the respondent this refusing  his  claim
    for asylum and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan dismissed his appeal in a decision dated
    31 August 2018. Permission to appeal was at first refused by First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Davidge  and  subsequently  granted  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Davey in a decision dated 9 January 2019 stated that  it
    is arguable that the decision disclose material errors of law but  gave
    no reasons.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan in an extensive decision  found  the
    appellant not credible. He noted that the core of the appellant's claim
    is that the Taliban came to his  family  home  when  one  of  them  was
    injured and the appellant went with another Taliban to bring  a  doctor
    to see the injured Taliban. When the appellant returned  home,  he  saw
    fighting between government forces and the Taliban at his house and the
    government forces killed all the Taliban men. The government  suspected
    the appellant was involved with the Taliban and left a message for  him
    to report to the headquarters. It was also the appellant's case that he
    fears Taliban because they believe that the  appellant  spied  for  the
    authorities and that is why members of the Taliban were killed  at  his
    house. The Judge was clear about the basis of the appellant's claim.

 4. The Judge considered the psychiatrist  report  which  stated  that  the
    appellant should be considered a vulnerable witness because  he  claims
    that he was 16 years of age when he entered  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    respondent however did  not  accept  the  appellant's  age  and  social
    services who assessed his age stated that he was 21 or 22 years of  age
    as of 22 May 2017. The age assessment team found that  the  appellant's
    identity document, the Taskira  did  not  fit  into  the  chronological
    timeline given by the appellant and of his  claimed  awareness  of  his
    age. The Judge found that the appellant  has  understated  his  age  in
    order to claim to be a minor so that he could benefit from his minority
    and said he does not accept the appellant's evidence that  he  did  not
    know anything about his age.

 5. The Judge found stated that the  appellant  claims  he  had  number  of
    encounters with the Taliban but the one that made him leave Afghanistan
    was in July 2015 when he went to get a doctor with  a  Taliban  because
    one of them was injured. The appellant stated that the Taliban came  to
    his father and asked  him  questions  about  the  appellant,  and  they
    suspected that the appellant was working for the Afghan authorities and
    that he had informed them of the Taliban presence at his  family  home.
    The Judge did not find this  explanation  credible  or  consistent,  in
    light of the appellant's own evidence that one of the Taliban  went  to
    the doctor's house with the appellant and therefore the appellant would
    not have had any opportunity to inform the  authorities.  It  was  only
    when the appellant returned to his home that he saw that  there  was  a
    fight going on between the government forces and the  Taliban  and  the
    government forces killed all to Taliban. The Judge did  not  find  this
    evidence credible and said that the appellant has made up his  evidence
    to make an asylum claim in the United Kingdom.

 6. The Judge found that the appellant's departure from Afghanistan,  after
    this incident, within a day as it were, was not credible because  large
    sums of money had to be found to pay the agents to take  the  appellant
    out of the country. He noted that the appellant's father was  a  farmer
    and therefore would not have been able  fund  this  unexpected  expense
    within a day.

 7. The Judge did not find credible that the appellant  had  not  contacted
    his mother since he left Afghanistan but claims that he managed to have
    indirect contact with his mother through a family in Croydon  which  is
    how she was able to send him his  identity  document  and  the  Taliban
    threat letter to his family. The Judge said that the appellant has  not
    given a credible explanation for why he had not contacted his mother or
    other  family  members  until  he  needed  his   identity   card   from
    Afghanistan.

 8. The Judge found that the  appellant  travelled  through  many  European
    countries on the way to the United Kingdom but  did  not  claim  asylum
    despite the fact he was fingerprinted in Hungary and remained in France
    for about a month.

 9. The Judge considered the two expert reports produced by the  appellant.
    The first one was a psychiatrist report and the other was by a document
    expert, Mr Jawed in respect of his Taskira identity  document  and  the
    letter from the Taliban to his family. The Judge did  not  accept  this
    evidence because he found that it does not accord with the  appellant's
    timeline.

10. The Judge stated that all the information given to the psychiatrist and
    about his circumstances was given by the appellant himself.  The  Judge
    noted that this does not sit well with the appellant's evidence that he
    has memory problems and easily forget things.

11. In respect of risk of return the Judge stated that  the  appellant,  on
    the lower standard of proof, has failed to establish persecution in the
    past or risk of persecution in the future as he  does  not  accept  the
    claim that events that took place  in  Afghanistan  as  stated  by  the
    appellant. He also found that for the same reasons the appellant is not
    entitled to humanitarian protection. He  stated  that  the  appellant's
    removal would not cause the United Kingdom  to  be  in  breach  of  its
    obligations under the Qualification Directive.

12. The appellant's renewed grounds of appeal state the following  which  I
    summarise. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  makes  no  reference  to  or
    findings about returning the  appellant  to  Kabul  and  therefore  his
    decision was inadequate. The judge did not take into account the  Joint
    Presidential  Guidance  Note  2  of  2010  in  respect  of   vulnerable
    appellants and therefore the evidence must be assessed in light of  the
    appellant's  diagnosed  mental  health  conditions.  The   Presidential
    Guidance states that "some forms  of  disability  cause  or  result  in
    impaired memory". The assessment  of  vulnerability  is  a  fundamental
    element of judicial decision-making in the asylum context as  has  been
    repeatedly emphasised by the  higher  courts  including  the  Court  of
    Appeal's recent reinstatement of the principles in AM Afghanistan.

13. The appellant provided  genuine  proof  of  his  age  which  is  highly
    significant to the credibility of the appellant's account  of  his  age
    and there has been no analysis of that assessment consideration of  any
    of the appellant's evidence or submissions about his age.

14. The Judge did not deal with the risk to  the  appellant  under  15  (c)
    which was pursued in written submissions and not oral submissions.  The
    appellant's Counsel at the hearing adopted her written  submissions  as
    part of her case and Judge Khan  states  that  he  has  considered  the
    appellant's legal representatives' skeleton  argument.  Therefore,  his
    failure to make any findings about this is unexplained.

15. The rest of the grounds of appeal explained the errors made  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge about the evidence and  the  Judge  had  materially
    erred in his findings based on the evidence before him.

    Decision on whether there is an error of law

16. I have considered the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  with
    great care to determine whether he  fell  into  material  error.  After
    considering the  grounds  of  appeal,  I  find  that  the  grounds  are
    essentially disagreements with the Judge's  findings  of  fact  on  the
    evidence in the appeal. The  Judge  was  entitled  not  to  accept  the
    appellant's evidence that he had come to the adverse attention  of  the
    Taliban and or the Afghan authorities before he left the United Kingdom
    and therefore, he would not come to any adverse attention  from  anyone
    on his return.

17. The Judge's reasoning in this regard. The judge was  entitled  to  find
    that the appellant had understated his age of 16 and  was  entitled  to
    believe Social Services as to  their  age  assessment  of  putting  the
    appellant's age at 20 to 21 years of age.  The  Judge  the  appellant's
    identity document did not fit the appellant's chronological timeline is
    provided to the age assessment team of his awareness of  his  age.  His
    findings did not amount to "a bare acceptance of  Social  Services  age
    assessment without any proper analysis of the evidence".  There  is  no
    burden on the Judge to analyse every piece of evidence on every finding
    that he makes. The decision makes it clear that he has  considered  all
    the evidence in the round before reaching his conclusion including  the
    appellant's Taskira document which he claims that he received from  his
    mother in Afghanistan. It is implicit in the decision  that  the  Judge
    found that the appellant was able to contact his mother when he  needed
    this document but otherwise said that he had no contact with his mother
    without a credible explanation. The  Judge  was  entitled  to  make  an
    adverse credibility finding against the appellant  in  respect  of  his
    evidence in this regard.

18. The grounds of appeal also state, that the Judge when  he  stated  that
    the appellant would not have been of interest to the Afghan authorities
    because the family home belonged to the appellant's father who would be
    deemed responsible and if there was any suspicion to be  accredited  it
    would be to his father and not the appellant. The grounds  states  that
    this finding is based solely on the Judge's personal opinion as to  how
    Afghan authorities would think and behave, and it is unsupported by any
    evidence. The Judge is entitled to use his common sense and  experience
    to make his findings. I find that there is no merit  to  this  argument
    because the Judge was entitled to find that the head of household would
    be the first target of suspicion. This was a credible finding in  light
    of the evidence that it was the appellant who  went  with  the  Taliban
    member to the doctor but it was the father who  remained  at  home  and
    would have had more opportunity to call the authorities.

19. The Judge's reasoning that it was impossible for the  Taliban  to  have
    suspected the  appellant  of  informing  the  authorities  about  them,
    because there was a Taliban member accompanied the  appellant  when  he
    went to the doctor's house, and he would have lacked an opportunity  to
    inform  the  authorities.  The  appellant's  evidence  in  his  witness
    statement was that the Taliban member did not come with  him  into  the
    doctor's house and had gone by the time he left the  house.  Therefore,
    the grounds argue that there would have been a substantial period  when
    the appellant was unaccompanied by any member  of  the  Taliban,  which
    fundamentally undermines the point made by the Judge and this was undue
    speculation as to  the  thoughts  and  beliefs  of  the  Taliban.  This
    explanation is  fraught  with  incredibility  because  no  timeline  is
    suggested as to when or how the appellant would have the opportunity to
    have  called  the  authorities  because  when  he  returned  home   the
    authorities and the Taliban were at war with each  other.  The  Judge's
    findings were open to him on the evidence.

20. It was argued that the judge when he stated that he "did not  know  how
    much or how finances were raised for the  appellant's  journey  to  the
    United Kingdom" given that his father is only income was  from  farming
    and found that it is not credible or consistent  that  the  appellant's
    trip could have been arranged so suddenly as it would be expected there
    would have to be a long process of planning for his  trip  abroad.  The
    grounds argue that this  conclusion  by  the  Judge  lacks  any  proper
    evidential basis because he failed to appreciate the appellant  in  his
    oral evidence said that his family were not poor like other people  and
    that his father owned and worked on the land and therefore it would  be
    plausible that  money  was  available  to  facilitate  the  appellant's
    departure. There is no perversity in the Judge's finding  that  raising
    money on the day  before  the  appellant's  sudden  departure  was  not
    credible on the evidence before him. The grounds of appeal do  not  set
    out the evidence that was before the Judge other than  the  appellant's
    oral evidence said that his family are "not poor" without  setting  out
    what that means. This is more of a quarrel with the Judges findings and
    not a material error of law.

21. The grounds state that it is unclear why the Judge does not accept that
    the appellant had no contact with his mother but made indirect  contact
    with her through his friend in Croydon. The Judge was entitled to  find
    it incredible and implausible that the appellant would not have contact
    with his mother directly and  would  indirectly  contact  her  when  he
    needed his identity document to be sent to him  from  Afghanistan.  The
    Judge was entitled find that the appellant had not provided a  credible
    explanation for why he did not contact his  mother  earlier  given  his
    claim that his parents sent him out of the country when he was 16 years
    of age.

22. The grounds further complained  that  the  Judge  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's journey to the United Kingdom as  he  had  stated  that  he
    could not claim asylum in another country  because  he  was  under  the
    control of an agent who had beat him and  kicked  him.  The  Judge  was
    wrong to conclude that  the  United  Kingdom  was  the  target  by  the
    appellant and his  family  for  other  reasons  other  than  protection
    reasons. Considering all evidence in the appeal the Judge was  entitled
    to find that the appellant's intention was  to  travel  to  the  United
    Kingdom. The judge did not believe the appellant's explanation that  he
    was under the control of an agent. The Judge stated at paragraph 1 that
    the appellant was detained and fingerprinted in Hungary before  leaving
    through more unknown countries and arriving in the jungle in Calais  on
    20 October 2015.  This conclusion was available to  the  Judge  on  the
    evidence that he was not under the constant monitoring of an  agent  as
    was his claim.

23. The grounds state that the  expert  evidence  of  Dr  Zadeh  about  the
    genuineness of his Taskira but makes no further comment on this report.
    The grounds states that this error by  the  Judge  shows  the  lack  of
    anxious scrutiny of the appellant's evidence. It  is  implicit  in  the
    decision that the Judge did consider the report but did not accept  the
    document given his reasoning that it did  not  fit  into  the  timeline
    given by the appellant to social  services.  It  is  evident  from  the
    decision the Judge considered all the evidence in the appeal.

24. The grounds states that in respect to the Medical Legal  Report  by  Dr
    Roy the Judge stated that the information provided to Dr Roy  does  not
    sit well with the appellant's evidence that he has memory problems  and
    easily forgets things. The Judge considered this report  and  concluded
    that Dr Roy has based his evidence at what the appellant has  told  him
    about his circumstances and that it is  not  for  the  expert  to  make
    credibility findings, but it is that of the Tribunal. I find it is  not
    a material error of law for the Judge to have said that  he  would  not
    have been able to give details to Dr Roy  if  he  had  memory  problems
    because the primary reason why the Judge place no reliance on Dr  Roy's
    report was because it was based on the appellant's own evidence to  the
    doctor.

25. The grounds complained that the Judge did not consider the  appellant's
    humanitarian protection  claim  on  the  bases  of  the  indiscriminate
    violence in Afghanistan as  set  out  in  the  skeleton  argument.  The
    grounds allege that the Judge did  not  consider  the  risk  and  undue
    harshness  of  internal  relocation  given   the   appellant   specific
    vulnerabilities. The Judge did not accept the  appellant  was  credible
    and  therefore  was  entitled  to  find  that  the  appellant  was  not
    vulnerable as he was 21 or 22 years of age when he came to  the  United
    Kingdom. It was implicit that the appellant's return would be to  Kabul
    and the Judge was aware that the appellant's mother was in  Afghanistan
    who would assist him on his return to settle down into the country.

26. I find considering all the evidence in the round,  the  Judge  did  not
    fall into material error and his decision  it  was  based  on  all  due
    scrutiny on all the evidence before him and  gave  proper  intelligible
    and adequate reasons for arriving at his conclusions.  I  find  that  a
    differently  constituted  Tribunal  would  not  come  to  a   different
    conclusion on the evidence in this appeal.

27. The Judge did consider article 15 (c) at paragraph 31 of  his  decision
    and stated that the appellant's removal  would  not  cause  the  United
    Kingdom to be in breach of  its  obligations  under  the  Qualification
    Directive.  This is in line with the recent case of AS  Afghanistan  CG
    [2018] UKUT 118 (IAC) AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG  [2018]  UKUT
    00118 (IAC) which states that a low-level interest for the Taliban  not
    a senior government or security official, honest by historic real  risk
    of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul. It states that it  will  not,
    in general be unreasonable or unduly harsh for a single adult  male  in
    good health to relocate to Kabul even if he does not have any  specific
    connections or support network in Kabul.

28. The Judge did not find the appellant to be a vulnerable  individual  or
    that he had mental health issues because he did not  believe  that  the
    events that the appellant claimed to have occurred in Afghanistan,  did
    occur.  The current security situation in Kabul is not at such a  level
    as to render internal relocation  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh.  The
    Judge found that the appellant came to  this  country  as  an  economic
    migrant  and  therefore  he  can  return  to  Afghanistan  safely.  The
    appellant has been in contact with his mother and therefore  will  have
    support on his return. On the evidence in  the  appeal,  the  appellant
    would not face a real risk of persecution in the place of the  proposed
    relocation and it would not be unduly harsh to expect him  to  relocate
    within Afghanistan. ST Afghanistan [2018] EWCA Civ 2382

29. In HK and others (minors - indiscriminate violence - forced recruitment
    by Taliban - contact with family members) Afghanistan  CG  [2010]  UKUT
    378 (IAC) the Tribunal said that where a child has close relatives  in
    Afghanistan who have assisted him in leaving the country, any assertion
    that such family members are uncontactable or are unable  to  meet  the
    child in Kabul and care for him  on  return, should  be  supported  by
    credible evidence of efforts to contact those family members and  their
    inability to meet and care for the child in the event of return.

30. Considering  this  background  evidence,  I  find  that  a  differently
    constituted Tribunal would not come to different conclusion in  respect
    of the Qualification Directive. The grounds of appeal argued  that  the
    existence of country guidance  does  not  preclude  the  Tribunal  from
    considering a point or departing from the said guidance. There  was  no
    reason given for the First-tier Tribunal  to  have  departed  from  the
    country guidance in this appeal. It is notable that this argument about
    the Qualification Directive was not in Counsel's oral argument although
    it was in the  skeleton  argument.  The  Judge  found  the  appellant's
    narrative not to be credible and  also  found  that  he  came  to  this
    country for a better life and not for reasons of protection.  There  is
    no merit and the grounds of appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed


Signed  by                                              Dated  18th  day  of
    February 2019

A Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Ms S Chana
