
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09331/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th February 2019                |On 12th March 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     O j
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes, Counsel instructed by Asylum Aid
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

First-tier Tribunal Judge Henderson granted the  appellant,  OJ,  anonymity.
I have not discharged that certificate.   No  report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant or  any  member  of  the
appellant's family.  This direction applies both to  the  appellant  and  to
the respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

1.   The appellant, OJ, is a national of Palestine who was born on 9th  July
    1991 and who first arrived in the United Kingdom on 11th October  2016.
    He has been granted a visa as a Tier 4 Student which  expires  on  30th
    January 2019.

2.   The appellant claimed asylum on 18th January 2018 but  that  claim  was
    refused by the respondent on 13th July that year.  The appeal was  made
    under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

3.   The appellant was born in Saudi Arabia and lived there until 1999.   He
    then moved to Gaza with his family.  He and his family were  registered
    with UNRWA in Gaza, where the appellant lived with his parents and  one
    of his brothers.

4.   In 2008 he was stopped for the first time by Hamas when he was  walking
    down the street with a female friend.  He was  detained  by  Hamas  but
    released after  signing  a  document  promising  not  to  continue  the
    behaviour that was complained of at the time.  In  March  2012  he  had
    been involved in  arranging  a  protest.   Following  this  his  father
    received a summons (in the appellant's name) and  then  spoken  to  the
    appellant about his behaviour; the appellant stopped all involvement in
    such protests.

5.   In 2015  the  appellant  received  a  call  from  someone  at  Internal
    Security requesting that he attend a meeting.  The  appellant  did  not
    believe that this was an official summons and did nothing.  There  were
    no consequences from his failure to attend as far as the  appellant  is
    aware.

6.   In October 2016 the appellant received another summons  but  this  time
    in writing.  He did not comply with that summons since he was about  to
    travel to the  United  Kingdom  on  a  scholarship  to  Oxford  Brookes
    University to study.  On 5th  January  2018  the  appellant's  home  in
    Palestine was raided by Hamas who took away his possessions,  including
    the hard drive from his computer.

7.   The appellant claimed asylum on 18th January 2018.  He  has  no  family
    in the United Kingdom and no health problems  or  medical  issues.   He
    fears return to Palestine where he believes  the  Hamas  military  wing
    would kidnap, torture and or in the alternative, arrest him.  The judge
    heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  from  the  appellant's
    brother, AIJ.  The judge also received and considered an expert  report
    from Deborah Hyams  dated  5th  October  2018.   The  judge  found  the
    appellant and his brother to be "generally  credible"  witnesses.   The
    judge  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  not  exaggerated  the
    consequences of his ignoring the  various  summonses  and  his  brother
    confirmed that following the raid in January 2018 and  his  questioning
    after the raid, there had been no other adverse  consequences  for  the
    appellant's family.  The judge viewed a video which had  been  made  at
    the time of the raid on the appellant's home and found the video to  be
    genuine and that it showed armed men searching the appellant's bedroom.



8.   The judge found  that  the  appellant  fell  within  the  provision  of
    Article 1D of the Refugee Convention in that he is at present receiving
    protection from UNRWA as evidenced by a certificate of June 2018.   The
    judge refers to Counsel referring to the CJEU case of El  Kott  [2012].
    The judge concluded that  the  appellant  left  Palestine  of  his  own
    volition and not because he was concerned for his  safety,  but  purely
    because he wished to study in the United Kingdom and concluded that the
    appellant was excluded from the protection of the  Refugee  Convention.
    The judge went on to consider humanitarian protection  and  noted  that
    after being stopped by police officers in 2008  while  walking  on  the
    street with a female friend, the appellant was  held  some  two  hours,
    required to sign a pledge and was then released.  He  has  never  since
    been detained or ill-treated.  The appellant received a summons in 2011
    but this was sent to the appellant's father and not to  the  appellant.
    The  appellant's  father  warned  him  about  engaging   in   political
    involvement, which he then  ceased.   The  appellant  then  received  a
    summons in October 2016, to which he did not  respond  and  from  which
    there were no adverse consequences.  Whilst the video of  the  raid  in
    January 2018 showed armed men searching his family  home,  it  did  not
    reveal any violence or ill-treatment of his family  and  the  appellant
    and his brother's evidence confirmed that there  had  been  no  adverse
    consequences for his family following that raid.  The  judge  concluded
    from the basis of the evidence he did not believe  that  the  appellant
    had shown, on the lower standard of proof, that  there  was  a  serious
    risk of harm to him on his return.  The judge dismissed the appellant's
    asylum claim and  dismissed  the  appellant's  humanitarian  protection
    claim.

9.   Permission was granted to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   There  were
    two challenges.  The first was that the judge erred in treating El Kott
    as definitive of the circumstances in which an asylum seeker from  Gaza
    could qualify for refugee status and failed to consider the restrictive
    interpretation that should be given to exclusions from refugee  status.
    The second ground suggested that the judge erred in law  in  concluding
    that the absence of past persecution and lack of  mistreatment  of  the
    appellant's family members  was  determinative  of  the  real  risk  of
    serious harm he might face on return given the expert's opinion that an
    ebb and flow of interest from the security forces in  individuals  such
    as the appellant could be explained by their  other  priorities,  their
    lack of capacity, their waiting further  "evidence"  of  "collaboration
    with the west from informants or surveillance of social media or due to
    the ebb and flow of  military  conduct".   Whilst  the  judge  held  it
    against the appellant that he defied a summons without coming to  harm,
    this takes account of highly relevant considerations that the appellant
    was receiving the summons on 8th October and departing from the  UK  on
    10th October.  A judge needs to give the  most  cogent  reasons  before
    holding the lack of harm eventuating for such a short  period  of  time
    against an asylum seeker.

10.  I was grateful to Mr Symes for addressing me succinctly.   He  took  me
    through the decision in El Kott.  He suggested that the  appellant  was
    not excluded, that the appellant cannot return to Palestine because  of
    lack of effective protection.  Mr Lindsay addressed  me  and  suggested
    that it needs to be shown that  the  Immigration  Judge  was  wrong  in
    respect of his assessment of humanitarian protection, because though he
    had considered the risk  facing  the  appellant,  the  judge  carefully
    watched the video showing that his former home was being searched,  but
    there was  no  finding  that  they  were  actually  searching  for  the
    appellant.  It is true that despite the search of the appellant's home,
    neither his parents nor his brother  suffered  any  harm.   I  enquired
    whether it was accepted by the respondent that the summonses  to  which
    the appellant had made reference were genuine.   Mr  Lindsay  suggested
    that they were not believed to be reliable and one of them was merely a
    photocopy or photograph.  Mr Symes pointed out that the  appellant  had
    made a credibility finding at paragraph 39 and had not sought  to  rely
    on Tanveer Ahmed v Secretary of State for the Home  Department*  [2002]
    UKAIT 00439.  I reserved my decision.

11.  Article 1D of the Refugee Convention provides as follows:-

         "This Convention shall not apply to  persons  who  are  at  present
         receiving from organs or agencies of the United Nations other  than
         the United Nations High Commissioner  for  Refugees  protection  or
         assistance.

         When such protection or  assistance  has  ceased  for  any  reason,
         without the position of such persons being definitively settled  in
         accordance with the relevant resolutions  adopted  by  the  General
         Assembly of the United Nations, these persons shall ipso  facto  be
         entitled to the benefits of this Convention."

12.  The European Union case of El Kott & Ors was a reference to  the  court
    for a preliminary ruling.  The details of the reference are set out  in
    paragraph 41 of that decision and at paragraph  45  the  court  suggest
    that the exclusion must be narrowly construed.  At paragraphs 49 and 50
    they point out that simply leaving UNRWA's area of  operations  is  not
    sufficient and at paragraph 56 point  out  that  it  is  not  only  the
    abolition itself of the organ or agency giving protection or assistance
    which brings about cessation of the protection or  assistance  provided
    by that organ or agency within the meaning of the sentence  of  Article
    12(1)(a) of Directive 2004/83, but also the fact that it is  impossible
    for the organ or agency to carry out its mission.  At paragraph 59  the
    court says this:-

         "Mere absence from such an area or a voluntary decision to leave it
         cannot be regarded as cessation of assistance. On the  other  hand,
         if the person concerned  has  been  forced  to  leave  for  reasons
         unconnected with that person's will, such a situation may lead to a
         finding that the assistance from which that  person  benefited  has
         ceased   within   the   meaning   of   the   second   sentence   of
         Article 12(1)(a) of Directive 2004/83."

    The decision goes on at paragraphs 60 and 61 to say this:-

         "60  That  interpretation  is  consistent  with  the  objective  of
             Article 12(1)(a) of Directive 2004/83, which is inter alia to
             ensure  that  Palestinian   refugees   continue   to   receive
             protection  by  affording   them   effective   protection   or
             assistance and not simply by guaranteeing the existence  of  a
             body or agency whose task is to  provide  such  assistance  or
             protection, as is also apparent from a reading of paragraph 20
             of United Nations General Assembly resolution No 302 (IV) in
             conjunction with resolution No 2252 (ES-V).

         61    For  the  purpose  of  determining  whether   assistance   or
             protection have actually ceased within  the  meaning  of  that
             provision of  Directive  2004/83,  it  is  for  the  competent
             national authorities  and  courts  to  ascertain  whether  the
             departure of the person concerned may be justified by  reasons
             beyond his control and independent of his volition which force
             him to leave the area in question and thus  prevent  him  from
             receiving UNRWA assistance."

13.  I have concluded, therefore, that in respect of the first challenge  to
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Henderson, the judge did  not
    err.  The appellant's departure from Palestine had nothing at all to do
    with him being forced to leave; it was his choice  to  leave  Palestine
    and, therefore, the protection of UNRWA assistance  in  order  that  he
    could study at Oxford Brookes University in the United Kingdom.   I  am
    satisfied that the judge did not err in finding that the appellant  was
    excluded from the protection of the Refugee Convention.

14.  In dealing with the question  of  humanitarian  protection,  the  judge
    noted that the respondent had not challenged the appellant's account of
    being stopped by police officers in 2008 and being held for  two  hours
    and being required to sign a pledge before being released.   The  judge
    noted that the appellant was never himself ill-treated.  The judge  was
    not referred to any evidence from the appellant's friends who had  been
    detained.  The judge noted that the appellant  received  a  summons  in
    2011, but this was sent to  the  appellant's  father  and  not  to  the
    appellant directly.  Quite why this was I do not know and it  does  not
    appear to be something that the judge enquired about.  The judge  noted
    that the  appellant's  father  had  been  warned  about  the  appellant
    engaging in political involvement and that it had then ceased.  He also
    noted that the appellant received a summons in October 2016,  to  which
    he had not responded and from which there were no adverse consequences.
     Having viewed the video of the raid which  took  place  in  2018,  the
    judge noted that armed men searched his home, but that  the  video  did
    not reveal any violence or ill-treatment towards his family and it  had
    been confirmed by the appellant and his brother that there had been  no
    adverse consequences for his family following the raid.  It was on that
    basis that the judge concluded that the appellant had failed to show to
    the lower standard of proof that there was a serious risk  of  harm  to
    him upon his return.

15.  The judge had earlier considered the expert  report  of  Deborah  Hyams
    and  quotes  from  parts  of  it  at  paragraphs  104  to  110  of  the
    determination.  The judge also refers to a Human Rights Watch document.
     He noted that since January 2016, the Hamas led Justice  Ministry  has
    detained a total of 45 people over  social  media  posts  and  that  81
    people were arrested during protests that took place  in  January  2018
    during which  public  property  was  damaged,  but  those  people  were
    released within 24 hours without any further court action on  condition
    they agreed not to protest again.   As  of  April  2008,  the  Interior
    Ministry held 4,071 men in  detention  for  "security  cases"  such  as
    "collaboration with the occupation".  The report  then  noted  specific
    cases of Fattah and activists.  I have examined and taken careful  note
    of the report of Deborah Hyams.  Ms Hyams spent four years  living  and
    working with local NGOs in the West Bank  and  eighteen  months  living
    with a Pakistani family in  the  largest  of  three  refugee  camps  in
    Bethlehem while working with Shiraa'  Association  for  Development,  a
    grass roots organisation serving workers and their  families.   She  is
    fluent in Levantine Arabic and proficient in Hebrew and  completed  her
    Masters dissertation in Development Studies at  the  London  School  of
    Economics.  Her dissertation was based on field work conducted  in  the
    occupied West Bank.  She is clearly an expert.

16.  At paragraph 98 of her report, the expert says this:-

         "To summarize  this  consideration  of  the  future  risk  to  [the
         appellant] if returned to the Gaza Strip, under the first scenario,
         on the basis that his entire account is true, in my  assessment  he
         would face a very serious risk  of  being  abducted,  tortured  and
         possibly killed by the Al-Qassam Brigades during the next round  of
         full-scale hostilities with Israel.  Even  before  that,  he  would
         face very serious risks of being detained by the Internal  Security
         and tortured or otherwise ill-treated during  interrogation,  which
         could lead to him facing charges of 'collaboration' in  a  military
         court.  Under the second scenario, based on  the  facts  for  which
         there  is  corroborating  evidence,  his  risk  of  detention   and
         interrogation by the Internal Security would be quite similar, with
         the same potential outcome of being charged with 'collaboration' in
         a military court.  He would also still face a risk of abduction and
         torture  by  Palestinian  armed  groups,   which   would   escalate
         significantly during periods of active hostilities."

17.  The expert report states that Al-Qassam Brigades  have  been  known  to
    abduct, illegally detain and in some cases torture and kill individuals
    during periods of relative calm when major hostilities with Israel  are
    not taking place,  although  these  cases  are  rarer  and  less  well-
    documented than those occurring during previous wars,  but  apart  from
    the risks from Al-Qassam Brigades he would also face, she  believed,  a
    very serious risk of being detained and interrogated by Hamas' Internal
    Security.  The threats and accusations he reports receiving during  his
    previous interrogations by the Internal Security,  the  phone  call  he
    reports receiving after his return from the West Bank in June, 2015  in
    which he was threatened by someone claiming to  be  from  the  Internal
    Security, his failure to report to the Internal  Security  subsequently
    as the caller requested, and the summons he reports  was  delivered  to
    his brother while he was in the UK, all indicate persistent interest in
    him from Internal Security.

18.  The judge noted the provisions of paragraph  339K  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and the fact that the only incident to which the appellant  could
    refer was his detention in 2008 (relating to his walking in public with
    a female friend) which, while unpleasant and causing anxiety, could not
    be regarded as serious harm  or  persecution.   Further,  the  incident
    occurred ten years ago and has not been repeated since then.   I  agree
    that the absence of past persecution and the lack  of  mistreatment  of
    the appellant's family members is not determinative of the real risk of
    serious harm this appellant may face on his return.  The risk  is  very
    clearly identified by the expert's evidence and I  concluded  therefore
    that the judge  was  wrong  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  humanitarian
    protection claim.  I set aside that part of the  judge's  decision  and
    substitute my decision that  the  appellant's  humanitarian  appeal  is
    allowed.



Summary

19.   I find that the judge was correct to  find  that  the  appellant  does
    fall within the provision of Article 1D of the  Refugee  Convention  in
    that he is presently receiving protection from UNRWA  as  evidenced  by
    the certificate of June, 2018.   He  is  therefore  excluded  from  the
    protection of the Refugee Convention and I find  that  Judge  Henderson
    did not err in so finding.  However, I believe that the judge  did  err
    in dismissing the appellant's humanitarian  protection  claim.   I  set
    aside that part of the judge's decision.  For the reasons I have  given
    I have concluded that the appellant would be at risk of serious harm on
    return to Palestine and I allow his humanitarian protection claim.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable for the  following  reason.
On the evidence the appellant was entitled  to  the  grant  of  humanitarian
protection and leave to remain as a result.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

Dated 07 March 2019
