
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09649/2019 (P)
                                                           PA/09648/2019 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 June 2020                      |On 2 July 2020                       |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                     AK
                                     AS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDERS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                    -and-
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellants are nationals of Afghanistan. On 14 June  2019  the  1st
    Appellant made a fresh claim for asylum on the  basis  that  he  feared
    persecution as a gay man in Afghanistan.  Meanwhile, the 2nd  Appellant
    had made a fresh claim on the same basis on  12  June  2019.   Both  of
    their applications were refused and they appealed.  When  they  did  so
    they asked for their appeals to be heard  together.  The  appeals  came
    before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Richardson,  who  dismissed  their
    appeals in decisions, promulgated on 19 December 2020  and  30  January
    2020.

2.   They appealed against these decisions and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blum
    granted them permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  6  March
    2020. He found that it was  arguable  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Richardson had failed to give adequate reasons for giving little weight
    to their evidence about their relationship. He also found that  it  was
    arguable that he had failed to have regard to material evidence; namely
    the chat transcript and the emails from "meetup"

3.   An error of law hearing for both Appellants had been  set  down  for  4
    May 2020 but was vacated in the light of the COVID 19 Pandemic.  On  21
    April 2020 Upper Tribunal Judge Gill gave directions about  the  future
    conduct of the error  of  law  proceedings  in  the  light  of  current
    restrictions. She also said that she was minded to find that the  error
    of law hearing could proceed on the papers.

4.   The Appellants' solicitors replied on 5 May  2020,  stating  that  they
    relied on their  previous  grounds  of  appeal  and  providing  contact
    details for their counsel. The Respondent submitted  separate  skeleton
    arguments for each appellant on  11  May  2020.  In  both  appeals  the
    Respondent asked for an oral hearing but gave no specific  reasons  for
    doing so and I find that an oral  hearing  is  not  necessary  in  this
    particular case to ensure that the interests of justice are  upheld.  I
    find that I can apply the powers contained in rules 2  and  34  of  The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and make by decision  on
    the papers in the light of the papers before me.

5.   As these are linked appeals relying on the same  evidence  and  as  the
    decisions made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Richardson contain the same
    references to the facts and law, I have combined  my  decision  and  it
    relates to the appeals made by both appellants and this  error  of  law
    decision applies equally to them both.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

6.   In both  of  these  appeals,  the  Respondent  had  accepted  that  the
    Appellants had made fresh claims for asylum based on the fact that they
    feared persecution as gay men and that they relied on material that had
    not previously been before the First-tier Tribunal when  their  earlier
    appeals were dismissed. The fact that the credibility  of  their  early
    accounts had not been accepted did not mean that the evidence on  which
    they relied in their fresh claims did not have to  be  considered  with
    anxious scrutiny and in the light of the relevant objective and country
    evidence.

7.   Even reading the decisions as a whole, it is not possible to  ascertain
    what view First-tier Tribunal Judge Richardson took of the chat extract
    between the two Appellants. The  judge  also  failed  to  consider  the
    significance of the Appellants being on the meet-up  site.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge also failed to take into account the fact that  many  of
    the photographs showed the Appellants at a public event and not  merely
    with each other.  In addition, two of the three  original  photographs,
    which were retained on file, had been taken by another  person  of  the
    Appellants in the company of other people. They  were  not  photographs
    taken by the Appellants of each other, as asserted in paragraph  36  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Richardson's decision.

8.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Richardson also gave considerable  weight  to
    the delay on the part of  the  Appellants  before  making  their  fresh
    claims. When doing so he failed to take into account  the  contents  of
    the  Country  and  Policy  &  Information  Note   Afghanistan:   sexual
    orientation and gender identity Version 2.0 January 2017 and the impact
    that growing up in Afghanistan may have had on their fears of revealing
    their sexuality.

9.   For  all  of  these  reasons,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Richardon's
    decisions contained material errors of law.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellants' appeals are allowed.

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Richardson's decisions are set aside.

(3)  The appeals are remitted  to  be  listed  together  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Richardson, Povey or Coutts.


         Nadine Finch
Signed   Date 23 June 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
