
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09235/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2018 and 9 May 2019             |On 23 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer (4
December 2018)
     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer (7 May 2019)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Gilbert, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

An order has been made under Rule 14(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead to the appellant being identified. Failure  to  comply
with this order could lead to a contempt of court.


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing an appeal by the applicant on human rights
    grounds against the decision of 11 July 2018 refusing  his  application
    for international protection.  In this decision I  will  refer  to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, the  applicant  as
    the appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent

Background.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on  12  February  1976.   He
    arrived in the UK as long ago as  15  December  1999  when  he  claimed
    asylum.  His application was refused in  October  2002  and  an  appeal
    against that decision dismissed on 28  January  2004.   In  April  2009
    further submissions were lodged, which were refused in  December  2013.
    Further submissions were again  made  in  August  2017  and  they  were
    refused in January 2018. In May 2018 they were  reconsidered  but  they
    were again rejected in July 2018.

3.   The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  relied  in
    particular  on  medical  evidence  in  the  report  of   a   consultant
    psychiatrist, Dr Battersby, and on the country expert  report  prepared
    by Alison Pargeter.  It was argued on  his  behalf  that,  whilst  most
    article 3 claims on health grounds failed, the appellant  was  entitled
    to succeed in the light of the ECtHR decision in Paposhvili  v  Belgium
    (41738/2010) [2017] Imm AR 867 as interpreted by the Court of Appeal in
    AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of  State  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  64,  which  had
    widened the scope of article 3 and would also impact on a  claim  under
    article 8.  It was further argued that  the  appellant  could,  in  any
    event, meet the provisions of para 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules as  there
    would be very significant obstacles to his reintegration into  Algeria.



4.   The judge found that the medical report and country  report  were  well
    prepared and authoritative and accepted  their  conclusions  [46].   He
    found that the appellant suffered from grand mal epilepsy and from long
    term mental health  problems.   If  he  did  not  take  the  prescribed
    medication for epilepsy, he was prone to grand mal fits  rendering  him
    instantly unconscious such that he would fall from a standing  position
    and this had had severe consequences for him in the past.  He had  been
    medicated for years on clonazepam, a high dose of benzodiazepine, which
    was highly addictive.  Were the appellant simply to  cease  taking  it,
    the withdrawal effect might lead to his death.

5.   He accepted that the appellant had made  several  attempts  at  suicide
    through drug overdoses and without his drugs  his  stress  level  would
    rise and, the greater the stress level and  the  greater  the  lack  of
    treatment and medication, the greater the risk of him making a  suicide
    attempt that came to fruition.  The judge accepted  that  there  was  a
    health system in Algeria but found that it  was  not  such  that  there
    could be any confidence that the appellant would receive  treatment  or
    medication and, accordingly, there was a great risk of  harm  or  death
    from suicide, from falling in a seizure,  or  from  withdrawal  of  his
    clonazepam.

6.   The judge adopted the analysis in Mr Gilbert's skeleton argument of  AM
    (Zimbabwe) and found that the appellant, therefore, fell within article
    3 [53].  The judge added in  [54]  that  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration into life in Algeria, including societal
    discrimination, lack of support, connection and illiteracy  but  mainly
    his need for a care plan and medication and  so  he  fell  within  para
    276ADE(1)(vi).  The judge went on to consider article  8  finding  that
    the contrast between the private  life  he  had  in  the  UK  with  his
    medication and what was very likely to be the  case  in  Algeria  would
    mean that removal would be a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
    article 8 private life.  Accordingly, the appeal was allowed  on  human
    rights grounds under articles 3 and 8, whereas the  claims  for  asylum
    and humanitarian protection were dismissed.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions.

7.   In the grounds of appeal, it is argued that the judge erred in  law  by
    failing to apply correctly the guidance set out in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  and
    the threshold outlined in N v  Secretary  of  State  [2005]  UK  HL  31
    (endorsed by the Grand  Chamber  ECtHR  at  (2008)  47  EHRR  39).  The
    appellant's medical conditions, although  serious,  did  not  meet  the
    level of exceptionality outlined in N and he had  failed  to  establish
    that there would be such a serious and rapid decline in his  health  or
    intense suffering on return to Algeria sufficient to engage  that  high
    threshold.  It is further argued that the judge erred by  allowing  the
    appeal on article 8 grounds largely, if not solely, on the basis of his
    medical condition, so failing to take account of the  judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in GS (India) v Secretary of State [2015] EWCA Civ  40.



8.   In his submissions, Mr Whitwell adopted his grounds, arguing  that  the
    judge had failed to follow the approach set out in N.   The  cumulative
    factors identified by the judge of a risk of suicide, having a  seizure
    and falling, and not being able  to  receive  the  same  medication  in
    Algeria did not meet that high threshold to show a breach of article 3.
     So far as article 8 and para 276ADE(1)(vi) were concerned,  the  judge
    had failed to indicate what aspect of private life in addition  to  the
    appellant's medical condition was engaged.

9.   Mr Gilbert accepted that he would have to concede  that  the  appellant
    could not meet the requirements of N, although it  was  his  submission
    that he could meet those in Paposhvili.  He did not seek to resist  the
    decision being set aside.  He submitted that there were further matters
    which he would wish to raise in support of article 3 and, in the  light
    of the age of the medical reports, there was further  medical  evidence
    which he wished to produce.  He understood that the appellant had  seen
    a neurologist on 1 October 2018.

The Error of Law.

10.  I am satisfied that Mr Gilbert's concession is rightly  made  and  that
    the judge has erred in law by failing to apply the high  threshold  set
    out in N.  I also find that when considering article 8,  he  failed  to
    take account the judgment in GS  (India)  and  also  erred  in  law  by
    failing to give adequate reasons for his  finding  that  the  appellant
    could meet the requirements of para 276ADE(1)(vi).   These  errors  are
    such  that  the  decision  must  be  set  aside  and   re-made.    Both
    representatives accepted that the better course would be for the appeal
    to remain in the Upper Tribunal.


11.  In accordance with directions made at the conclusion of  the  error  of
    law hearing,  the  appellant  has  filed  further  evidence  about  the
    appellant's medical condition, a medical report  dated  27  March  2019
    with amendments of 25 April 2019 by Dr William  Durward,  a  consultant
    neurologist.  A letter dated 2 May 2019 from the appellant's solicitors
    indicated that Dr Durward would be attending the hearing on 9 May  2019
    to give evidence as an expert witness.   However,  permission  has  not
    been given for the calling of oral evidence.

12.   Mr  Gilbert  explained  that  his  instructing  solicitors   had   had
    difficulties in getting everything done in time and  sought  permission
    to call oral evidence in the light  of  the  issues  raised  about  the
    appellant's medical condition and treatment.  Mr Tufan  indicated  that
    he would not object to Dr Durward giving oral  evidence  and  confirmed
    that he did not seek an adjournment to consider  the  further  evidence
    and was in a position to proceed.


The evidence of Dr Durward.


13.  Dr Durward adopted his report as amended.  It was his opinion that  the
    appellant's epilepsy was not  being  managed  optimally  and  for  this
    reason he should not be returned to  Algeria  where  he  considered  it
    highly improbable that he would receive effective care  (diagnosis  and
    treatment) of his epilepsy and psychiatric issues.  His report confirms
    that the appellant has had epilepsy for perhaps 10 years  or  more  and
    reports having one to three seizures a week.  The history he  gave  was
    highly suggestive of a  type  of  epilepsy,  designated  temporal  lobe
    epilepsy (partial complex seizures).

14.  Dr Durward says that the appellant has complied poorly with  prescribed
    medication, he has been taking levetiracetam,  an  anticonvulsant  that
    has not controlled epilepsy satisfactorily  and  clonazepam,  a  habit-
    forming drug which, if withdrawn, should be done so  very  slowly.   In
    addition to epilepsy the appellant has significant psychiatric problems
    which include depression, anxiety and post-traumatic  stress  disorder.
    He comments that the appellant is said to  have  attempted  suicide  on
    more than one occasion and the risk of future attempts  at  suicide  is
    considered high.


15.  It is his  view  that  the  prognosis  is  poor  unless  the  appellant
    receives appropriate treatment for both epilepsy and psychiatric issues
    and his prognosis is better in the UK than in  Algeria.   He  considers
    that the appellant is fit to give instructions  to  his  solicitor  and
    need not be treated as a vulnerable witness.  He gives his views as  to
    how his present treatment could be modified and repeats that  treatment
    of epilepsy must not be  withdrawn  abruptly.   He  predicts  that  the
    appellant's mental health will deteriorate if he is returned to Algeria
    but concedes that this comment is not within his specialist  field  but
    made on a common sense basis as a  trained  medical  practitioner.   He
    emphasised the need for stability with regard to competent medical care
    over an extended period.  At interview he did not detect any  intention
    by the appellant to attempt suicide or self-harm but notes that he  has
    attempted suicide and says that a further attempt to do so could  arise
    very quickly.  He has not determined a history of suicidal self-harming
    thoughts as that is the  business  of  a  psychiatrist  rather  than  a
    neurologist.


16.  In his oral evidence he confirmed that if  the  appellant's  medication
    was withdrawn abruptly, it would carry a risk  of  fatal  consequences.
    The reasons for prescribing his present medication were  not  clear  to
    him.  If clonazepam was withdrawn gradually, there would  be  no  added
    risk to the current risks from  epilepsy.   But  if  it  was  withdrawn
    suddenly, there would be a risk  of  seizures.   A  gradual  withdrawal
    would be the correct decision.  He could not offer a precise prediction
    of the effect of a sudden withdrawal, but the symptoms generally became
    clear after 24 hours.

17.  In cross-examination, he said that clonazepam was  prescribed  to  damp
    down anxiety and reduce seizures.  Normally treatment  in  an  epilepsy
    case was initiated by a specialist and there would then  be  a  review.
    In general, GPs were not confident  about  dealing  with  epilepsy  and
    would let a consultant prescribe policy.  He had read Alison Pargeter's
    report and he thought that what she said was  very  sensible.   He  had
    worked in North Africa in Libya and had also  been  in  Morocco.   When
    asked about the availability of treatment in Algeria, he simply replied
    that he had had Algerian patients who seemed happy to come  to  the  UK
    for treatment.  He was asked about whether the appellant had  PTSD  but
    commented that this was more in the province of  psychiatry.   He  said
    that the appellant had psychological problems whatever label they  were
    given.  In his view, the appellant was fit enough to go to hospital  in
    Algeria and the issue of treatment there came down to the  quality  and
    availability of resources.


Further submissions.

18.  Mr Tufan submitted that the medical evidence provided did  not  support
    the claim that the appellant reached  the  article  3  threshold.   The
    report from Dr Battersby was now over three years old and was equivocal
    in the diagnosis of PTSD, saying that the appellant would not meet  the
    criteria for such a diagnosis, but he did  describe  some  symptoms  of
    PTSD. His verbal and non-verbal behaviour were highly  consistent  with
    an individual who was heavily intoxicated  with  benzodiazepines.   The
    doctor also considered the risk of suicide in the UK on return but said
    that given the evidence for predictors of completed suicide,  his  risk
    was moderately low in the UK and  moderate  if  returned.   Whilst  the
    report from Alison Pargeter set out concerns about the availability  of
    adequate treatment in Algeria, it did not suggest that no treatment was
    available or that the appellant would not be able to access it.


19.  He submitted that the facts did  not  meet  the  test  in  N  and  that
    following the ECtHR decision in Paposhvili, the Court of Appeal  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) had held that the stringency of the N  test  had  only  been
    modified to a very limited extent.  The appellant would be able to seek
    treatment in Algeria and the medical evidence  was  not  sufficient  to
    support a claim under article 3 or article 8.


20.  Mr Gilbert submitted that  when  assessing  the  appeal,  a  number  of
    factors had to be considered: the appellant's epilepsy,  his  addiction
    to clonazepam, his mental illness and the risk of suicide.   Clonazepam
    was not commonly used for epilepsy and it was unclear why it  had  been
    prescribed.  In  any  event,  withdrawal  needed  to  be  gradual.   He
    submitted that there would be  a  significant  risk  of  the  appellant
    experiencing a fatal attack of epilepsy if this drug was withdrawn.


21.  He referred to  the  availability  of  treatment  in  Algeria  and  the
    evidence of long delays, short treatment periods and  high  costs.   He
    argued that medical care was not available in any meaningful  sense  in
    Algeria.  There was a large shortfall in available  accommodation.   He
    submitted that the appellant's  circumstances  were  very  exceptional.
    The position had been aggravated by the fact  that  he  had  been  mis-
    prescribed and would have to be weaned off his present medication.   To
    this extent, so he argued, there was an obligation on the UK to  ensure
    that the appellant received the proper treatment to obviate the  likely
    harm arising from removal.  Further, in substance, there was a complete
    absence of available treatment in Algeria.


22.  So far as the risk of suicide was  concerned,  there  was  evidence  of
    suicide attempts and, in particular,  recent  attempts  in  the  period
    December 2018 to April 2019 as set  out  the  medical  notes  produced.
    When the risk was assessed  in  the  context  of  the  appellant  being
    returned to Algeria which he associated with being in fear, there would
    be a real risk of a completed suicide.  He submitted that the appellant
    could bring himself within article 8.  He had been in the UK for a long
    period of time and there would be no family members in Algeria he could
    turn to  or  rely  on.   He  was  illiterate  and  had  no  history  of
    employment.  He argued that article 8 was engaged and when all relevant
    factors were taken into account, it would be disproportionate  for  him
    to be returned and, in any event, there would be significant  obstacles
    to  his  integration  bringing  him  within  the  provisions  of   para
    276ADE(1)(vi).


Assessment of the issues.


23.  The appellant firstly  seeks  to  argue  that  he  can  meet  the  high
    threshold within article 3.  In order to do so he must show that he can
    meet the very high threshold test in N of effectively a "deathbed" case
    of someone facing imminent death on return. As Lord Hope said  at  [50]
    of N, for the circumstances to be very exceptional it would need to  be
    shown that  the  appellant's  medical  condition  had  reached  such  a
    critical stage that there were compelling humanitarian grounds for  not
    removing him to a place which lacked the medical  and  social  services
    needed to prevent acute suffering when he was dying.  In Paposhvili the
    threshold has been extended to cases  where  substantial  grounds  have
    been shown for believing that an applicant, although  not  at  imminent
    risk of dying, would face a real risk of being exposed  to  a  serious,
    rapid and irreversible decline in his  state  of  health  resulting  in
    intense suffering or to a significant reduction in life  expectancy  on
    account of the  absence  of  appropriate  treatment  in  the  receiving
    country or lack of access to such treatment: per Sales LJ at [28] of AM
    (Zimbabwe).

24.  In AM (Zimbabwe) at [39] Sales LJ held that Paposhvili did  not  effect
    any major change in what had been authoritatively laid down in N in the
    UK.  The Court  noted  that  it  was  significant  that,  even  on  the
    exceptional facts of the Paposhvili case where the  applicant  faced  a
    likelihood of death within six months if removed to Georgia, the  Grand
    Chamber did not feel able to say that it was clear that a violation  of
    article 3 would have occurred but the applicant  had  simply  raised  a
    sufficiently credible article 3 case that gave  rise  to  a  procedural
    obligation on the Belgian authorities to examine  his  case  with  care
    with reference to all the available evidence.

25.  The approach in AM (Zimbabwe)  has  been  confirmed  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in SL (Saint Lucia) [2018] EWCA Civ 1894 where  the  Court  also
    considered whether Paposhvili had had any impact  on  the  approach  to
    article 8 claims.  The Court confirmed the guidance  in  GS  India  and
    said that article 3 and article 8 claims had a different focus and were
    based upon entirely different criteria. Article 8  was  not  article  3
    with merely a lower threshold and did not provide some sort  of  safety
    net where a medical case failed to  satisfy  the  article  3  criteria.
    However, if article 8 was otherwise engaged, i.e.  not  simply  in  the
    light of a medical condition, then the fact that a person was receiving
    treatment in the UK which was not available in the  country  of  return
    might be a  factor  in  the  proportionality  balancing  exercise:  per
    Hickinbottom LJ at [27].


26.  So far as assessing whether a risk of suicide gives  rise  to  a  claim
    under article 3, the approach is set out by the Court of  Appeal  in  J
    [2005] EWCA Civ 629 as subsequently amended by the Court of Appeal in Y
    and Z (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 362.  An assessment has to be made of
    the severity of the  treatment  which  an  applicant  would  suffer  if
    removed;  a causal link must be shown  to  exist  between  the  act  or
    threatened act of removal  and  the  inhuman  treatment  relied  on  as
    violating his article 3 rights; in the context of a  foreign  case  the
    article 3 threshold is  particularly  high  simply  because  it  was  a
    foreign case; article 3 could in principle succeed in a  suicide  case;
    in deciding whether there is a real risk of a breach of article  3  the
    question of importance is whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment
    in the receiving state upon which the risk of suicide  is  said  to  be
    based is objectively well-founded and whether the removal or  receiving
    state has effective mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide.

27.   These  guidelines  must  be  read  in  the  context  of  the   further
    jurisprudence in Y and Z (Sri Lanka) that in cases where  there  is  no
    objective foundation  for  the  fear,  an  independent  basis  must  be
    established if weight is to be given to it.

28.  It is clear that the appellant suffers from epilepsy.  Dr  Durward  has
    concerns about his treatment and whether he  has  been  prescribed  the
    correct drugs.  He was cautious in the way he expressed these  concerns
    and indicated that he was not aware of the reasons why  clonazepam  was
    prescribed.  Nonetheless, it was his advice that it should be withdrawn
    but he made it clear that this could be done  without  additional  risk
    provided it was withdrawn gradually and not suddenly stopped. But there
    is no reason to believe that if the  appellant  receives  treatment  in
    Algeria, any withdrawal or change of medication will  not  be  properly
    managed.

29.  It is also clear from the medical evidence produced that the  appellant
    suffers from a number of psychological issues.   Dr  Battersby  in  her
    report of February 2016 said at [3] that, although he did display  some
    symptoms, due to his degree of intoxication on examination, she was not
    able to observe any objective symptoms that were clearly characteristic
    of PTSD  but  his  intoxication  may  have  masked  them,  noting  that
    clonazepam was often sought out by substance users. She  described  the
    appellant as appearing to use high doses of benzodiazepines as a coping
    strategy.


30.   The  report  from  Alison  Pargeter   confirms   the   problems   with
    availability of medicines in Algeria, the cost, the problems caused  by
    corruption and the lack of facilities.  She also refers to  the  stigma
    associated with mental illness and to hospitals often being regarded as
    places of last resort.   She  dealt  specifically  with  the  situation
    facing the appellant on  return  at  4.i-vii  of  her  report  and  her
    conclusion is that if he were to  be  returned  to  Algeria,  he  would
    struggle to receive the proper standard of treatment and care that  his
    conditions require.

31.  Looking at the evidence as  a  whole,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant can meet the high threshold of article 3 as  set  out  in  N.
    There is no imminent risk of death or of imminent suffering leading  to
    death arising from a lack of treatment. There is treatment available in
    Algeria although not to the same standard as in the UK and he  is  able
    to seek out treatment in Algeria just as he has done in the UK.

32.   It  was  argued  on  his  behalf  that  there  were  two   exceptional
    circumstances.  Firstly, the  fact  that  he  has  been  mis-prescribed
    medication in this country and that this raised a  positive  obligation
    on the UK.  Mr Gilbert referred to [93] of Lord Brown's  opinion  in  N
    and the issue of whether article 3 gave rise to a negative or  positive
    obligation.  Lord Brown identified the issue as whether the  State  was
    under a positive obligation to continue treatment on a long-term  basis
    but then referred to the statement in D v UK  (1997)  24  EHRR  425  as
    having particular application, that those subject to removal could  not
    in principle claim any  entitlement  to  remain  to  continue  medical,
    social or other forms of assistance provided in  the  expelling  state.
    The fact that the  appellant  has  been  receiving  treatment  in  this
    country which may turn out to have been wrongly prescribed does not add
    to the obligations of the UK authorities when returning  the  appellant
    to Algeria in circumstances where  there  is  treatment  available  for
    epilepsy and his other medical issues, even if not  to  the  extent  or
    level of treatment in the UK.

33.  Secondly, it is argued that  the  problems  about  obtaining  treatment
    were such that it amounted to a complete absence of treatment, but this
    assertion is not made out on the facts.  The  evidence  is  clear  that
    treatment is  available.  I  am,  therefore,  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant's  circumstances  fall  within  those   envisaged   as   very
    exceptional  in  N.  The  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in   KH
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State [2009] EWCA Civ 1354 indicates  just
    how stringent this test is: see [29] - [34] of the judgment of Longmore
    LJ and in particular [31]-[33].

34.  It is submitted that the appellant comes within article 3 in the  light
    of the risk of  suicide.   There  is  evidence  in  the  report  of  Dr
    Battersby that  the  appellant  had  made  several  impulsive  overdose
    attempts in the previous  eight  months,  the  report  being  dated  20
    February 2016. She noted that he had  accepted  support  and  found  it
    beneficial. Dr Battersby's opinion was that the  risk  of  suicide  was
    moderately low in the UK and  moderate  on  return.   There  have  been
    recent suicide attempts but there is also evidence in the large  bundle
    of medical notes which  includes  the  period  January  to  April  2019
    showing that the appellant has sought help and has received  treatment.
    Dr Durward's view was that the risk of further attempts at suicide  was
    high but he had not detected any such intention at  interview  although
    he added that a further attempt to do  so  could  arise  very  quickly.
    Taken as a whole, the evidence  does  not  satisfy  me  that  the  high
    threshold requirements set out in J are met.

35.  So far as article 8 is concerned, I accept that article  8  is  engaged
    on the basis of private  life  in  the  light  of  the  length  of  the
    appellant's residence in the UK.  However, his private  life  has  been
    established at a time when that residence has been  both  unlawful  and
    precarious and is, therefore, to be given little weight  in  accordance
    with s.117B(4) and (5).  The appellant's level of English  is  limited,
    and he is not able to support himself: (s.117B(2) and (3)).


36.  He suffers from epilepsy and a number of related psychiatric  problems.
     However, I am not satisfied that these are sufficiently compelling  to
    make his removal disproportionate to the legitimate aim of  maintaining
    immigration control.  Whilst there are problems about the adequacy  and
    availability of treatment for mental health conditions in  Algeria  and
    these must be taken into account when assessing  proportionality,  they
    do  not  outweigh  the  public  interest   in   maintaining   effective
    immigration control in the appellant's case.  To give them such  weight
    in the present case would in substance be to elevate  article  8  to  a
    safety net where the appellant's medical condition fails to satisfy the
    article 3 criteria.  Accordingly, removal would not be disproportionate
    to a legitimate aim.

37.  So far as para 276ADE(1)(vi) is concerned, for  the  reasons  given  in
    relation to the claims under article 3 and 8  the  appellant's  medical
    condition and the lesser standard of treatment in Algeria does not show
    that there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  in  re-establishing
    himself there. The concerns set out in Alison Pargeter's report must be
    read in the light of  the  country  background  evidence  about  mental
    health services in Algeria set out in the respondent's decision  letter
    at [83] - [99].  Treatment is available in  Algeria  and  there  is  no
    reason to believe that he would  be  denied  the  care  and  medication
    available.   The  other  factors  relied   on   such   as   illiteracy,
    discrimination and lack of family support are not such that he can show
    very significant obstacles in re-establishing himself there.

Decision.

38.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and  the  decision  has  been  set
    aside.  I remake the decision  by  dismissing  the  appeal  on  asylum,
    immigration and human rights grounds.

39.  The anonymity order made  on  4  January  2019  in  the  Error  of  Law
    decision remains in force until further order.





     Signed:      H J E Latter                        Date:  20 May 2019


     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter.
