
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09660/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 26 February 2018                |On 20 April 2018                         |
|                                   |                                         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                    [a i]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, Counsel, instructed by Vanguard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan who was born on [ ]  1986.   He
    entered the UK as a visitor in September 2012 but did  not  leave  when
    his  visa  expired  and  instead  overstayed.   In  July  2014  he  was
    encountered by Immigration Officers working in a  restaurant.   He  was
    served with  an  immigration  notice  and  was  released  on  reporting
    conditions but he failed to comply with those conditions and  in  March
    2015 he  absconded.   He  was  then  encountered  again  working  in  a
    restaurant in July 2017 at which point  on  16  July  2017  he  claimed
    asylum.  He was detained originally but  has  later  been  released  on
    bail.

 2. He was interviewed on 8 August 2017 (his screening interview)  when  he
    said that he would be at risk on return to Pakistan because he had been
    the General Secretary of a Sunni religious organisation and was at risk
    from Shia Muslims by reason of his  attempts  to  convert  people  from
    being Shia Muslims to becoming Sunni Muslims.  He gave a fuller account
    of his claim in his asylum interview which occurred some fourteen  days
    later on 22 August 2017.  He claims he was in fear of a  person  called
    Mr Shah who was a powerful man who had been involved in his arrest  and
    he claimed that he had lodged an FIR against  them.   He  also  claimed
    that the persons he feared had connections to the Government  and  some
    were MPs and members of National Provincial Assemblies.  This claim was
    refused by  the  respondent  on  14  September  2017.   The  respondent
    considered that his account in interview was unimpressive, to  say  the
    least, and inconsistent.   The  respondent  also  considered  that  the
    appellant's credibility was damaged by the inconsistencies  within  his
    account and also by the fact that his claim for asylum  was  made  very
    late.

 3. The appellant appealed against this decision on asylum and human rights
    grounds, claiming that he had established a private and family life  in
    the UK.

 4. This application came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup,  sitting
    at Harmondsworth on 31 October 2017, but  in  a  Decision  and  Reasons
    promulgated on 8 November 2017 Judge Widdup dismissed his appeal on all
    grounds.

 5. The appellant now appeals against this decision on what  are  now  very
    narrow grounds.  Permission was  given  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Nigel Osborne who stated as follows, when giving his reasons:

         "1.  The grounds seek permission to appeal a decision  and  reasons
             of First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup  who  in  a  decision  and
             reasons promulgated 8 November 2017 dismissed the  Appellant's
             appeal for protection.

         2.   The grounds assert that the judge materially erred in law  and
             in  deciding  to  refuse  to  adjourn  the  hearing  made   an
             irrational Decision.  The  judge  failed  to  give  sufficient
             reasons for refusing to adjourn at [59].  At  [72]  the  judge
             failed to give  sufficient  reasons/make  proper  findings  on
             whether the documents had been properly  obtained.  The  judge
             failed to consider the appeal under the Immigration  (European
             Economic Area) Regulations 2016 despite  an  EEA  relationship
             under Section 120 response being raised.

         3.   In an otherwise careful and  appropriately  detailed  decision
             and reasons it is nonetheless arguable that the  judge  should
             have granted the requested adjournment.  The Tribunal and  the
             Respondent  had  been  put  on  notice  of   the   Appellant's
             relationship with an EEA national who was unable to attend the
             hearing.  In that respect it is arguable  that  the  Appellant
             was unable to present his appeal to its best effect.

         ..."

 6. Before  this  Tribunal  Mr  Gajjar  relied  only  on  the  two  grounds
    identified in Judge Osborne's reasons, that being first that the  judge
    ought to have adjourned the hearing in order to allow the appellant  to
    argue the EEA point, and secondly, that the judge  ought  not  to  have
    rejected the letter from the person said to be the appellant's advocate
    in Pakistan (with reference to paragraphs 70 and 72 of  the  decision),
    or at the very least that his reasons for doing  so  were  inadequately
    reasoned.

 7. I agree entirely with Judge Osborne that Judge Widdup's decision  is  a
    careful and detailed one  and  indeed  in  my  judgement  it  is  quite
    apparent from that decision why it was that he refused the  adjournment
    and also why it was that he gave no weight to the letter sent which was
    said to be that of his advocate.  While it is true that at paragraph 59
    when stating that "I was not prepared to adjourn and  I  was  satisfied
    that the hearing could proceed without injustice to the Appellant", the
    judge does not set out his reasons for refusing to adjourn, nonetheless
    within the judgment itself it is clear why the judge  took  that  view.
    The basis of the application for an adjournment (which had been refused
    by another judge prior to the hearing) was that the appellant  had  for
    the last four years been in a relationship with an EEA national but  at
    the very last moment her mother had died and that she had had to travel
    to Portugal (according to the appellant) in  order  to  deal  with  the
    aftermath of her death.  Accordingly it would be unfair for the hearing
    to go ahead without the lady who was potentially a key witness.  As the
    judge observed in his decision, this lady had not been mentioned either
    in his screening interview or indeed in his asylum interview.  Although
    an explanation was advanced for that, the judge  did  not  accept  that
    explanation, which was a matter for him.   Although  in  terms  of  her
    absence, the  judge  had  been  provided  with  a  copy  of  the  death
    certificate and a copy of travel documents, these  suggested  that  she
    had gone to Luanda, which is in Angola, in Africa.  The  appellant,  on
    the other hand, had repeatedly asserted that she was in  Portugal.   An
    explanation was given within the grounds, or at  any  rate  within  the
    submissions advanced in support of the grounds, that Angola had a prior
    colonial relationship  with  Portugal  (until  1974  or  1975)  but  at
    paragraph 91, Judge Widdup specifically rejected  this  explanation  as
    follows:

         "91. It could be said that the Appellant's  knowledge  of  Portugal
             and Angola is very limited but his evidence  was  that  Ms  De
             Sousa is in Portugal and not in Africa.  While I  accept  that
             his knowledge of  geography  may  be  limited,  it  is  wholly
             incredible that after a relationship of four  years  he  would
             not have learnt that his partner's mother lived and then  died
             in Africa and that this was where his partner had  gone.   The
             lack of knowledge  of  this  on  the  part  of  the  Appellant
             suggests that he knows very little about Ms De  Sousa  or  her
             current whereabouts and that leads  me  to  have  considerable
             doubts about the nature of their relationship."

 8. At paragraph 92, the judge also notes that in his witness statement the
    appellant did not even give the correct name of  his  alleged  partner.
    He said that her name was "Despuse" and he did not name her children or
    give their ages.

 9. There are further matters which the judge referred to which he had been
    entitled to take into account when deciding  that  there  would  be  no
    unfairness in proceeding with the trial in the absence of this witness.
     It was a bail condition of the appellant that he had to live in  Luton
    which, on the face of it, was inconsistent with his  evidence  that  he
    cared for his partner's children in Harrow.  His explanation  was  that
    he travelled from Luton to Harrow in order to take  these  children  to
    school.  However, as the judge notes at paragraph 94, "I note also that
    he made  no  mention  in  his  witness  statement  of  any  child  care
    responsibilities he is undertaking while Ms De Sousa is  away".   Also,
    the judge was entitled to take account of the fact that  it  was  quite
    extraordinary that this appellant, who apparently drove from  Luton  to
    Harrow every day in order to take his partner's children to school  did
    not seem to know either their names or their  ages.   Furthermore,  the
    judge was also entitled to take account as he did of the facts that the
    appellant had "produced no documentary evidence  of  that  relationship
    whatsoever" (at para 87)  and  also  that  he  failed  to  provide  any
    evidence from the school of the parental role that  he  now  claims  to
    have had.  The judge also noted that although the appellant had claimed
    that he  had  mobile  phone  photos  of  his  alleged  partner  he  had
    overlooked the need to bring them to the hearing because (he said) they
    were on another mobile phone which he had left at home.

10. Further, there was no  witness  statement  produced  from  the  alleged
    partner herself, and, as already noted, although he claims that she was
    Portuguese, the passport, of which a photocopy was produced, shows that
    she had been born in Angola.

11. There were yet further reasons referred to by the judge  for  rejecting
    the appellant's latest claim, when considering the claimed relationship
    between the appellant and his alleged partner in  the  context  of  the
    impact this would have on his Article 8  right  to  remain,  the  judge
    acknowledging that if he was entitled to be  in  this  country  as  the
    partner of an EEA national exercising  treaty  rights,  this  would  be
    relevant when considering whether it would be proportionate  to  remove
    him.  In particular, the judge had in mind (at paragraph 26) that  when
    in his asylum interview at question 132  and  133  he  had  been  asked
    whether he had a partner or any children, he had  said  "no",  and  the
    appellant's explanation that "he thought he was  being  asked  about  a
    partner or children in Pakistan" and that "he had not mentioned  either
    his partner or her children in either interview for that reason".   The
    judge considered but rejected that explanation, as he was  entitled  to
    do.

12. At paragraph 33 it was noted that the appellant had been asked  why  he
    had stopped reporting after his arrest, for which his  explanation  was
    that "he had kidney stones and his doctor advised him to rest at  home"
    and that he had told his solicitors this.  Although he claimed to  have
    had evidence of his kidney problems before, rather unfortunately he  no
    longer had that evidence.  Unsurprisingly, "he was asked why, if he was
    well enough to work in 2017, he had not been well enough to report", to
    which his reply was that "he said he had to work to fill  his  stomach"
    and that "his pain had eased and a friend said he could work for  him".
    When the question was repeated, "he said he did not know.   He  thought
    his solicitor would deal with it".  Again,  unsurprisingly,  the  judge
    was unimpressed with this answer also.  If he was able to work, clearly
    he would have been able to report to the police.

13. There is one other reason which is also referred to within the decision
    as  to  why  the  judge  could  properly  consider  that  the   alleged
    relationship was not based in reality, which is set out at paragraph 41
    of the decision as follows:

         "41. I asked if his partner speaks Urdu.  He said that she can only
             give a greeting.  When asked how they communicate he said  she
             speaks a little English and so did he".

14. Accordingly, so far as the alleged relationship is concerned,  we  have
    only the appellant's word for this, and this is the word  of  a  person
    concerning whom substantive adverse credibility findings have  properly
    been made.  Although  (inconsistently  with  his  bail  conditions)  he
    claims to have taken her children to school, there is no evidence  from
    the school regarding this, and he seemingly knows neither  their  names
    nor their ages.  The couple have  apparently  been  together  for  four
    years, but when asked previously  whether  he  had  a  partner  or  any
    children he had replied "no".  They do not  speak  the  same  language.
    Most remarkably of all, he  does  not  even  know  what  continent  his
    partner is from.  There is further no witness statement from her.

15. In these circumstances, the judge was entirely  justified  in  refusing
    him an adjournment on the basis that it was not  in  the  interests  of
    justice  to  further  adjourn  the  case,  therefore   prolonging   the
    applicant's stay in this country when he has  no  arguable  basis  upon
    which he should be allowed to remain.

16. Regarding the second ground which is that the  judge  should  not  have
    attached little weight to the letter of the person claiming to  be  the
    appellant's advocate (at paragraph 70) it is fair to  say  that  during
    the course of his submissions, Mr  Gajjar  effectively  abandoned  this
    submission.  No original copy  of  the  letter  was  produced,  and  at
    paragraph 72, as in my judgement he was entitled, the judge  took  into
    account background evidence produced by the respondent  which  referred
    to the ease with which false documents could be  obtained  in  Pakistan
    and also to the high number of FIRs which had been found to be  totally
    baseless (at para 72).  I refer to the translation of this document (or
    what is said to be a translation) which  appears  at  page  50  of  the
    appellant's original bundle, which merely says as follows:

         "Mr [AI],

         I hope You will be in  good  position  you  have  appointed  me  as
         Counsel for your Cases, But your Family  is  not  living  in  Mandi
         Bahauddin, and not meet me.  There are full dangrous time  for  you
         in Pakistan.  Do not come back in Pakistan".

    This is then apparently signed by Mr Khani, said to be  "Advocate  High
    Court".  Even if genuine, this letter would be of no  real  assistance,
    and on the evidence which  was  before  the  Tribunal,  the  judge  was
    entitled to find that  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  was  completely
    hopeless.

17. I would mention one other matter as well which is this.   Even  if  the
    appellant was in a genuine relationship with Ms De Sousa, at  the  very
    least I would have expected him either to have  attended  this  hearing
    with her or at the very least to have made  an  application  to  adduce
    evidence from her once she had returned to the UK.  Standard directions
    were given in this appeal (and  the  appellant's  solicitors  would  be
    aware of these directions in any event) whereby it is provided that  if
    an error of law was found the Tribunal would then go on to consider the
    application without a further hearing if this  was  possible  and  that
    further evidence would only be entertained if an application  had  been
    made previously giving a reason why it had not been  possible  to  call
    that evidence earlier.  In these circumstances it was incumbent on  the
    appellant to adduce any evidence on which he now sought to rely, and so
    even if I had found that the failure to grant  an  adjournment  was  an
    error of law, there would still have been no basis upon which  I  could
    have found in the circumstances that that error was material, or had  I
    been remaking  the  decision  that  the  decision  should  now  be  any
    different.  But in any event, for the reasons I have already  given,  I
    do not consider that there was any error of law in the judge's decision
    to refuse an adjournment.  In the circumstances of this case, given all
    the evidence which the judge clearly took into account, it is  hard  to
    see how any judge could have allowed the appellant to put off yet again
    a decision that he had no right to remain in this country.

18. It follows that his appeal must again be dismissed, and I also find.

Decision

There being no error of law in  Judge  Widdup's  decision,  this  appeal  is
dismissed, and Judge Widdup's decision, dismissing the  appellant's  appeal,
is affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
    Date: 14 March 2018



