
                                        [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09145/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd April 2019                             |On 30th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                   mr A R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield instructed by York Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a  national  of  Sri  Lanka  appeals  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision by the Secretary of State  dated  7th  July
    2018 refusing his application for asylum and  humanitarian  protection.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 28th November 2018.  The Appellant now appeals  to  this
    Tribunal having been granted  permission  to  appeal  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Taylor on 7th March 2019.

 2. The Appellant claims to have arrived in the UK on 13th June  2016  when
    he was 15 years old and claimed asylum on  the  same  day.   He  claims
    asylum based upon his fear of returning to Sri  Lanka  because  of  his
    family's involvement with LTTE.  The Appellant has been diagnosed  with
    PTSD and depression.  There was a medical report from Dr Camilo  Zapata
    dated 8th November 2018 expressing the opinion that he did not have the
    mental capacity to give evidence and appear in court.  Accordingly  the
    hearing proceeded by way of submissions only.  The First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge dismissed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

 3. Four grounds are put forward to challenge the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  It is contended in the  first  ground  that  the  judge
    erred in his approach to the  appeal  with  reference  to  the  medical
    evidence.  It is contended in the second ground that the judge erred in
    his approach to credibility in apparently requiring  corroboration  and
    in a failure to apply the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.  2  2010
    Child, Vulnerable  Adult  and  Sensitive  Appellant  Guidance.   It  is
    contended in the third ground that the judge erred in his  approach  to
    the assessment of risk on return to Sri Lanka in  the  context  of  his
    mental health issues.  It is contended in the fourth  ground  that  the
    judge erred in his approach to Article 3 in relation  to  the  risk  of
    suicide.

 4. In my view the first three grounds are  interconnected  and  they  have
    been made out.

 5. It is contended in the first ground that the judge  did  not  give  any
    consideration to the Joint Presidential Guidance which  gives  guidance
    as to how to approach the evidence of  vulnerable  adults.   The  judge
    made no reference to the Joint Presidential Guidance.  This  in  itself
    would not be fatal if the judge had applied the guidance to  the  case.
    Mr Avery submitted that it was apparent that the judge had applied  the
    guidance at paragraph 46 and 53.  At paragraph 46 the judge referred to
    the fact that the Appellant was not clear about what work he was  doing
    for the LTTE and that he took account of the fact that the  Appellant's
    attention, concentration and  short  and  long  term  memory  were  all
    reduced.  At paragraph 53 the judge referred to inconsistencies in  the
    Appellant's evidence but said "even allowing for his  difficulties"  he
    did not find him to be a reliable witness.

 6. However Ms Benfield pointed out that the judge did  not  refer  to  the
    medical evidence until after making observations about  credibility  at
    paragraph 63.  The judge considered the medical evidence at  paragraphs
    63 to 69.  However the judge did refer to Dr Zapata's medical report at
    paragraph 32.

 7. In my view the judge's approach to the  medical  evidence  is  unclear.
    The medical evidence before the judge was that the  Appellant  suffered
    from PTSD and depression, was not fit to give evidence at the  hearing,
    that he had made two attempts at suicide and that he had been sectioned
    under the Mental Health Act 1983 on 12th October 2018.  It appears from
    the evidence in the Appellant's bundle that he may have been discharged
    from detention under mental health  provisions  on  2nd  November  2018
    (discharge liaison form of 2nd November 2018), only a week  before  the
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal on 9th November 2018.   Further,  at
    the time of his entry  to  the  UK  and  when  he  was  interviewed  in
    connection with his asylum claim the Appellant was a minor  who  turned
    18 in July 2018.

 8. In terms of consideration of the appeal as stated above the judge  made
    no reference to the Joint Presidential  Guidance.   Further  the  judge
    made limited reference to the Appellant's mental health in the  context
    of the appeal itself.  So at paragraph 7 the judge  said  that  he  had
    taken no live evidence at the  hearing  and  the  matter  proceeded  on
    submissions only.  The judge made no reference there to the reasons why
    no oral evidence had  been  given.   Apart  from  a  reference  to  the
    skeleton argument at paragraph 6 the rest of the  section  setting  out
    the Appellant's case consists of the submissions made by the Presenting
    Officer from paragraphs 8 to 24.

 9. In the section entitled findings the judge said at the outset paragraph
    27 "my starting point was that the Appellant had to be well  enough  to
    give instructions".  The judge  went  on  to  discuss  the  Appellant's
    witness statement saying that he believed that  the  witness  statement
    had  been  prepared  for  the  Appellant  and  "presented  to  him  for
    signature".  The judge at paragraph 31 the judge expressed reservations
    about the second  witness  statement  produced  by  the  Appellant  and
    appears to have indicated reservations about what the Appellant told Dr
    Zapata at paragraph 32.  It is therefore unclear from paragraphs 27  to
    32 whether the judge considered  that,  as  he  was  not  fit  to  give
    evidence, the Appellant was also not fit to give  instructions.  It  is
    also not clear whether the judge considered that the instructions given
    in the witness statements were of any  weight.   At  paragraph  29  the
    judge said that he thought that some of the evidence  came  from  other
    parties and was not within the knowledge of the Appellant but  gave  no
    reasons for this finding.

10. The judge went on to analyse the Appellant's account in relation to Sri
    Lanka and the UK at paragraphs 34 to 62.  In this part of the  decision
    the judge made  a  number  of  adverse  comments  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's credibility.  He  took  into  account  that  there  was  no
    statement from the Appellant's mother, that the Appellant was vague  in
    relation to his uncle's role in the LTTE, that there was no documentary
    proof of his father's arrest  in  2016  and  pointed  to  a  number  of
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's account.

11. Whilst there is  no  prescriptive  order  in  which  the  judge  should
    consider the evidence the difficulty with the  approach  taken  by  the
    judge in this case is that the judge only  looked  at  the  psychiatric
    report at paragraph 63 having made a number of comments in relation  to
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's account (Mbanga v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 367).  The judge acknowledged that the Appellant had mental  health
    problems at paragraph 68 but in my view it is not adequately clear that
    the  judge  considered  the   specific   mental   health   difficulties
    experienced by the Appellant in his approach to the assessment  of  the
    Appellant's evidence about what happened in Sri Lanka.

12. In these circumstances I find that the first ground has been made  out.
    Grounds 2 and 3 are interlinked with the first ground.

13. In his submissions Mr Avery accepted that the judge had not  said  much
    about Article 3.  However he submitted that it had to be  read  in  the
    context of the overall findings and submitted that, although the  judge
    did make comments in relation to family support,  he  could  have  gone
    into more detail about the medical issue  but  in  his  submission  the
    findings were adequate.

14. In relation to Article 3 the  Appellant's  representative  submitted  a
    skeleton argument in the First-tier Tribunal.  That  skeleton  argument
    deals with Article 3 at paragraphs 40 to 47.   There  it  is  contended
    that removal of the Appellant would amount to a breach of Article 3  in
    this case.  Reliance is placed on the evidence that the  Appellant  was
    sectioned pursuant to the Mental Health Act, that the medical  evidence
    highlighted risk to the Appellant should he be questioned  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities and whether there is a risk of suicide  on  removal.
    The judge dealt with that at  paragraph  74  where  he  said  "for  the
    reasons set out above I did not find that the Appellant  had  made  out
    that he had a genuine case for  asylum  to  the  required  standard  of
    proof.  His Article 2 and 3 claims were linked to his asylum claim".  I
    find that this consideration of Article 3  is  insufficient  given  the
    evidence before the judge in this case.  The judge found  at  paragraph
    70 that there was no real risk of suicide in  this  case.   However  he
    failed to give reasons for this finding in light of the  evidence  that
    the Appellant had just been sectioned  in  connection  with  a  suicide
    attempt.  In these circumstances I find that the judge  has  not  dealt
    adequately with Article 3 on the  basis  of  the  evidence.   This  too
    amounts to an error of law.

15. For the reasons set out above I  find  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    approach to the asylum part of the appeal by failing to  give  adequate
    consideration to the medical evidence  in  the  context  of  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance.  The judge erred in his approach to Article 3 by
    failing to engage with the evidence and submissions in relation to this
    aspect of the appeal.

16. In these circumstances I set the decision aside  in  its  entirety.  In
    light of the Presidential Practice Statements the nature or  extent  of
    the judicial fact finding which is necessary for the  decision  in  the
    appeal to be re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective in rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, it is appropriate to remit the asylum appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside in its entirety.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 25th April 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is payable therefore there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 25th April 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

