
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09665/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2018                           |On 10 January 2019            |
|Decision given orally at hearing              |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE H MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    HTTN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Farrell, Peter G Farrell, Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a decision in an appeal brought by the  appellant  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which,  in  a  determination  that
    followed a hearing on 1 December 2017, but which  was  not  promulgated
    until 16 May 2018, dismissed the appellant's protection appeal.

 2. The challenge to the decision was based upon the failure of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to produce the determination within three months of
    the hearing.  That was said to infect the quality of his decision.

 3. Although that was the primary ground of challenge, it was not the  only
    one. We see at paragraph 68 of the determination that a  challenge  was
    made to a finding regarding the judge's assessment of the weight to  be
    given  to  the  views  expressed  in   a   national   newspaper.   More
    particularly, however, at paragraph 7 we see that  there  is  challenge
    made to the way in which the judge dealt with the  expert  report  that
    had  been  commissioned  and  filed  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  in
    connection with her appeal.

 4. During the course of oral submissions,  it  has  become  apparent  that
    there is unquestionably an error in the decision, such as the  decision
    must be set aside.  The error is that, contrary to what  is  stated  in
    the  index  in  the  inventory  of  production  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the judge does not  appear  for  some  reason  to  have  been
    provided with the official  conclusive  grounds  consideration  minute,
    which recorded in detail the account given  by  the  appellant  of  her
    experiences, leading to her arrival in the United Kingdom  and,  having
    engaged with  that  account,  explained  why  the  competent  authority
    reached the conclusion  that  the  appellant  was  not  the  victim  of
    trafficking.

 5. The judge referred to material which on its face would seem to be  that
    minute; for example, at paragraph 8 of the determination, he said  that
    there was  sufficient  in  the  NRM  report  to  justify  the  negative
    conclusive grounds conclusion.  That suggests that he had read not just
    the result of the analysis and assessment but also the reasons for  it.



 6. A further reference is made to the decision of the competent  authority
    at paragraph 32.  There we see that the judge referred to the  decision
    "at page  G4"  of  the  inventory  of  production  as  being  negative.
    However, when we look at the bundle that was before the judge, page  G4
    does not correspond to anything amounting to a decision.

 7. In conclusion, therefore, it does not appear that the judge had  before
    him this important document. If and in so far as he thought that he had
    the totality of the material emanating from  the  competent  authority,
    the judge was mistaken.  That is not a criticism of the judge.  It  is,
    however, plain that there has been a procedural  error  in  this  case,
    leading to unfairness, which comprises an error of law.  We  know  that
    from the case E & R v Secretary of  State  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  49.   The
    judge's fact-finding task needed him to be aware of the reasons for the
    conclusive  grounds  decision,  the  minute  was  plainly  of  material
    relevance to the outcome of the protection claim.

 8. In all the circumstances, therefore, albeit for reasons that are rather
    different from those that are  contained  in  the  written  grounds  of
    appeal, the Upper Tribunal sets aside the decision of the judge.  Given
    the nature and extent of the fact-finding that will  be  necessary,  we
    must remit this case to be heard de novo by a Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, other than Judge Boyd.



                           Signed                     Date






                           The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                           President of the Upper Tribunal
                           Immigration and Asylum Chamber

