
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09207/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8th August 2017                        |On 25th August 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                           lucia maria chakanyuka
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Billie
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Zimbabwe born  on  10th  September
    1968.  The Appellant first arrived in the UK on 13th November 2001 when
    she was refused leave to enter  but  given  temporary  admission.   She
    absconded and was not heard of again until 21st December 2015 when  she
    was arrested on suspicion of using false documents.   On  3rd  February
    2016 the Appellant applied for asylum.  That  application  was  refused
    for the reasons given in the Respondent's letter of  2nd  August  2016.
    The Appellant appealed and her appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pooler (the Judge) sitting at Stoke on Trent on 16th March  2017.
    He decided to dismiss the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds for
    the reasons given in his Decision dated 27th March 2017.  The Appellant
    sought leave to appeal that decision,  and  on  25th  April  2017  such
    permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  because  he  found  the  Appellant's
    evidence to be lacking in credibility  and  found  that  the  Appellant
    would not be at risk on return to Zimbabwe.  The Judge also found  that
    the decision of the Respondent did  not  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
    Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  rights  as  she  did  not  satisfy   the
    requirements of  paragraph  276ADE  of  HC  395.   Finally,  the  Judge
    considered the Appellant's Article 8 rights outside of the  Immigration
    Rules and decided that there was no disproportionate  breach  of  those
    rights.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Billie argued that the Judge had  erred  in  law  in
    coming to those conclusions.  In respect of ground 1 of the grounds  of
    application which related to the paragraph 276ADE decision,  Mr  Billie
    argued that the Judge had failed to consider all of  the  obstacles  to
    the Appellant's successful integration on return to Zimbabwe which  the
    Appellant had relied upon at the hearing.  There was a  large  quantity
    of documentary evidence relating to those obstacles and supporting  the
    Appellant's evidence contained at pages 91  to  271  inclusive  of  the
    Appellant's Bundle.  Mr Billie argued further that as regards  risk  on
    return, the Judge had failed  to  consider  the  Appellant's  prolonged
    absence from Zimbabwe and  that  her  unsuccessful  asylum  application
    would place the Appellant at risk on  return  in  accordance  with  the
    guidance provided by the decision in HS (Zimbabwe) v SSHD EWCA Civ 915.
     In particular, the Judge had not considered the problems caused by the
    collapse of the health system in Zimbabwe.

 5. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 reply  and  argued  that
    there had been no such errors of law.  The Judge had  directed  himself
    appropriately and had made findings open to him on the evidence  before
    him.  The Judge did not find the Appellant credible and his conclusions
    flowed from that decision.  The Judge  fully  considered  the  risk  on
    return on the basis of his finding of credibility at  paragraph  22  of
    the Decision.  In any event, the Judge came to an alternative  decision
    that internal relocation would not be unduly harsh.   The  Judge  dealt
    with the health system in Zimbabwe at paragraph 32 of the decision, and
    overall he considered all the issues in the appeal  and  gave  adequate
    reasons for his decision.

 6. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  which  I
    therefore do not  set  aside.   The  Judge  made  a  finding  that  the
    Appellant was not credible which he fully explained and which  has  not
    been challenged in this appeal.  It follows  that  the  Judge  did  not
    accept the Appellant's evidence relating to factors which might put her
    at risk on return.  The finding of a lack of  credibility  extended  to
    the factors relied upon by the Appellant to establish  her  case  under
    paragraph 276ADE.  I am satisfied that Mrs Aboni was correct  to  argue
    that the Judge dealt with all issues in the appeal.  Even if it is true
    that the Appellant would be at risk on  return  to  her  home  area  of
    Mhondoro, the Judge found that it would not be unduly harsh for her  to
    relocate in Harare.  The Judge specifically dealt with the  documentary
    evidence at paragraphs 32 to 35 inclusive of  the  Decision  and  dealt
    with with the issue of whether the Appellant's health  and  the  health
    services available in Zimbabwe would entitle the Appellant  to  relief.
    I find that the Judge came to conclusions that were open to him on  the
    evidence and which he fully explained.  For these  reasons  I  find  no
    error of law in the decision of the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date   25th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

