
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09374/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 8 January 2019                             |On 23 January 2019           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                   MR H S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hodson
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran  born  on  19  September  1983.   He
    appealed against a decision of the respondent on 16 July 2018 to refuse
    his protection claim.  Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Cohen  ("the
    FTTJ"), in a decision promulgated on 11  October  2018,  dismissed  his
    appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
    on 7 November 2018 on all grounds in the application.

 3. Before me, Mr Hodson adopted the grounds of  appeal.  He  made  further
    oral submissions. He noted the appeal been determined on  a  series  of
    adverse findings.   The  principal  issue  was  whether  the  FTTJ  had
    approached the decision with care and anxious scrutiny.  He accepted it
    was relatively  detailed.   In  summary,  however,  the  reasoning  was
    inadequate and based on mistake of fact.

 4. Mr Kotas, for the respondent, accepted the  FTTJ  has  mischaracterised
    the military documentary evidence but submitted it was clear  the  FTTJ
    had been referring to the appellant's military record, as adduced.   Mr
    Kotas accepted the  FTTJ's  findings  were  inelegant  insofar  as  the
    absence of an expert report was concerned.  However  it  was  clear  he
    meant merely that it was  another  factor  which  did  not  assist  the
    appellant; the outcome of the appeal did not hinge on this finding.  Mr
    Kotas submitted that the  grounds  were  an  attempt,  principally,  to
    relitigate the appeal. He submitted the errors of  the  FTTJ  were  not
    material to the outcome; the remaining findings were sufficient for  an
    adverse finding on credibility.  The decision was  overall  a  rational
    one.  The appellant knew why he had lost the appeal; the  decision  was
    sustainable  and  the  FTTJ  would  have  reached  the  same   decision
    notwithstanding two erroneous findings about visits by the  appellant's
    brother and the absence of an expert report.

Discussion

 5. I take the grounds in the order in  which  they  are  set  out  in  the
    application for permission to appeal, as expanded upon by Mr Hodson.

 6. At [30] of the decision, the FTTJ made an adverse  credibility  finding
    on an alleged inconsistency in the appellant's evidence concerning  the
    sequestration of his family home in Iran. The appellant  had  provided,
    at the hearing on 28 August 2018, a letter dated 23 August 2018 from an
    attorney in Iran, Dr Hadi Azari, who maintained  that  the  appellant's
    father's "residential home" had been sequestrated  on  account  of  the
    appellant absconding while on bail.  The appellant's oral evidence  was
    that the family home was in the process  of  being  sequestrated.   The
    appellant now submits that the discrepancy was explained by the recency
    of the evidence of Dr Azari and the appellant's lack  of  contact  with
    his family in Iran; Dr Azari's letter had been sent to the  appellant's
    solicitors rather than to the appellant himself.

 7. The appellant's appeal statement is  dated  15  August  2018.  In  that
    statement he says: "the latest news that I have from  Iran  is  that  I
    continue to be actively sought by the Iranian  authorities.  Forfeiture
    proceedings are  underway  [sic],  in  an  attempt  to  confiscate  the
    property that was lodged as recognizance for my release on  bail."   In
    his asylum interview the appellant said he was not in contact with  his
    family in Iran and had not been since his arrival in the  UK;  however,
    he was in contact with two of his friends in Iran since his arrival  in
    the UK.

 8. The letter from Dr Azari refers to the  appellant  as  his  client.  He
    states the case against the appellant "is under legal prosecution".  He
    refers to the appellant's father as being the appellant's guarantor and
    having put up a property  as  surety.  He  states  the  "deeds  to  his
    property - which is his residential home ... have been confiscated  and
    seized  and  his  ownership  of  the  property  has  been  annulled  in
    accordance with Article 140 of the Criminal Procedure  Code  ...".   It
    was submitted by Mr Hodson that, as this letter had been  sent  to  the
    appellant's solicitors, rather  than  to  the  appellant  himself,  the
    appellant would not have been aware of the content.

 9. The FTTJ makes specific reference  at  [30]  to  the  existence  of  Dr
    Azari's letter. He refers to the discrepancy in the evidence being  put
    to the appellant who said the information in Dr Azari's letter was  not
    correct.  If Dr Azari were instructed to provide an update on the legal
    proceedings in Iran by the appellant's solicitors, in order  to  assist
    the appellant's  case  at  the  appeal  hearing,  it  is  unlikely  the
    appellant would  not  have  been  aware  of  the  contact  between  his
    solicitors in the UK and his attorney in Iran and  that  he  would  not
    have wanted to  know  the  current  position  in  Iran,  if  the  legal
    proceedings there were genuine, particularly as they  impacted  on  his
    father  personally.   Furthermore,  although  the  FTTJ  did  not  make
    specific reference to it in his findings, I note the  appellant's  oral
    evidence at [18] that "the appellant was  asked  how  he  obtained  his
    documents and responded in a wrong [sic] was in touch with his  father.
    They managed to email the documents. He  was  not  in  touch  with  his
    father directly. It was  safe  to  contact  the  friend,  ...,  through
    WhatsApp. He had not been in contact with any of his  family  since  he
    left."  Whilst this phrasing is open to  criticism,  it  indicates  the
    appellant was in touch with his father indirectly, through others,  and
    that he had the opportunity  to  establish  the  latest  position  with
    regard to the sequestration of his father's  property.   The  FTTJ  was
    entitled, despite the fact the letter from Dr Azari had  been  recently
    obtained,  to  find  this  was  a  "significant  discrepancy   in   the
    appellant's evidence going to the core of his claim and damaging to his
    credibility".  There is no challenge by the  appellant  to  the  FTTJ's
    reference to the "ease  with  which  fabricated  documentation  may  be
    obtained in Iran". Thus it was open to the FTTJ, on the evidence before
    him, to give no weight to Dr Azari's letter.

10. Mr Hodson accepted that the second ground of appeal  arising  from  the
    failure of the appellant to refer to his arrest and detention at Part 5
    of his screening interview was not the "strongest".   I agree:  it  was
    open to the FTTJ to make an adverse credibility finding at [31] on  the
    basis of  the  appellant's  denial,  when  specifically  asked  at  the
    screening stage, that he had been arrested and detained  in  Iran.   It
    was submitted in the grounds of appeal that "most applicants take  this
    section of the screening interview to  relate  to  matters  other  than
    those for which they have  claimed  asylum.   Indeed,  interpreters  at
    screening interviews often point this out to asylum applicants."  It is
    not clear to me on what basis this proposition is made.  The FTTJ noted
    the appellant had been asked whether

         "he had ever been arrested, charged with or convicted of an offence
         in any country and indicated, no (5.1). He  was  asked  if  he  was
         subject to an arrest warrant  or  wanted  by  any  law  enforcement
         agency for an offence in any country and responded that Sepah  were
         after him to  arrest  him  (5.2).   This  is  discrepant  with  the
         appellant's evidence elsewhere indicating that he was arrested  and
         detained and tortured for 9 days in Iran following  being  released
         after his father stood surety and lodged his property deeds."

    The FTTJ went on to find this

         "a significant discrepancy in the appellant's evidence and damaging
         to  his  credibility.  The  appellant  could  not  explain  why  he
         indicated that he had not been arrested in his screening  interview
         [sic] when this discrepancy was put to before me [sic]. It  is  not
         the appellant's case that he did not think he was being asked about
         events in Iran; if that were the case, there might be merit in  the
         grounds.   The  appellant  sought  to  make  2  amendments  to  his
         interview record following the event for [sic] his  representatives
         but did not address this."

    The discrepancy had been put to the appellant and he had not provided a
    reasonable explanation.  This finding is fully reasoned.

11. At [32], the FTTJ made an adverse credibility finding on the  basis  of
    an inconsistency in the appellant's evidence at  question  104  of  the
    substantive  interview  record.    The   appellant   had   consistently
    maintained his brother, who lives in the UK, had  not  visited  him  in
    Iran.  The FTTJ found, on the basis of his answer to question 104, that
    the appellant had said otherwise. However, as was conceded before me by
    Mr Kotas, this finding is based on  a  misreading  of  the  appellant's
    evidence in interview when taken in conjunction with the FTTJ's note at
    [15] that the appellant had clarified at the hearing that he  had  seen
    his brother in the UK, not in Iran.  The finding that the appellant had
    stated in interview that he  had  seen  his  brother  in  Iran  is  not
    sustainable on the interview evidence when the question and answer  are
    read in full. It is clear from the content of his  answer  to  Question
    104, namely whether "he" had visited the appellant in  Iran,  that  the
    appellant, while answering "yes" then  went  on  to  refer  to  another
    matter.  The content of his answer suggests that he  had  misunderstood
    that the interviewer was referring to his brother (who was the  subject
    of the previous question).  Furthermore, the FTTJ had not taken account
    of the appellant's explanation as noted at [15] of  his  decision.   He
    should  have  indicated  why  he  did  not   accept   the   appellant's
    clarification on the issue.  Taken with the appellant's correction,  at
    the hearing ([15] of  the  decision),  this  finding  at  [32]  is  not
    sustainable  on  the  evidence  before  the  FTTJ.   I   consider   the
    materiality of this error below.

12. Mr Hodson  submitted  the  appellant  had  not  provided  a  "biometric
    military service card". The FTTJ found at [33] as follows:

         "the appellant claims that he  completed  his  compulsory  military
         service in 2004. He indicated that he needed to obtain a  biometric
         military completion certificate which necessitated him returning to
         his old barracks and led to his claimed  problems.   The  appellant
         has produced his biometric military service  card.  This  does  not
         contain details of his blood type, hair colour, weight, height, eye
         colour and physical defects or the rank of  the  cardholder  during
         military  service.  Having  regard  to  the  country   policy   and
         information  note:  Iran  military  service  this  information   is
         contained on the new biometric card. I therefore find that the card
         produced by  the  appellant  is  inconsistent  with  the  objective
         evidence  and  find  this  to  be  a  further  discrepancy  in  the
         appellant's evidence and further damaging to his credibility."

13. Mr Hodson and Mr Kotas were in agreement that the document produced  by
    the appellant is entitled (in translation)  "Registration  Receipt  and
    Receiving the Completion of Service  Card",  rather  than  a  "military
    service card" as described by the FTTJ.  Mr Hodson  submitted  that  it
    was an error "to consider evidence that relates only to that  card  and
    then make an adverse finding with regard to a document which relates to
    the completion of service".  He submitted there was  a  clear  material
    difference which the FTTJ had not noticed.  I am unable to accept  that
    submission: the FTTJ referred in the same paragraph to the  appellant's
    needing "to obtain a biometric military completion certificate".  While
    he then refers to the appellant having  produced  a  "military  service
    card" this appears, on its face, to have been a generic description  of
    the card produced by the appellant, rather than  a  specific  one.   At
    paragraph 9 (which is not criticised by the appellant  before  me)  the
    FTTJ notes the appellant's claim that "in 2013 the government announced
    that the military service  card  was  being  changed  to  digital.  The
    appellant claimed that to complete his application, he travelled to the
    barracks where he performed military service for December  2012  [sic].
    While there he picked up a confirmation that  he  had  before  military
    service there [sic]."  Thus it is clear the  FTTJ  has  understood  the
    appellant's case that the document he  has  produced  is  a  completion
    certificate. It is clear both from this paragraph and  from  [33]  that
    the FTTJ was referring to the Registration Receipt  and  Receiving  the
    Completion of Service Card,  albeit  not  by  its  specific  title,  as
    translated.  Furthermore, the objective  material  to  which  the  FTTJ
    refers,  the  CPIN,  makes  specific  reference  to  military   service
    completion cards and there is no doubt the FTTJ  was  relying  on  this
    guidance when listing the specific biographical data which was  not  in
    the card the appellant had  produced.  Paragraph  33  of  the  decision
    contains no error of fact or law.

14. It is submitted in the grounds of appeal that  the  FTTJ's  finding  at
    [34] that the appellant's photographic evidence of him standing next to
    "dummy" missiles does not enhance the appellant's case is perverse.  It
    is suggested that it is highly unlikely the appellant would be able  to
    obtain evidence of access to classified sites.   It  is  submitted  the
    evidence is "wholly plausible".  The FTTJ had  accepted  the  appellant
    "undertook military service  and  the  photographs  show  him  next  to
    missiles but the appellant indicated these were dummies and  I  do  not
    find that the pictures advance the appellant's claim in any way".  This
    is a sustainable finding: the FTTJ was entitled to find  the  existence
    of the photographs was a neutral point given that it  was  accepted  he
    had been in military service.  The appellant's case is based not on the
    mere fact of his military service but issues arising from it.  This  is
    not a perverse finding.

15. As regards [35] of the decision, it is  submitted  the  FTTJ  based  an
    adverse credibility finding on the failure of the appellant to  provide
    evidence of an arrest warrant. It was submitted the  FTTJ  should  have
    been aware that the Iranian authorities did not normally  serve  arrest
    warrants in the absence of the  accused.   However,  when  I  asked  Mr
    Hodson the basis for this proposition, he was unable to  direct  me  to
    any background material or evidence to support it. He  said  there  was
    evidence  that  the  authorities  in  Iran  were  apt  not  to   follow
    procedures, whatever they were.  He noted  a  US  Department  of  State
    report to the effect that the arrested person  should  be  informed  of
    charges against them.  The FTTJ noted the  appellant's  claim  that  an
    arrest warrant had been issued against him but that the  appellant  had
    failed to supply any evidence  to  substantiate  this  "despite  having
    obtained some evidence from Iran".  The appellant's attorney  in  Iran,
    Dr Azari, refers to the appellant having been  "summonsed  on  numerous
    occasions in order for him to be notified of  the  accusations  against
    him and based on the trial procedures and given his failure to  present
    himself...".   This  document  does  not  specifically  refer  to   the
    existence of a warrant for his arrest.  I do not accept the  submission
    that the FTTJ had placed  an  unreasonable  evidential  burden  on  the
    appellant  given  the  nature  of  the  claimed  contact  between   his
    solicitors in the  UK  and  his  attorney  in  Iran.  Even  if,  as  is
    submitted, the arrest warrant were not available, it could be  expected
    that the attorney would refer to a warrant if one had been issued.  The
    existence of an arrest  warrant  would  have  been  recognised  by  all
    concerned as a significant factor as regards risk on return. The FTTJ's
    finding is sustainable on the evidence.

16. The FTTJ is criticised by the appellant for his finding at [36]; it  is
    submitted that  the  FTTJ  failed  to  understand  that  the  appellant
    maintained the Bushehr Nuclear Station was also used for Iran's  secret
    nuclear weapons programme.  Mr Hodson submitted the  drafting  of  this
    paragraph was "questionable": the existence of nuclear  missiles  would
    not be in the public domain; this paragraph was "borderline  perverse".
    As Mr Kotas pointed out, the only evidence that this facility was being
    used for secret purposes was the appellant's own.    I  have  had  some
    difficulty following the  sense  of  this  paragraph  which  is  poorly
    phrased but it can reasonably be inferred that the  FTTJ  accepted  the
    site was a military one and that the documentary evidence  demonstrated
    this.  There is no suggestion in  this  paragraph  that  the  appellant
    could have been expected to provide documentary evidence that the  site
    was being used for other secret purposes. I agree that such  a  finding
    would have been perverse. It can be inferred that the FTTJ merely found
    that  the  documentary  evidence,  including  google  maps,   did   not
    demonstrate the existence of a claimed secret facility at the  military
    base, merely the military base itself.  Importantly the  FTTJ  did  not
    suggest this was an adverse credibility point. He  has  treated  it  as
    neutral.

17. The FTTJ states the following at [37]:

         "The appellant has failed to submit an expert report in support  of
         his claim which in the light of my findings  above  I  find  to  be
         further damaging to his credibility".

    Both parties are in agreement that this, on the face of it, amounts  to
    an error of law in that the failure of the appellant  to  produce  such
    evidence should not be taken against him.  I agree that, while  it  was
    open to the appellant to obtain an expert report, this could  not  form
    the basis for an adverse credibility finding.  It was submitted  by  Mr
    Kotas that this paragraph is inelegantly phrased; I agree. He submitted
    that it could be inferred that the FTTJ considered the absence of  such
    a report did not damage the appellant's case but was a relevant  factor
    to be taken into account. I do not accept that submission: it is  clear
    from the decision that the FTTJ found the  absence  of  such  a  report
    warranted an adverse credibility finding.  That is an error of  law.  I
    consider the materiality of that error below.

18. The FTTJ gave weight to the  failure  of  the  appellant's  brother  to
    attend the hearing albeit he knew about the  appellant's  "problems  in
    Iran".  He found this damaged the appellant's credibility  ([38]).   Mr
    Hodson submitted the appellant's brother's  evidence  would  have  been
    hearsay. It was submitted that if the  FTTJ  considered  this  evidence
    would have been helpful he should have indicated  why  that  was.   The
    appellant was himself in contact indirectly with his  family  in  Iran.
    It could reasonably be inferred that his brother was also and thus that
    he could  have  provided  evidence  of  his  knowledge  of  the  family
    situation in Iran, particularly with regard  to  the  sequestration  of
    property there.  His evidence might have been hearsay in some  respects
    but it was potentially corroborative in others.  While  it  would  have
    been preferable for the FTTJ to  have  indicated  in  what  regard  the
    brother's evidence would have been of assistance, it was  open  to  the
    FTTJ to give some adverse weight to  the  failure  of  the  appellant's
    brother to attend to support the appellant or even to  give  a  witness
    statement.

19. As Mr Hodson submitted, the nub of the appellant's case is that he  had
    access to secret information while a military conscript in  Iran.   The
    respondent had averred that, as a conscript, the  appellant  would  not
    have had access to such information.  This  was  a  matter  of  dispute
    which the FTTJ had  to  resolve.  It  was  submitted  that  the  FTTJ's
    findings at [39] did not  adequately  address  the  arguments  on  both
    sides. However, that was not the purpose of [39].  The  FTTJ,  in  that
    paragraph, deals only with  the  plausibility  of  a  conscript  having
    "access  to  secret  documentation  relating  to  the   existence   and
    whereabouts of nuclear missiles".  In  the  grounds  of  appeal  it  is
    submitted that the appellant had explained why he had become  privy  to
    such information. The FTTJ does not seek to address that issue in  this
    paragraph, merely the fact of the appellant's being of "lowly conscript
    rank" as he puts it. Indeed, to his credit, Mr Hodson accepted that the
    FTTJ's finding in this paragraph might be one which he was entitled  to
    make but it was a key issue and he should have given  his  reasons  for
    it.  I am satisfied that the reasoning is  clear  from  the  paragraph:
    this was a "lowly conscript" who claimed to have been privy to detailed
    secret and highly sensitive information and, on the face  of  it,  this
    was inherently implausible.

20. I have considered whether the failure of the FTTJ to deal  specifically
    with the appellant's claim that he had acquired secret information as a
    result of his relationship with a senior officer can be criticised,  as
    is, by inference, submitted at paragraph 12 of the grounds  of  appeal.
    The FTTJ has considered the evidence in the round;  he  has  identified
    various strands of the evidence which he finds to be  inconsistent.  He
    states  at  [44]  that  there  were  "further  discrepancies   in   the
    appellant's evidence and evidence which I find to  be  implausible  but
    which I will not set out in further detail  herein".    The  latter  is
    unclear and adds nothing to the specific findings.  This was  an  issue
    on which the appellant relied  only  on  his  own  evidence;  thus  his
    credibility was key to this finding.  It  can  reasonably  be  inferred
    from the decision taken as a whole that the FTTJ did not find the  core
    of the appellant's account to be credible or reliable.   This  included
    the claimed relationship of trust with a senior officer.

21. Mr Hodson indicated that the appellant did not  pursue  the  ground  at
    paragraph 40 of the application to the Upper Tribunal which related  to
    [40] of the decision. I do not therefore consider it.

22.  The  appellant  submits  the  FTTJ's  finding  at  [41]  that  it  was
    implausible the appellant was able to escape from his home while  under
    surveillance is an error of law.  It is submitted that "no intelligence
    organization in the world, no matter how sophisticated,  can  guarantee
    the prevention of an escape. The Appellant provided a plausible account
    of escaping in the boot of his neighbour's car".  Mr  Hodson  submitted
    the FTTJ had merely reached a conclusion without consideration  of  the
    appellant's explanation; he had not reasoned his decision. He submitted
    that sometimes the "implausible happens"; it was not  impossible.   The
    FTTJ has given brief reasons for his conclusion  that  the  appellant's
    account was implausible: he finds that  "if  the  appellant  was  under
    surveillance he would not be able to escape with such ease".   Thus  he
    has considered the appellant's account of the escape.  The  appellant's
    account is that he had disclosed  the  presence  of  a  secret  nuclear
    facility to others. This was a highly sensitive issue, he  was  accused
    of committing an offence punishable by death and he was  being  guarded
    while on bail yet claims he was able to leave in the boot of a car from
    the back of the house.  It was open to the FTTJ to find that  this  was
    an inherently implausible account given the seriousness of his  alleged
    offence against the state.

23. As regards [42] the Mr Hodson submitted the FTTJ had not considered the
    background material in the appellant's bundle. He directed  me  to  one
    document in the appellant's bundle before the FTTJ but  was  unable  to
    tell me its relevance. There was a further document before the FTTJ  (a
    BBC article relating to the arrest of a nuclear deal  negotiator  on  a
    spying charge, dated 28 August 2016). In that article a  dual  national
    in charge of "banking issues  during  the  two-year  negotiations,  was
    arrested for "selling the country's economic details  to  foreigners"".
    It is reported he "was a member of a parallel team working  on  lifting
    economic sanctions, under one of the main negotiations for  the  deal".
    He was released on bail after being  held  for  several  days.  It  was
    submitted that this case was analogous to that  of  the  appellant  and
    that the FTTJ should have borne it in mind.  The FTTJ noted as follows:

         "The appellant claims that he was suspected of an accused [sic]  of
         espionage for which the sentence is death.  Despite this he  claims
         that he was released  from  detention  on  the  depositing  of  his
         father's property  deeds  and  father's  surety.   I  find  if  the
         appellant was accused was suspected [sic] of such a crime  that  he
         would  not  be  released  from  detention  in  the  manner  claimed
         particularly having been told of the crimes that he was accused  of
         as this would more than likely cause him to  attempt  to  flee  the
         country.  I find  the  appellants  [sic]  evidence  to  be  further
         implausible and further damaging to his credibility."

24. It is correct the FTTJ did not refer to the BBC article. However, I  do
    not consider the circumstances of the accused in  that  article  to  be
    analogous to those of the appellant: the appellant was a member of  the
    military  at  the  material  time.   His  disclosures  related  to  the
    existence and  location  of  nuclear  weapons  facilities  rather  than
    confidential economic information. His  activities  were  described  as
    espionage against the state and warranted a  death  sentence  if  found
    proved.  His actions would have been viewed  far  more  seriously  than
    those of the individual in the BBC article.  In the grounds  of  appeal
    it is submitted that there  is  a  "wealth  of  evidence  showing  high
    profile prisoners in Iran being released for short periods".   This  is
    not the appellant's case: he is not a high profile person in  Iran:  he
    is a former conscript of modest  rank  who  claims  to  have  disclosed
    secret information about  the  existence  and  location  of  a  nuclear
    weapons facility.  The finding at [42] does not amount to an  error  of
    law; the finding is adequately reasoned.

25. I agree with Mr Hodson that there are numerous typographical errors  in
    the FTTJ's decision which distract the reader. However, the decision is
    otherwise coherent and its meaning is clear overall.

26. As Mr Hodson himself conceded at the outset of the hearing  before  me,
    this is a detailed decision.  There  is  no  challenge  to  the  FTTJ's
    adverse finding at [43] regarding the manner  in  which  the  appellant
    gave oral evidence. Nor is there any challenge to the finding  at  [45]
    that  it  is  implausible  that  the  "appellant  would  meet  up  with
    colleagues from some 9 years previously who were members of  Sepah  and
    openly talk to them about military secrets that he held  and  find  his
    knowledge was likely to be highly out of date in any event."  These are
    but  two  of  various  adverse  credibility  findings   regarding   the
    appellant's account.

27. I turn to the issue of materiality. As was  said  by  Keene  LJ  in  IA
    (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA  Civ
    323:

         "... in public law cases, an error of law will be regarded as
         material unless the decision-maker must have reached the same
         conclusion without the error ... [A]n error of law is material if
         the Adjudicator might have come to a different conclusion ... "

28. Taking the decision as a whole, the  adverse  credibility  findings  as
    regards the core of the appellant's  claim  (in  summary  that  he  had
    disclosed to others secret information, obtained as a conscript from  a
    senior officer, and this had led to the issue of an arrest warrant  and
    the grant of bail) is sustainable on the evidence before the FTTJ.   It
    is not the case that the FTTJ might  have  come  to  have  a  different
    conclusion were it not for the errors of  law  identified  above.   For
    these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain
    material errors of law in the assessment of the evidence. The  decision
    stands.

Decision

29. This appeal is dismissed.

30. Given the nature of this appeal, the appellant is entitled to anonymity
    in these proceedings and I make a direction accordingly.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Dated: 11 January 2019

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Dated: 11 January 2019
