
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/09037/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 9th October 2017                   |         On 18th October 2017         |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                             shahram rastegarfar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain of Counsel instructed by Bankfield Heath
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Bradshaw
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 31st January 2017.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran.  He entered  the  UK  in  2010  and
    claimed asylum on the  basis  of  his  political  activities.   He  was
    refused and his appeal rights  were  exhausted  in  2011.   He  claimed
    asylum on a second occasion on 11th May 2016, having  failed  to  leave
    the UK, on the basis that he had converted to Christianity here.

 3. The judge rejected  the  appellant's  account  of  his  conversion  and
    dismissed the appeal.

 4. The appellant produced  evidence  at  the  hearing  that  he  had  been
    baptised on 12th October 2013 and had posted the fact of his conversion
    and his baptism on his Facebook page.  As a consequence his family  had
    discovered he had converted to Christianity and they had threatened  to
    kill him if he returned to Iran.]

 5. No findings were made by the judge in relation to that  aspect  of  his
    claim.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to consider and apply AB & Others (internet activity - state
    of the evidence) [2015] UKUT 257.

 7. He relied in particular on the Tribunal's conclusion:

         "We find that the act of returning someone creates a pinch point so
         that returnees are brought into direct contact with the authorities
         in Iran who have both the time and inclination to interrogate them.
          We think it likely that they will be asked  about  their  internet
         activity and likely if they have any internet activity for that  to
         be exposed and if it is less than flattering of the  government  to
         lead to a real risk of persecution."

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on that basis by Judge Mailer on  19th
    June 2017.

 9. The respondent served a reply arguing that social media platforms  such
    as Facebook could be manipulated in a variety of ways and any claims to
    have posted the information onto Facebook had to be viewed through  the
    lens of the appellant's credibility.

Consideration of whether there is a material error of law

10. The problem in this appeal is that the judge did not grapple  with  the
    argument before her, namely, regardless of  his  credibility,  that  he
    would be at risk on return on account of his Facebook activity.

11. The credibility findings in  relation  to  the  claimed  conversion  to
    Christianity have not been disputed. However findings need to  be  made
    in relation to the Facebook postings and whether  they  are  reasonably
    likely to have been manipulated.

12. Both sides agreed that this matter would benefit from  expert  evidence
    and both the appellant and the respondent are directed to file  all  of
    the evidence upon which they seek  to  rely  within  28  days  of  this
    hearing.



Notice of Decision

13. The original judge erred in law and her decision  is  set  aside.   Her
    adverse credibility findings in relation to  the  Christian  conversion
    are unchallenged and preserved.  The matter is remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to a judge other than Judge Bradshaw for a decision to be
    made in relation to the internet activity to be heard at least 28  days
    from the date of the promulgation of this decision.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal            Judge            Taylor
             Date   16 October 2017
