
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/09048/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Glasgow
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
          On 28th July 2017
           On 7th September 2017


                                     Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


Between

                                   mR.HAS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr. Wintor, Counsel, instructed by Latta and Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr.S.Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant made a claim for protection which was refused on 12
      August 2016. His appeal against that decision was heard by Judge of
      the First-tier Tribunal Agnew who, in a decision promulgated on the 23
      March 2017, dismissed his appeal.


   2.  The basis of his claim is that he is an Iraqi Kurd who lived in the
      Salah Al-din Province. He account was that he, along with some close
      friends, were promoting secular views .This led to them being accused
      of insulting Islam and a fatwa was issued. The appellant and his
      family moved to his uncle's house shortly before their own home was
      set on fire by a crowd. Following this, the appellant decided to leave
      the country. The respondent did not believe his account.

   3. He said he was from a contested area which was accepted. Although he
      could not be returned to his home area the respondent took the view he
      could relocate within the Iraqi Kurdish region.

The First tier Tribunal

   4. First-tier Tribunal Agnew also did not find his account credible. She
      recorded that the appellant had a CSI D before he left Iraq and had
      not demonstrated he could not obtain this from his family or obtain
      sufficient information to get a replacement. He also had not
      demonstrated he could not obtain a passport. She referred to him being
      young, fit, and healthy and on his account had been able to establish
      a business in his home area from a young age. She concluded he could
      do this again in the I KR and was someone with initiative and business
      skills. He had not demonstrated to her satisfaction that there was no
      support available. Furthermore, he would have access to the assisted
      return scheme. She noted he had significant funds when he left Iraq.

   5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge had not given adequate reasons or findings about either his
      possession of or ability to acquire a CSID and about his ability to
      travel to the I KR.

   6. Mr Wintor contended that First-tier Tribunal Agnew did not correctly
      apply the guidance in AA(Article 15 (c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544
      about the conditions for entry into Baghdad or the I KR. He submitted
      that if the appellant were granted a laissez-passer this would not
      entitle him to gain admission to the I KR. I was referred to the
      appellant's statement and he submitted nothing indicated he would have
      the means to get replacement documentation.Mr Wintor questioned
      therefore how he could get to Baghdad or if he could, how he could
      travel onwards to the IKR.

   7. In response, Mr.S.Kotas pointed out there had been no challenge to the
      negative credibility findings made by the judge. Consequently, his
      account of not having any contacts could not be relied upon.

Consideration

   8. The bulk of First-tier Tribunal Agnew's decision is concerned with the
      claim of the appellant about events he said happened to him in his
      home area. She rejected his claims and gave reasons. No challenge has
      been made to those findings.


   9. It is only at paragraphs 36 to 38 that she considers the question of
      return. She recorded that the appellant's evidence was that he had a
      CSI D before he left Iraq. The submission on his behalf was that he
      could not obtain documentation. The judge rejected this, pointing out
      it had not been established he could not through his family or friends
      obtain the documentation he had or else obtain replacements. In the
      same way, she did not accept it was established he could not obtain a
      passport.


  10. There are flights from the United Kingdom to Baghdad. From Baghdad
      there are flights to Erbil. Access can also be gained through third
      countries. The practicalities of travel are a matter for the
      respondent after the appeal is over.  A laissez-passer is the document
      that it is issued by the Iraqi authorities in the UK for the return of
      a national.

  11. It is sufficient for the respondent to demonstrate a general mechanism
      for return. The nature of a laissez-passer is that it is issued by the
      Iraqi authorities here to facilitate return. If this is taken from the
      appellant on arrival at Baghdad airport the country guidance case is
      silent as to the need for documentation for onward travel within the
      country. I was not referred to any evidence that further documentation
      is required for travel within Iraq. The onus is not on the respondent
      to prove in each case what documents are required to board an internal
      flight from Baghdad to the IKR.Nor does she have to show that the
      appellant has them or can access them. Paragraph 170 of the County
      Guidance case was a discussion on internal relocation which does not
      make its way into the head note. The Court of Appeal's comments on
      para 170 (AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944) does not affect my conclusion
      as I find he would be entitled to a laissez-passer.

  12.  Whether a Kurd if returned to Baghdad can be expected to avoid undue
      hardness will be dependent on the individual circumstances. The judge
      recorded that the appellant had demonstrated initiative and business
      skills in the past and that he had family support in the country. He
      would also have the benefit of the returns package. The emphasis
      however was that he could relocate to the IKR.The judge had indicated
      basic features indicating this would not be unreasonable. Each case
      has to be considered on its merits. Sometimes the evidence is limited.
      Here the appellant had described how he had employment. The judge
      commented on general features about him. This is due to the general
      nature of the evidence before the judge. The decision elsewhere has
      been carefully prepared and displays a proper analysis of the
      evidence. The underlying claim was rejected on a sound basis and this
      has not been challenged. The only query relates to return. I found the
      judge has given basic but adequate reasons. The appellant has not
      provided evidence to suggest the situation is otherwise. In conclusion
      therefore I find no material error of law established.

Decision

No material error of law has been established in the decision of First  tier
Judge Agnew. Consequently, that decision dismissing the  appellant's  appeal
shall stand.

Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge           Farrelly
Dated 6th September 2017



