
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: PA/09184/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2020                  |On the 10 September 2020             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     SA

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr H Broachwalla, Burton & Burton Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
explained my decision but reserved my reasons, which I now give.  The  order
made is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. The appellant, who is an Iraqi national of Kurdish ethnicity and  Sunni
    Muslim faith with date of birth given as 22.9.92, has appealed  to  the
    Upper Tribunal with permission against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated 24.12.19, dismissing on  all  grounds  his  appeal
    against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  11.9.19,  to
    refuse his claim for international protection based on threats  to  his
    life because of his romantic relationship with a  young  woman  of  the
    Shia Muslim faith.

 2. In directions issued  on  6.5.20  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  originally
    proposed to determine the error of law issue on the papers  without  an
    oral hearing.  There  was  no  response  to  the  directions  from  the
    respondent. However, the appellant objected to the issue being  decided
    without a hearing. In the circumstances, on 16.7.20 the Upper  Tribunal
    issued directions for the appeal would be held remotely.

 3. In essence, the grounds submit that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  as
    follows:

      a. Making irrational findings at [27] when stating that the  appellant
         would have known early in his relationship that the young woman  he
         was involved with was Shia and her brothers PMF. It is argued  that
         this finding was not supported by any evidence or  sound  reasoning
         and arose from pure speculation;

      b. Speculating at [29] when stating it  was  not  believed  "that  two
         young people would be  so  foolhardy  as  to  ignore  their  family
         wishes, ignore their family attitudes and ignore the likely outcome
         to all of them and still continue (the relationship) for so long as
         he claims," when the objective evidence  demonstrates  that  extra-
         marital relationships do take place despite such danger. It is also
         argued that  the  judge  failed  to  engage  with  the  appellant's
         evidence;

      c. Failing to consider the risks on return in line with  AA  (Iraq)  v
         SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944  and  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -   internal
         relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC), finding at  [34]  that
         the appellant's home area was not a 'disputed area'   and  that  he
         could return there from Baghdad, despite the fact that he had lived
         all his life in a 'contested area';

      d. Stating at [34] that the case law in relation to obtaining  a  CSID
         was not relevant, when the importance of such a  document  or  INID
         card is confirmed in the Country Guidance case of  SMO,  KSP  &  IM
         (Article 15(c); identity documents)  Iraq  CG  [2019]  UKUT  004100
         (IAC);

 4. Permission to appeal was granted  on  all  grounds  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 16.3.20, on the basis that it was considered arguable  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in failing to provide  adequate
    reasons for the findings made, including that at [27] of the  decision.
    It was also considered arguable that at [29] of the  decision  reliance
    was placed on the judge's opinion rather than findings of fact made  on
    evidence put before the Tribunal.

 5. I was advised that the respondent had submitted a Rule 24 reply,  dated
    28.5.20, which I have not received and is not in  the  Tribunal's  case
    file. However, Mr Diwnycz explained that it was prepared by a colleague
    without access to the case papers and would  not  be  helpful  for  the
    Tribunal to consider.

 6. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 7. At the outset of the hearing  I  expressed  concern  with  the  judge's
    treatment of the CSID issue at [34] of the decision,  where  the  judge
    stated that the case law in  relation  to  obtaining  a  CSID  was  not
    relevant, as the appellant could return to his home  area.  Mr  Diwnycz
    accepted that the appellant's home area was in what has been identified
    in the case law as a  'contested  area'.  Amongst  other  matters  left
    unaddressed, the judge has not explained how  the  appellant  would  be
    able  to  travel  from  Baghdad  to  his  home  area  without  identity
    documentation. The decision does not address SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article
    15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 004100 (IAC), which  was
    promulgated after the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing but a few days
    before its decision was promulgated.

 8. In response, Mr Diwnycz took a sensible approach,  conceding  that  the
    decision was "confused at best" in relation to location of  return  and
    identity documentation.

 9. Taken in the context of the decision as  a  whole,  I  agree  with  the
    submissions of the appellant that the findings lack adequate reasoning.
    Mr Diwnycz did not resist the appeal on those grounds.

10. However, Mr Diwnycz did resist the first two grounds of appeal, on  the
    basis that it was open to the judge to make the  observations  referred
    to. I take the view that  the  judge  could  easily  have  phrased  the
    observations made as the appellant's account being  implausible  and/or
    not credible. In the light of the respondent's approach  to  the  third
    and fourth grounds,  Mr  Broachwalla  did  not  pursue  the  first  two
    grounds.

11. In the circumstances, I do not accept that there was any error  of  law
    in respect of the first two grounds but find a material error of law in
    the third and fourth grounds. The identified  errors  are  sufficiently
    material to require the decision to be set aside and remade de novo.

12. Mr Broachwalla submitted, and Mr Diwnycz did not  demur,  that  as  the
    findings regarding identity  documentation  and  the  location  of  the
    appellant's return would have to be remade, including consideration  as
    to whether the appellant could obtain the necessary  documents  in  the
    UK, there would need to be  a  full  factual  analysis,  probably  with
    further evidence, which is best done  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    agree.

13. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiates all other findings of fact and the  conclusions
    from those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of
    the issues in the appeal.

14. In all the circumstances, at the invitation or consent of both parties.
    I relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, on
    the basis that this is a case which falls squarely  within  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

    The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error of law.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    The remaking of the decision in the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  at  Birmingham  to  be  made  afresh  with  no  findings
    preserved.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    8 September 2020




Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    8 September 2020

