

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09297/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 January 2017                            |On 18 January 2017           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     DS
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:      Ms V Easty (Counsel)
For the respondent:     Mr P Singh (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to his  asylum  claim  and  he  is  to  be  regarded  as  a
          vulnerable witness.

Summary of asylum claim

       2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, from Bartela, near Mosul.   He
          was born in June 1998.  He left Iraq in 2014 (when he  was  around
          16) and arrived in the United Kingdom ('UK') in October 2015.   He
          claimed asylum on 26 January 2016.   The SSHD  refused  the  claim
          for asylum in a decision dated 19 August 2016.

       3. The  appellant  contends  that  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
          persecution in Iraq because of the actions of  ISIS  in  his  home
          area and  that  he  cannot  relocate  because  of  his  particular
          personal profile.  He claims that he fled  Iraq  with  his  father
          after hearing that ISIS had killed his brother and  kidnapped  his
          mother and sister.

Procedural history

       4. In a decision dated 4  November  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
          Abebrese   dismissed   the   appellant's   appeal.    The    judge
          comprehensively  rejected  the  credibility  of  the   appellant's
          asylum claim and  found  that  he  could  internally  relocate  to
          Baghdad.


       5. In a decision dated 1  December  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
          Saffer granted permission to appeal observing that the  First-tier
          Tribunal  failed  to  refer  to  significant  evidence  (including
          psychological  evidence  and  a  report  from  a  country  expert)
          capable of impacting upon the credibility assessment.

       6. The SSHD has submitted a rule 24 notice dated 3  January  2017  in
          which it conceded the  "application  for  permission  to  appeal".
          At the beginning of the hearing Mr Singh accepted that the  appeal
          was  unopposed  and  the  decision  needs  to  be  remade  in  its
          entirety.  He was entirely correct to do so for  the  reasons  set
          out below.


       7. Both  representatives  agreed  that  the  errors  of  law  that  I
          identified  are  such  that  the  decision  needs  to  be   remade
          completely.  There  is  considerable  apparently  cogent  evidence
          that the appellant  is  a  vulnerable  witness  who  continues  to
          suffer adversely from the uncertainty surrounding his  immigration
          position together with his claimed  history  (separated  from  his
          father en route to the UK, death of brother, uncertain  plight  of
          mother and sister, kidnapped as a  child).   Unfortunately,  there
          was  no  interpreter  available  and  in  the  circumstances  both
          representatives agreed that given the nature  and  extent  of  the
          credibility findings required, this should be done in  the  First-
          tier Tribunal.

       8. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior  President's
          Practice Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
          findings required in remaking the decision,  and  I  have  decided
          that this is an  appropriate  case  to  remit  to  the  First-tier
          Tribunal.

       9. Both representatives also agreed that this is an appropriate  case
          for expedition given the difficulties  the  appellant  is  facing.
          These have been helpfully summarised  by  a  social  worker  in  a
          letter dated 9 January 2017.  I entirely agree.  In so far  as  it
          is possible to do so it would be helpful to both parties  for  the
          First-tier Tribunal to expedite the listing of this matter.

Error of law discussion

      10. I can state my reasons briefly given the respondent's  concession.
           In finding  the  appellant  not  to  be  credible  regarding  the
          alleged ISIS kidnapping of his mother and sister, and the  killing
          of his brother [42-45]  and  his  father's  enemies  [47-48],  the
          First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  take  material   evidence   into
          account:


              i) In an amended statement dated 3 August 2016  the  appellant
                 raised the apparent inconsistency regarding the fate of his
                 mother and  sister.   He  explained  that  the  interpreter
                 misunderstood him.   He  emphasised  that  his  mother  and
                 sister were kidnapped, not that they are dead (or  that  he
                 knew them to be dead).  That explanation is relevant  to  a
                 careful analysis of the appellant's responses  as  recorded
                 in the respondent's record of the asylum interview in  this
                 regard.  The  response  to  question  68  required  further
                 clarification in light of the response to question 67  when
                 read in the context of the appellant's explanation  in  his
                 statement.
             ii) As a result of the apparent lack of clarity  in  the  above
                 responses the appellant's solicitors arranged for a further
                 transcript of questions 8 and 68.  This transcript supports
                 the appellant's explanation, yet  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                 has not referred to this transcript at all.
            iii) No reference whatsoever  is  made  to  the  country  expert
                 report of Dr George.  Although the First-tier Tribunal  was
                 aware of the activities of ISIS in Mosul in  2014  [46]  it
                 failed to engage with the general analysis of the  apparent
                 plausibility of the appellant's specific account.
             iv) No consideration was given to the psychological  report  of
                 Dr Lissa Morrish when considering the  credibility  of  the
                 appellant's claim.  There was a  clear  obligation  on  the
                 First-tier Tribunal to carefully consider this,  given  its
                 acceptance that  the  appellant  should  be  treated  as  a
                 vulnerable witness and the  detailed  evidence  within  the
                 report relevant to a credibility assessment.
              v) No reference is made whatsoever to supporting evidence from
                 social services to the effect that he  remained  consistent
                 in his account of what happened to him.

      11. In my judgment the First-tier Tribunal has erred  in  law  in  its
          approach to the  evidence  set  out  above.   The  errors  I  have
          focussed upon are sufficiently  wide-ranging  and  fundamental  to
          lead me  to  the  view  that  the  conclusion  on  credibility  is
          vitiated by errors of  law  and  unsafe.   The  decision  must  be
          remade entirely and de novo.

      12. The First-tier Tribunal has  also  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
          consider all the relevant factors set out in AA (Art 15c) Iraq  CG
          [2015] UKUT 544 when determining internal relocation.  I  entirely
          agree with the submissions at paras 9 and 10  of  the  grounds  of
          appeal.

Decision

      13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
          aside.

      14. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.

Directions

        1) The appeal shall be reheard de novo by the  First-tier  Tribunal
           sitting in Taylor House (TE: 2.5hrs) on the first date available
           but expedition of the listing of this matter  is  justified  for
           the  reasons  provided  above.    Kurdish   Sorani   interpreter
           necessary.





Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
16 January 2017

