

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number PA/09166/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
             Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 11th April 2018
               On 24th April 2018


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                    M P J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr P J Lewis (Solicitor, York Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Ms A Everett (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant sought asylum for the reasons given in the application and
   summarised in the Refusal Letter of the which also contained the reasons
   for his claim being rejected. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
   Judge Herlihy at Taylor House on the 9th of January 2018. The appeal was
   dismissed for the reasons given in the decision promulgated on the 2nd of
   February 2018.

2. It is not necessary to go into the details of the case as the challenge
   to the Judge's findings in respect of the Appellant's mental health
   issues and the credibility of the account that he gave regarding his
   claimed support for the LTTE and events in Sri Lanka. It is also argued
   that the Judge had not properly assessed the Appellant's sur place
   activities in the context of country guidance and the risk it is claimed
   he would face on return.

3. The grounds assert that the Judge failed to consider the Joint
   Presidential Guidance Note number 2 of 2010 and that the Judge had also
   failed to consider the evidence of the Appellant's brother and had not
   given adequate reasons for rejecting the medical evidence. Permission was
   granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge McDonald on the basis that the Judge
   appeared not to have considered the Joint Presidential Guidance and
   arguably failed to give consideration to the Appellant's mental state.

4. In a decision covering 25 pages and 84 paragraphs there is no reference
   to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note number 2 of 2010. Having accepted
   the medical evidence of Dr Lawrence the Judge did not place the
   credibility findings within that context. Obviously the fact that an
   Appellant has psychological problems does not automatically lead to the
   acceptance of an Appellant's account but an analysis of the account must
   take place with the medical findings in play. Consistent with that is the
   need to consider whether an Appellant is vulnerable, to make findings on
   vulnerability and to assess the extent to which that informs the
   credibility assessment that follows.


5. I bear in mind the guidance from Burnett LJ in EA v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ
   10 where, at paragraph 27, he made the following observations: "Decisions
   of tribunals should not become formulaic and rarely benefit from copious
   citation of authority. Arguments that reduce to the proposition that the
   F-tT has failed to mention dicta from a series of cases in the Court of
   Appeal or elsewhere will rarely prosper. Similarly, as Lord Hoffmann said
   in Piglowska v Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360, 1372, "reasons should be read
   on the assumption that, unless he has demonstrated the contrary, the
   judge knew how he should perform his functions and which matters he
   should take into account". He added that an "appellate court should
   resist the temptation to subvert the principle that they should not
   substitute their own discretion for that of the judge by a narrow textual
   analysis which enables them to claim that he misdirected himself".
   Moreover, some principles are so firmly embedded in judicial thinking
   that they do not need to be recited. For example, it would be surprising
   to see in every civil judgment a paragraph dealing with the burden and
   standard of proof; or in every running down action a treatise, however
   short, on the law of negligence. That said, the reader of any judicial
   decision must be reassured from its content that the court or tribunal
   has applied the correct legal test to any question it is deciding."

   6. Regrettably despite the length and care that has gone into the First-
      tier Tribunal decision the omission of any reference to the relevant
      guidance and the failure to place the credibility findings in the
      context of the Appellant's mental health fundamentally undermine the
      reliability of the decision. I do not propose to go through the First-
      tier Tribunal decision in detail because this decision rests on what
      is clearly absent. It is not possible to read the decision in a way
      that provides the substance of the considerations that should have
      been applied. In the circumstances I find that the omissions of Judge
      Herlihy outlined above are such that the decision should be set-aside
      and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing with no
      findings preserved.


CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House for re-
hearing on all issues with no findings preserved, not to be heard by First-
tier Tribunal Herlihy.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).

Fee Award

In remitting the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the issue of a fee order
remains to be decided at the conclusion of the appeal.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 23rd April 2018

