
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09121/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 September 2018                          |On 13 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                  kamel [m]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Lesley Irvine, Advocate instructed by Latta & Co
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Egypt, born in November 2002,  so  still
    aged well under eighteen.  He came to the United Kingdom sometime after
    27 July 2016 (when he was fingerprinted in Italy).  He  claimed  asylum
    on 3 October 2016.  On 1 September 2017 the Secretary of State issued a
    letter determining his claim.  The  Secretary  of  State  rejected  the
    appellant's claim to refugee status or  humanitarian  protection.   The
    decision-maker  took  the  view  that  the  country  evidence  did  not
    establish that he would be at risk on return either  in  the  sense  of
    risk of persecution  or  in  the  sense  of  a  risk  of  serious  harm
    justifying a grant of humanitarian protection.   For  similar  reasons,
    the decision-maker concluded that there was no basis for thinking  that
    the appellant's return to Egypt would expose him to risk  of  treatment
    contrary to article 2 or article 3 of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights.  The decision-maker then went on to consider article 8.   There
    appeared  to  be  no  reason  to  think  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of the rules for a grant of leave under paragraph 276  ADE
    or under appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.  The decision-maker went
    on to consider exceptional circumstances, but noted that the  appellant
    had not suggested that there were any circumstances meriting a grant of
    leave to him under article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  Similarly,
    there  did  not  appear  to  be  any  reasons  justifying  a  grant  of
    Discretionary Leave.  The  letter  then  goes  on  to  consider  family
    tracing.  It includes the following sentences:

         "Your mother lives in Egypt, your country of origin and you have no
         contact with her  since  leaving  Egypt  and  her  whereabouts  are
         unknown.  As such as it is accepted [sic] there  are  no  reception
         facilities available to you upon return to Egypt."

 2. The letter concludes by  indicating  that  the  decision  is  that  the
    appellant does not qualify for asylum, humanitarian  protection,  leave
    to remain on  the  basis  of  his  family  life  or  private  life,  or
    discretionary  leave.   However,  because  the  appellant   meets   the
    requirements of paragraph 352ZC of the Immigration  Rules  applying  to
    unaccompanied asylum-seeking children, the letter  indicates  that  the
    appellant is being granted leave until 1 March 2020,  a  period  of  30
    months.

 3. The appellant, who has  been  represented  throughout  by  Latta  &  Co
    Solicitors, gave notice of appeal against that  decision.   The  appeal
    came before Judge Sorrell in the First-tier Tribunal and was determined
    by him in a decision sent out  on  6  April  2018.   He  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The crucial parts of his decision are as follows.   First,  he
    rejected the appellant's claim to be at risk of persecution as a result
    of his father's claimed perceived or actual involvement with the Muslim
    Brotherhood, escape from Egypt, and subsequent  alleged  activities  of
    the police against the appellant's family.  The judge  did  not  accept
    the evidence supporting that claim.   The  judge  then  turned  to  the
    second element of the appellant's claim, which was that he has a  well-
    founded fear of persecution if  returned  to  Egypt  because  he  is  a
    separated child and would encounter difficulties there.  On  that,  the
    judge rejected the main part of the appellant's evidence which was that
    he had had no contact with his mother  or  siblings.   The  judge  also
    noted that there was no evidence that the appellant  had  attempted  to
    trace his family.  For these  reasons  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant's claim to refugee status on this ground was  also  not  made
    out.  As there were no additional factors which might justify  a  grant
    of humanitarian protection, the judge rejected the claim to that status
    as well.  The judge then said this:

         "As no evidence was adduced  or  submissions  made  in  respect  to
         article 8 of the ECHR, this has not been considered further."

 4. Latta & Co on behalf of the appellant put in grounds of appeal.   Those
    grounds addressed a number of topics.  Paragraphs 2 - 3  challenge  the
    judge's conclusions in relation to the credibility of  the  appellant's
    primary  asylum  claim.   Paragraph  4  noted  that  in  reaching   his
    conclusions on the second basis of the appellant's claim, the judge had
    failed to observe that  the  respondent  had  conceded  both  that  the
    appellant had not been in contact with this mother and that there  were
    no  adequate  reception  arrangements  for  the  appellant  in   Egypt.
    Paragraph  5  provides  further  possible  reasons  for  accepting  the
    appellant's claim on this ground.  Paragraph 6 reads as follows:

          "It is submitted that the  FtT  have  erred  in  failing  to  make
         findings in relation to the submissions made on the final  page  of
         the skeleton argument with regards to  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
         Immigration Rules. "

 5. Permission to appeal was granted in relation to  the  point  about  the
    concession, and the findings in relation to the  appellant's  situation
    on his return  to  Egypt,  and  the  point  about  paragraph  276  ADE.
    Permission was refused on the ground challenging the judge's assessment
    of the credibility of the appellant's primary claim.

 6. In preparation for the hearing before us, Ms Irvine prepared a note  of
    argument summarising the argument she proposed to raise in the  appeal.
    She did indeed direct her submissions to precisely  those  points.   In
    her note she summarised her arguments as follows:

         "The Appellant appeals, further to the grant of permission, on  the
         grounds that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in (1) failing to
         address the Appellant's claim under article 8 ECHR; and (2) failing
         to take into account, in the context of the second ground on  which
         the Appellant seeks international protection in the United Kingdom,
         the Respondent's concession as to the fact of the Appellant's  lack
         of contact with this mother; the fact that the whereabouts  of  the
         Appellant's mother are unknown; and the  fact  that  there  are  no
         adequate  reception  facilities  available  in  Egypt   where   the
         Appellant is to be required to return."

 7. In her oral submissions, she addressed  the  protection  matter  first.
    She argued that the Tribunal was wrong to go behind the  concession  in
    the decision-letter: the judge should have accepted what  was  conceded
    by the respondent and made his decisions on both the  second  basis  of
    claim for international protection and in relation  to  the  article  8
    claim based on family life with those concessions of fact in mind.  She
    submitted that there was evidence before the  judge  that  a  separated
    child in Egypt is at risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm.   He  was
    likely to become a street child, and there was evidence pointing to the
    treatment of street children as persecutory.  Mr Govan reminded us that
    the appellant's story about the Muslim Brotherhood had  been  rejected.
    There was an unsigned statement from the appellant's father  which  was
    clearly not an independent and  objective  assessment  of  whether  the
    appellant would be at risk if returned to Egypt.   The  other  evidence
    submitted did not establish that the appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution  or  suffering  serious  harm  even  if  returned  in   the
    circumstances that the respondent had accepted in the refusal letter.

 8. On this issue, we have considered with care both the evidence and  what
    we could discover about the way the matter  was  presented  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  We have set out above the terms  of  the  refusal
    letter.  We did not understand Mr Govan to accept without qualification
    that  there  had  been  a  concession  about  the  whereabouts  of  the
    appellant's mother.  We agree that it is not clear from the Reasons for
    Refusal letter whether what is said about the appellant's mother  is  a
    repetition of the appellant's account, or whether it is accepted by the
    decision-maker.  We were not shown that there was any clear  submission
    on this issue made to the First-tier Tribunal.  In these  circumstances
    it appears to us to be far from clear that the judge was  not  entitled
    to  consider  for  himself  whether  he  accepted  this  part  of   the
    appellant's account of his circumstances.

 9. But, in our judgment, it  makes  no  substantial  difference,  for  the
    following  reasons.   If  the  appellant's  account   of   his   family
    circumstances is true, or  if,  in  any  event,  it  should  have  been
    accepted as true because the Secretary of State did not query  it,  but
    the position is that if returned to Egypt the appellant would be in his
    mid-teens, with no family  members  capable  of  supporting  him.   The
    question then is what is the  evidence  that  he  will  be  subject  to
    persecution  or  serious  harm  within  the  meaning  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights or the regulations relating to  humanitarian
    protection.

10. The evidence relied on by Ms Irvine does  not  in  our  view  begin  to
    establish that he would be.  There is a Human Rights Watch Report  from
    as long ago as 2003: nothing that we were shown  gives  any  indication
    that the authors of that  report  would  claim  that  it  reflects  the
    present situation in Egypt.  There  were  a  number  of  press  reports
    indicating some difficulties and ill-treatment to some children.  There
    is what appears to be a student essay submitted to  the  University  of
    Lund indicating the student's analysis  of  the  perception  of  street
    children by members of the Egyptian public.   There  is  no  indication
    that the author's research methods, findings or conclusions  have  been
    accepted even by Lund University.  There is a long letter  by  Dr  Alan
    George, specifically prepared  for  the  purposes  of  the  appellant's
    appeal, in which he sets out some materials relating to street children
    in Egypt. Dr George's conclusions, at paragraph 95 of  his  letter  and
    referred to again in his summary at paragraph 108 are as follows:

         "Mr [M] is now almost 15 years old.  If returned to Egypt, where he
         states that he has no family other than his  mother  and  siblings,
         whose whereabouts he does not know for  sure,  he  would  certainly
         face a wide range of serious challenges to his  wellbeing  -  quite
         apart from any threat he might face from the authorities because of
         his father's political activities.  Families and extended  families
         form the basis of society  in  Egypt,  and  people  look  to  their
         families for social, economic and even political support.   Without
         such a support network Mr [M] would be severely disadvantaged.   In
         addition homeless and uneducated, his prospects would be  extremely
         bleak.  In my firm opinion, he  would  be  at  very  real  risk  of
         joining the country's armies of street children,  existing  on  the
         margins of lawfulness, abused and exploited by adults, at risk from
         the authorities, and resorting to begging, prostitution  and  petty
         criminality to survive.  These risks would apply, albeit perhaps to
         a slightly lesser extent, if he was returned to Egypt on completion
         of the period for which he has leave to remain, by  which  time  he
         will be 17.5 years old."

11. The appellant, having travelled to the  United  Kingdom  and  had  some
    experience of life and  education  in  the  United  Kingdom,  is,  even
    without family, no doubt at somewhat lesser risk than  those  who  have
    known nothing other than poverty and neglect in Egypt.  Even if he were
    to become a street child, the risks of ill-treatment that would justify
    a claim to international protection either under the provisions of  the
    European Convention on Human  Rights  or  those  of  the  Qualification
    Directive are, in our judgment, simply not made out.   Whether  or  not
    the judge was wrong to go behind a concession, the claim on this ground
    fails.

12. We turn then to the assertion  that  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to
    determine a claim under article 8.  The way in which  this  matter  has
    been presented by the solicitors and Ms Irvine is very  troubling.   As
    we have already noted, the material before the decision-maker  was  not
    seen by the latter as incorporating any material that would  justify  a
    grant of leave under article 8 whether within or outside the rules,  or
    a grant of discretionary leave.  The grounds  of  appeal  against  that
    decision, prepared by Latta & Co and signed by Laura Sclare,  who  also
    presented the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  are  presented  in
    the box headed "Human Rights Decision".  Most of the  contents  of  the
    box relate not to an article 8 matter but  to  the  appellant's  asylum
    claim.  However, the grounds do include the following:

         "5.  ECHR: Article 2, 3 and 8

         ...

         7.   Other issues: see Witness Statement to follow."

13. There is no indication of what Witness  Statement  is  meant,  or  from
    whom.  We do not know whether it  is  said  that  any  of  the  Witness
    Statements which did in due course emerge, some signed, some not,  were
    intended to deal with article 8.  What we do know is that, as  asserted
    in the grounds of appeal against the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,
    there was a reference to paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules  in
    the skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal.   In  fact  there
    are two skeleton arguments, which are different; Ms Irvine was not able
    to tell us which one was relied upon before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    They do however, both include the following paragraph:

         "Immigration Rules

         The Immigration Rules include provision for leave to be granted  on
         the basis of "private life" in the UK and paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi)
         is relied upon in this regard.   This  provides  for  leave  to  be
         granted if there are:

             "Very significant obstacles  to  the  applicant's  integration
             into the   country to which he would have to go if required to
             leave the UK".

         It is submitted that the absence of family, friends or any  support
         network is a "very significant obstacle" to integration into  Egypt
         for the Appellant.  It is  submitted  that  his  appeal  should  be
         granted on this basis."

14. The skeleton argument contains no other reference to  article  8.   The
    first thing to say about the ground of appeal based  on  article  8  is
    that it is extremely difficult to see, in that context, how  the  judge
    could properly be criticised for saying, as he did, that  "no  evidence
    was adduced or submissions made in respect to article 8".  But what  is
    of much more concern is that  a  firm  of  solicitors,  with  purported
    immigration expertise, should raise an argument along the lines that we
    have set out.  Paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi) reads as follows:

         "(vi)    subject to sub-paragraph (2) [which does not apply in this
         case] is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in  the  UK
         for less than 20- years (discounting any  period  of  imprisonment)
         but there would be very significant obstacles  to  the  applicant's
         integration into the country to  which  he  would  have  to  go  if
         required to leave the UK."

15. The argument made to the First-tier Tribunal,  which  formed  also  the
    basis of the application for permission to appeal to this Tribunal  and
    Ms Irvine's submissions, was wholly misleading.   It  is  an  essential
    part of the applicant's case that he is under the age of 18 years.   On
    its face, paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi) could not apply to him.  It is,  to
    say the least, extremely regrettable that a solicitor  or  an  advocate
    should in these circumstances assert that there was a claim under  that
    paragraph.  That claim is obviously wholly without merit and should not
    have been pursued at either level.

16. There is, in reality, nothing that could have founded a claim that  the
    appellant has an entitlement to remain in the  United  Kingdom  despite
    not meeting the relevant requirement of  the  rules,  with  a  possible
    exception of a letter from a school teacher, unauthenticated but  dated
    6 February 2018, largely based on hearsay and on the  writer's  opinion
    of the circumstances in Egypt.  In  reality  it  adds  nothing  to  the
    appellant's case.

17. There is a further difficulty  about  this  aspect  of  the  case.   Mr
    Govan's position was that the appellant is not entitled to raise  human
    rights grounds at all.  This is a matter of  some  difficulty.   As  we
    have said, the Secretary of State refused to grant the appellant  leave
    under article 8 or as a matter of discretion but  granted  leave  under
    paragraph 352ZC.  Mr Govan's  position  was  that  as  leave  had  been
    granted, the appeal had to be regarded purely as an  "upgrade"  appeal,
    with grounds limited to those  based  on  the  protection  claim.   The
    relevant statutory revisions are all in  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 as amended and are as follows:

         "82. (1) a person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where -

                   a) the Secretary  of  State  has  decided  to  refuse  a
                      protection claim made by P, or

                   b) the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a  human
                      rights claim made by P, or

                   c) the Secretary of State  has  decided  to  revoke  P's
                      protection status,

             ...

         84.  Grounds of appeal

             (1)  An appeal under section 82(1)(a) (refusal  of  protection
                  claim) must be brought on one or  more  of  the  following
                  grounds -

                  (a)  that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom
                      would breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  under
                      the Refugee Convention;

                  (b)  the removal of the appellant from the United  Kingdom
                      would breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  in
                      relation  to  persons  eligible  for   a   grant   of
                      humanitarian protection;

                  (c)  the removal of the appellant from the United  Kingdom
                      would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights
                      Act 1998 (public authority not  to  act  contrary  to
                      Human Rights Convention).

             (2)  An appeal under section 82(1)(b) (refusal of human rights
                  claim) must be brought on the ground that the decision  is
                  unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

             ...

         104. Pending appeal

             (1)  An appeal under  section  82(1)  is  pending  during  the
                  period -

                  (a)  beginning when it is instituted, and

                  (b)  ending when it is finally  determined,  withdrawn  or
                      abandoned (or when it lapses under section 99).

             ...

             (4A) An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a  person  while
                  he is in the United Kingdom shall be treated as  abandoned
                  if the appellant is granted leave to enter  or  remain  in
                  the United Kingdom (subject to subsection (4B)).

             (4B) Subsection (4A) shall not apply to an appeal in so far as
                  it is brought on a ground specified  in  section  84(1)(a)
                  ...  (asylum  or  humanitarian   protection)   where   the
                  appellant -

                  ...

                   b) gives notice in accordance  with  Tribunal  Procedure
                      Rules that he wishes to pursue the appeal in  so  far
                      as it is brought on that ground.

         ...

         113. Interpretation

             (1)  In this Part, unless a contrary intention appears -

                  ...

                  "human rights claim" -

               a) means a claim made by a person that to remove him from  or
                  require him to leave the United Kingdom or to  refuse  him
                  entry into the United  Kingdom  would  be  unlawful  under
                  section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998

                  ... ."

18. Mr Govan's position appeared to be that  the  grant  of  leave  to  the
    appellant meant that his claim to remove him from  the  United  Kingdom
    would breach the Convention had not been refused.  He therefore had  no
    right of appeal under s 82(1)(b).   It does not appear to us that  that
    can be right, because s 84(1) allows (in paragraph  (c))  human  rights
    grounds to be advanced in an appeal against the refusal of a protection
    claim.  It is true that, if a human rights claim is refused and, whilst
    an appeal against that refusal is pending leave is granted,  s  104(4A)
    and  (4B)  will  apply,  essentially  preventing  the  appellant   from
    continuing to raise human rights grounds under s 84(1)(c) or (2).  That
    position does appear to be anomalous, but in our judgment  the  anomaly
    does not justify imposing any restriction on the grounds  permitted  to
    the appellant by statute under s 84(1).  We therefore do not accept  Mr
    Govan's  submission  that  the  grounds  under  article  8  cannot   be
    considered.  For the reasons we have given, however, there is no  basis
    upon which the appeal could succeed under article 8.

19. We therefore dismiss this appeal.  If  the  judge  made  any  error  in
    relation to any concession by the respondent, it was  not  such  as  to
    affect the outcome of the appeal; and the  judge  made  no  perceptible
    error in relation to article 8.

20. We have to say that we remain  concerned  about  the  conduct  of  this
    appeal by the solicitors, and not merely for the reason  that  we  have
    already expressed.  The appellant is no doubt vulnerable and depends on
    sound legal and practical advice in relation to his application and his
    appeal.  We do not know why popper efforts were not made to obtain  up-
    to-date evidence supporting the claim of risk as a street child if that
    risk genuinely exists.  We do  not  know  why  there  was  no  evidence
    supporting  the  article  8  claim  under   other   than   the   wholly
    unsatisfactory document to which  we  have  already  referred,  if  the
    article 8 claim has substance.  Obviously, if either of those claims do
    not have substance they should not have been advanced at all.   But  if
    either of them does have substance, it is  very  regrettable  that  the
    appellant's legal representatives did not choose to substantiate it  or
    them properly.  As we explained  at  the  close  of  the  hearing,  the
    appellant's status is that he has leave at the moment, and it does  not
    appear to us that the leave he has is less advantageous than any  leave
    he would obtain under any of the other heads under which his claim  was
    made.  But it is to  be  hoped  that  before  that  leave  expires  his
    position will be properly considered by somebody able to give him  good
    advice as to whether he has a proper basis for claiming  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.

21. For the reasons we have given, however, this appeal is dismissed.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 7 February 2019
