
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/09278/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham CJC                | Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th November 2018                  | On 20th December 2018                |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    saam
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Janjua, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Parkes promulgated following a hearing on 20th October 2017, at Sheldon
    Court in Birmingham.  In the decision, the judge dismissed  the  appeal
    of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant subsequently applied for, and
    was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is male, a citizen of Sudan, and was born  on  8th  March
    1988.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  7th
    September  2017,  refusing  his  application   for   asylum   and   for
    humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he is a  non-Arab  Darfuri
    of the Al-Berti tribe, and, although he has no political profile there,
    he has been arrested twice, when he was held for nearly  a  month,  and
    has been beaten, and falsely accused of being in the opposition.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had before him the country guidance  case  of  MM  (Darfuris)
    Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 10, which had also been addressed in  the  refusal
    letter (at paragraph 40), and the point made there was that  there  was
    no systematic persecution of non-Arab  Darfuris.   The  judge  accepted
    that this was the case, pointing out also that by his own account,  the
    Appellant had not been involved in opposition groups, and so would  not
    attract adverse interest (paragraph 10).

The Grant of Permission

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 28th February
    2018, on the basis that the judge had failed to  consider  the  country
    guidance case and to apply it in an  appropriate  manner,  deciding  to
    simply adopt the statement in the refusal letter (at  paragraph  40  of
    the RL) that there was no systematic persecution of  non-Arab  Darfuris
    outside of Darfur.  The country guidance case does not say at any stage
    that there is no systematic persecution of non-Arab Darfuris outside of
    Sudan, and it is well-known that  the  Al-Berti  tribe  is  a  non-Arab
    Darfuri tribe that is at risk of persecution.

Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me on 16th November 2018, Miss  Aboni,  appearing
    on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, stated that  she  would
    have to accept that there was an  error  of  law  in  that  the  judge,
    although referring to the country guidance case, had failed to apply it
    in its spirit.

 7. For his part, Mr Janjua stated that the error in this respect  was  not
    just at paragraph 10, where the judge expressly refers to  there  being
    "no systematic persecution of non-Arab Darfuris  outside  Darfur",  but
    also at paragraph 20 of the decision, where the judge states that:-

         "The fact that non-Arab Darfuris are to be found  in  the  Khartoum
         area in most walks of life is consistent with the  ability  of  the
         Appellant's family to live there and the Appellant having lived and
         worked without any other incidents being reported".





Error of Law

 8. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of a decision on a point of law such that it amounted to  an
    error of law (see Section 12(1)) of TCA [2017], and accordingly  stands
    to be set aside.  The general position is that country  guidance  cases
    have to be followed unless sufficient reasons are given to  demonstrate
    why a country guidance case needs to be departed from.  In  this  case,
    the relevant country guidance case has  been  misapplied.   Given  that
    there is a consensus between both parties  appearing  before  me  today
    that the judge fell into error, this decision must  be  set  aside  and
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a  Judge  other
    than Judge Parkes.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law, such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the
    decision of the original judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.
    This appeal  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be
    determined by a judge other than  Judge  Parkes  pursuant  to  Practice
    Statement 7.2(b).

10. An anonymity direction is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th December 2018

