
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
pa/09402/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Determination & Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 10th August 2017                    |     On 21st September 2017          |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                     A T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hoshi (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bowler, promulgated on 5th  May  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 18th April  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of  the  Appellant  on  human  rights  grounds,  but
    refused  it  on  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  grounds.    The
    Appellant, thereafter, applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, on the grounds  that  the  appeal  should
    equally have been allowed on  asylum  and  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds as well.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal, is a male, and was  born  on  15th
    November 1990.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 20th January 2017, refusing his asylum,  human
    rights protection and human rights claims, on the grounds that he is at
    real risk of serious harm due to the fact that he is  gay.   The  risks
    arose from threats made by his brother and previous  harm  suffered  at
    his brother's hands as well as from the general attitude to gay  people
    in Nepalese society.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge held that the Appellant had faced societal attitudes in Nepal
    and discrimination against gay people.  He had no family  support.   He
    was ostracised by his family.  Although he had  spent  nearly  nineteen
    years growing up in Nepal, and  was  familiar  with  the  language  and
    traditions and culture, those years were not lived  as  an  openly  gay
    person.

 4. As a gay man, the judge found that the  Appellant  was  a  particularly
    effeminate man who was likely to be judged on his  demeanor,  and  "the
    Appellant will face very significant obstacles in finding somewhere  to
    live and finding a  job.   His  capacity  to  participate  in  Nepalese
    society and to be accepted in Nepalese  society  would  be  limited  by
    these very significant obstacles" (paragraph 51).

 5. The judge went on to observe that the Appellant had always lived in the
    UK lawfully (paragraph 62) and had made a significant  contribution  to
    society through his voluntary work here (paragraph 62).

 6. Having weighed up all  the  evidence,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    Respondent's decision was not proportionate as a response  to  maintain
    the integrity of immigration control (paragraph 64).   The  appeal  was
    allowed on human rights grounds.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application are twofold.  The judge, it  was  said,  had
    applied the wrong test with respect to internal relocation at paragraph
    42 when she had held that, "he would face significant obstacles ...  as
    a result  of  discrimination,  but  the  discrimination  is  not  state
    sponsored or condoned" (paragraph 42).

 8. The correct legal test for internal relocation had been established  in
    Januzi [2006] UKHL 6 where Lord Bingham had said at  paragraph 21  that
    the test was whether it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the  Claimant  to
    relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so.

 9. In AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 the House of Lords stressed that it  would
    be an error of law to impose the standard of Article  3  ECHR  for  the
    reasonableness threshold.  The judge had applied a test where  she  was
    asking the question whether the Appellant  would  face  persecution  in
    Kathmandu.   This  was  incorrect,  she  had  to  ask  whether  it  was
    unreasonable or unduly harsh for the Appellant to relocate there.

10. Given that the judge had already stated  (at  paragraph  51)  that  the
    Appellant would be returning with no support network, unable to live  a
    life free from judgment of others, facing  significant  obstacles  with
    respect to  accommodation,  struggling  in  finding  work,  and  having
    limited participation in societal life, the judge should have held that
    the Appellant succeeded in showing that  there  would  be  no  internal
    relocation available to him in any reasonable sense, so that the appeal
    should have been allowed on asylum grounds as well.

11. Second, Mr Hoshi submitted that there was a further Ground  of  Appeal,
    namely, that the judge had failed to take relevant considerations  into
    account in terms of sufficiency of protection given the  expert  report
    of Ms Welton-Mitchell, who had stated that,  "in  some  instances,  the
    authorities had been the ones perpetrating the violence.

12. Cases of sexual assault by authorities, including law enforcement, have
    been reported ..." (see pages 5 to 6).

13. She had gone on to say that, "ultimately authorities,  including  local
    police, cannot be trusted to protect the LGBT persons".

14. For all these reasons, the appeal should have been  allowed  on  asylum
    grounds as well.

15. For his part, Mr Kotas submitted that the judge does fully address  the
    expert report of Ms Welton-Mitchell (at paragraphs 36  to  37)  of  the
    determination.   Therefore,  it  cannot  be  said   that   a   relevant
    consideration has not been taken  into  account.   Second,  as  far  as
    internal relocation is concerned, at paragraph 47 of Januzi, the  House
    of Lords had stated that,

         "The words 'unduly harsh' set the standard that  must  be  met  for
         this to be regarded as unreasonable.  If the claimant  can  live  a
         relatively normal life there judged by the standards  that  prevail
         in his country of nationality generally, and if he  can  reach  the
         less hostile part without undue hardship or  undue  difficulty,  it
         will not be unreasonable to expect him to move there."   (Paragraph
         47).

16. Mr Kotas submitted that  this  was  exactly  the  position  here.   The
    Appellant could live a relatively normal life judged by  the  standards
    of that country.  He would be able to  move  to  a  less  hostile  part
    without undue hardship.  Therefore, the judge was perfectly entitled on
    this basis to conclude that the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  in  an
    asylum claim.

17. In reply, Mr Hoshi submitted that  the  judge  had  already  found  (at
    paragraph 51) that the Appellant would be  ostracised  by  his  family,
    would have no family support, was a particularly effeminate  man  whose
    life would be judged on his demeanor, and would, "face very significant
    obstacles in finding somewhere to live and finding a   job"  (paragraph
    51).  This echoed the concerns as set out in the expert  report  of  Ms
    Welton-Mitchell above.

Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

19. First, I note that permission to appeal was granted in this  matter  on
    1st June 2017 on the basis that it was arguable that the wrong test had
    been applied with respect to internal relocation by the judge when  she
    had asked whether the Appellant could reasonably relocate to Kathmandu,
    without  facing  persecution,  rather  than   whether   it   would   be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect him to relocate there.

20. That is indeed the reason why the decision of the judge below fell into
    error.  The  judge  had  already  found  (at  paragraph  51)  that  the
    Appellant "will face very significant obstacles in finding somewhere to
    live and finding a job".  She had found that the Appellant's  "capacity
    to participate in  Nepalese  society"  and  also  "to  be  accepted  in
    Nepalese society" was such that it would  be  "limited  by  these  very
    significant obstacles".

21. In the light of  this,  the  conclusions  that  the  judge  reached  at
    paragraphs 34 to 35 are unsustainable.  She  had  concluded  that  "the
    Appellant could relocate to Kathmandu and could reasonably be  expected
    to rely on the sufficiency  of  protection  from  the  Nepalese  state"
    (paragraph 35).

22. Second, I do not accept Mr Kotas' argument that Januzi is authority for
    the proposition that "if the Claimant can  live  a  relatively   normal
    life there judged by the standards  that  prevail  in  his  country  of
    nationality" (see paragraph 47) then his relocation there would not  be
    unduly harsh.  This is because the judge has already found at paragraph
    51 that the Appellant would face "very significant obstacles".

23. Given those findings, I conclude  that  the  Appellant  would  find  it
    unduly harsh to relocate  to  Kathmandu,  especially  as  the  evidence
    pointed that he was a depressed and mentally  fragile  homosexual  man,
    who had been ostracised by his family, and was unlikely to be  able  to
    freely access the employment market  and  obtain  accommodation.   That
    would have sufficed, on the lower  standard,  for  the  purposes  of  a
    successful asylum and humanitarian protection claim.

Remaking the Decision

24. I remade the decision on the basis of  the  findings  of  the  original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons that I have  set  out
    above.





Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.

26. This appeal is allowed on asylum and humanitarian  protection  grounds,
    as well as it was on human rights grounds by the judge below.

27. An anonymity order is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th September 2017


