
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09007/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 March 2019                               |On 5 March 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. S.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant, a citizen of Iraq, entered the UK illegally and made a
protection claim which was refused on 6 July 2018. The Appellant's appeal
against that decision was heard, and allowed, by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Dearden, in a decision promulgated on 10 September 2018.

The Respondent's application for permission to appeal was granted by First-
tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on 5 October 2018 on the ground that it was
arguable the Judge had failed to conduct a fair hearing. The Appellant did
not reply to that grant with a Rule 24 response.

As the Judge records in his decision, the Respondent applied to the
Tribunal by fax on the morning of the hearing for an adjournment. The
reason given was that the presenting officer due to attend the hearing had
fallen ill. The fax in question is not on the Tribunal file, and Mr Diwnycz
has not been provided with a copy amongst the papers supplied to him
either. There is however no doubt that such a request was made, since the
Judge refers to it in his decision [11-13]. The Judge recorded that he
refused the application because he considered that a large organisation
should be able to deploy a substitute at short notice. He recorded no
enquiry made by him as to the circumstances lying behind the application,
or, whether it would be practical for the Respondent to field an
alternative representative later in the day, if given the opportunity to do
so.

I am satisfied that the Judge's approach to the adjournment application
demonstrated a clear error of law. The relevant principles are set out in
Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418. There was apparently no
attempt to ascertain all the material facts behind, or relevant to, the
application. The size of the Home Office was of little, or no, relevance to
the application. The relevant questions were; (i) where the Respondent's
file was and whether it could be accessed, (ii) whether any suitably
qualified local member of staff able to prepare for the hearing as a
replacement could be identified once it was known that the original had
fallen ill, and, (iii) how long that preparation would take. They were
neither asked, nor answered. However well run, any organisation can be
caught out by unforeseen events. The Judge's approach necessarily deprived
the Respondent of his right to a fair hearing.

In the circumstances, the Respondent has made out his case of procedural
unfairness, and the only proper course is that the appeal should be
remitted for hearing afresh. None of the findings of fact made by the Judge
are safe, or can be preserved. In circumstances such as this, where it
would appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been considered by
the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has been to
deprive the parties of the opportunity for their case to be properly
considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice
Statement of 13 November 2014. Moreover the extent of the judicial fact
finding exercise required is such that having regard to the over-riding
objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to the
First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 13
November 2014.

    To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other
    than First tier Tribunal Judge Dearden, at the North Shields Hearing
    Centre. A Kurdish Sorani interpreter is required. The parties accept
    they have already filed the evidence they wish to place before the
    Tribunal. Accordingly the remitted appeal is suitable for the short
    warned list. The parties should expect the appeal to called on for
    hearing at short notice.



Notice of decision

 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing de novo, with the directions set out above.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]                  Date 1 March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes








