
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09249/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 21 January 2019                            |On 11 April 2019l            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Colin [R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Mohzam, Solicitor with Burton & Burton
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the   appeal   of   the   respondent,
    hereinafter "the claimant", against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State on 12 July 2018 refusing him leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds having decided that the claimant should be deported because his
    deportation is conducive to the public good.

 2. In summary, the First-tier Tribunal decided that the Secretary of State
    should not have made the claimant the subject of a  deportation  order.
    The First-tier  Tribunal  then  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 3. The Secretary of State contends that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    approach was entirely wrong. It was not  the  role  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to decide if  the  Secretary  of  State  should  have  made  a
    deportation order and the appeal should not have  been  allowed.  These
    assertions have to be considered separately.

 4. It is helpful to consider exactly what decisions  were  made  and  what
    decisions are the subject of appeal.

 5. The decision to refuse an application for leave on human rights grounds
    is dated 12  July  2018.  It  deals  with  the  claimant's  immigration
    history.  It notes that he arrived in the United Kingdom as  a  visitor
    in 1993 and again in 1996.  In January 2002 he  applied  unsuccessfully
    for entry clearance as a visitor.  He made a  further  application  the
    same year for leave to enter as a spouse of a  British  citizen.   That
    application was successful and he was given leave until July 2003.   He
    did not regularise  his  stay  and  he  remained  unlawfully.   He  was
    arrested on suspicion of being an overstayer in November 2005.  He  was
    subject to administrative removal and  left  the  United  Kingdom.   In
    October 2008 he sought leave to enter for six months to visit his  wife
    and was given leave to enter as a visitor on compassionate grounds.  He
    did not embark when he should have done and when he was  identified  as
    an overstayer he applied for indefinite leave to remain as  the  spouse
    of a British citizen.  The application was  rejected.   He  resubmitted
    the application in October 2010 and it was refused in January 2011.  He
    appealed and was allowed discretionary leave to remain.  He  failed  to
    make an application to renew his leave and remained without permission.
    He now has new partner, Ms H, and at the time of  the  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal his wife had resolved divorce him.

 6. He had been convicted of offences in 2004 and 2017 and on  27  February
    2018 at the Crown Court at Lincoln he was convicted of  being  involved
    in the production of a class  B  drug,  namely  cannabis,  and  he  was
    sentenced to four months' imprisonment.   He was in the United  Kingdom
    without permission when he was arrested in January 2018 for the matters
    that led to his being sentenced to four months' imprisonment.

 7. He was served papers identifying him as an overstayer in January  2018.
    The Secretary of State decided that his deportation  was  conducive  to
    the public good as a result of his criminal activity and that he should
    be removed.  He responded to receiving notice of the decision to deport
    him with an application for leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds.
    That application was refused and the decision was appealed. The  appeal
    was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal and it is the decision to  allow
    the appeal that is the subject of the appeal before me.

 8. The Secretary of State's decision was said to be  consistent  with  the
    policy commitment made by the then Secretary of State at a Labour Party
    conference in 2007. It is described conveniently  as  the  "Bournemouth
    Commitment". It is policy that "those involved in gun crime or  selling
    drugs  would  not  be  allowed  to  remain  in  the   United   Kingdom,
    irrespective of the length of sentence handed down or served".

 9. The Secretary  of  State  has  decided  that  the  claimant  should  be
    deported.  The Secretary of State noted  that  the  claimant  had  been
    convicted of possessing a controlled drug of class B and fined in  July
    2017 and that he was in trouble again in January 2018.   The  Secretary
    of State took a very serious  view  of  producing  class  B  drugs  and
    commented on the "severe and negative impact on society" caused by  the
    trade in illicit drugs.  The Secretary of State said at paragraph 59 of
    the Decision to Refuse a Human Rights claim:

         "Whilst you do not have  an  extensive  criminal  record  the  Home
         Office takes the view that the serious harm which would  be  caused
         as a result of any similar instances of offending is such  that  it
         is not considered reasonable to leave the public vulnerable to  the
         potential for you to reoffend."

10. The Secretary of State then  considered  submissions  relating  to  the
    claimant's private and family life and  particularly  the  relationship
    between the claimant  and  his  partner  and  went  on  to  refuse  the
    application on human rights grounds.

11. It is apt to remember that the First-tier Tribunal was  concerned  with
    an appeal against a decision refusing leave on human rights grounds and
    that the only ground of appeal is that "the removal  of  the  appellant
    from the United Kingdom would be unlawful under section 6 of the  Human
    Rights Act 1998..." (Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,
    section 84)(1)(c).

12. The First-tier Tribunal looked carefully at the relevant  Rules.   They
    are set out in the decision and the  judge  had  particular  regard  to
    paragraph 398(c) of HC 395.  It comes under  the  heading  "Deportation
    and Article 8". The Rule states:

         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and

         (a)  ...

         (b)  ...

         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of  the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for  the
         law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

13. In summary, paragraph 399 applies to relationship with  a  child  or  a
    partner and paragraph 399A applies when there has been  long  residence
    and integration. The claimant has not relied on a relationship  with  a
    child and he cannot come within the provisions of paragraph 399 because
    his  relationship  with  his  present  partner  was  formed  when   his
    immigration status was precarious and for much of its duration when  he
    did not have leave at all.

14. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  looked  carefully  at  the  sentencing
    remarks made when the claimant was sent to prison. It was accepted that
    the claimant was growing cannabis for his own use.  The  claimant  does
    suffer from significant back pain and some people do regard cannabis as
    a useful pain blocker.  The claimant has now  found  more  conventional
    treatment that has worked.

15. The First-tier Tribunal judge noted that the prison  sentence  was  for
    only four months yet the Secretary of State relied  on  the  contention
    that the claimant's offending "has caused serious harm".  As far  as  I
    can ascertain that was never stated expressly in the Decision to Refuse
    a Human Rights Claim which referred to  the  "very  serious  harm  that
    would be caused as a result of any  similar  incidents  of  offending".
    However I have not been able to find a copy of page 2 of  the  Decision
    to Deport amongst the many copies of that decision that are before  me.
    Be that as it may, the judge was clearly satisfied that the Decision to
    Deport was made because the claimant's offending  "has  caused  serious
    harm" because that is what the  judge  said  at  paragraph  45  of  his
    decision. The judge then found the Secretary  of  State's  reasons  for
    making  the  order  inadequate.   He  noted   that   the   "Bournemouth
    Commitment" referred to the selling of drugs and there was no  evidence
    that the claimant had ever been involved in selling drugs.   The  judge
    did not accept that the claimant's  behaviour  was  capable  of  having
    caused or causing serious harm.

16. The judge then looked at the claimant's case based on his  relationship
    with his partner.  His partner is a British citizen. They were residing
    together when the offence was committed.  The judge noted the Secretary
    of State's finding that:

         "... it is not accepted that your relationship with Ms H was formed
         when you were in the UK lawfully and your  immigration  status  was
         not precarious."

17. The claimant said that he was in the United Kingdom lawfully  when  his
    relationship started.  He had discretionary leave  until  19  September
    2017 and he started to become friendly with  Ms  H  in  February  2017.
    Although still married in law his close relationship with his wife  was
    over when he and Ms H met.  The  judge  found  that  the  claimant  was
    lawfully in the United Kingdom when his relationship with Ms H  started
    as his leave had not lapsed when the  relationship  began.   The  judge
    realised  that  the  claimant's  status  had  never  been  better  than
    precarious and concluded that the claimant could not satisfy the  Rules
    because the relationship was formed when the  relationship  status  was
    precarious.

18. The judge noted guidance published by  the  Secretary  of  State  about
    whether an offence has caused  serious  harm  and  concluded  that  the
    claimant had not caused serious  harm  by  his  offending.   The  judge
    decided  that  the  Rules  did  not  require  consideration  of   "very
    compelling circumstances" to outweigh the public interest  because  the
    claimant should not have been subject to deportation.

19. The judge also considered part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act  2002.   He  decided  that  the  claimant  and  Mrs  H  were
    "soulmates" and found it unduly harsh to expect her to leave the United
    Kingdom or to live in the United Kingdom without her partner.  He  went
    on to allow the appeal.

20. The grounds complain that the judge should not have  concerned  himself
    with the application  of  the  policy  summarised  as  the  Bournemouth
    Commitment.  I agree.  The requirement of the Rule is that "in the view
    of the Secretary of State", the  offending  has  caused  serious  harm.
    Clearly if the Secretary of State reaches that conclusion  irrationally
    then the decision is likely to attract judicial review but the case  is
    before the First-tier Tribunal precisely because the Secretary of State
    has decided to make a deportation order and to  refuse  an  application
    for leave to remain on human rights grounds.   There  is  no  right  to
    appeal the decision to make the deportation order.  That  is  a  matter
    for the Secretary of State  subject  to  the  possibility  of  judicial
    review.

21. I appreciate it  is  difficult  to  conduct  an  "article  8  balancing
    exercise" when the judge deciding the appeal  considers  that  decision
    that led to the  balancing  exercise  was  wrong.   However,  and  with
    respect, the judge rather lost sight  of  his  function  which  was  to
    decide if a decision under the Immigration  Acts  breaches  a  person's
    rights to respect for private and family life. The judge did not decide
    the appeal properly by concluding that the  claimant  should  not  have
    been subject to deportation. That was not his function.

22. When conducting a balancing exercise it is  always  necessary  to  have
    regard to the Rules because it is hard to say that a  person's  removal
    is proportionate when he can show that he can satisfy the  requirements
    of the rules that apply to his application. Even  though  there  is  no
    appeal under the rules a balancing exercising outside the rules can  be
    illuminated by public policy expressed in the rules.

23. However Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    applies when a tribunal is required to determine with a decision  under
    the Immigration Acts breaches a  person's  right  to  respect  for  his
    private and family life and must be considered by a judge deciding such
    an appeal.

24. Section 117C sets out "additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
    foreign criminals" but "foreign criminals" are defined at s117D(2) with
    reference to the length of sentence, being a  persistent  offender  and
    having been convicted of "an offence that has caused serious  harm".  A
    person can be a national of a country other than the United Kingdom who
    has been  convicted  of  a  criminal  offence  without  consequentially
    becoming a "foreign criminal" for the purpose of section 117C and  such
    a person is not subject to  the  "additional  considerations  in  cases
    involving foreign criminals" when a Tribunal is considering an  article
    8 balancing exercise.

25. A "foreign criminal" thus defined  includes  a  person  who  "has  been
    convicted  of  an  offence  that  has  caused  serious  harm"  (Section
    117D(2)(c)(ii)).  It is plain from reading the Act that it is  for  the
    judge determining the appeal to decide if the claimant  is  a  "foreign
    criminal" which, in this case, means if the clamant has been  convicted
    of an offence that has caused serious harm.  Clearly  the  trial  judge
    will consider the Secretary of State's views but the judge is not bound
    by them. Part 5A does not apply to the Secretary of State  but  to  the
    court or Tribunal determining a claim under the Immigration Acts.

26. It is quite clear here that the judge decided that the claimant had not
    been convicted of an offence that caused serious harm. On  the  judge's
    findings the claimant is not a "foreign criminal" for the  purposes  of
    Part 5A and, again on the judge's findings, the claimant has a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with his partner.

27. Notwithstanding his  (irrelevant)  reservations  about  the  underlying
    reasons for the Respondent making a Deportation  Order  the  judge  was
    clearly obliged to decide for himself if the claimant  was  a  "foreign
    criminal" within section  117C.  He  concluded,  rationally,  that  the
    claimant was not such a  person  and,  correctly,  did  not  apply  the
    "additional considerations in cases involving a  foreign  criminal"  to
    his deliberations.

28. It does not follow from this that he was right to allow the appeal  and
    the Secretary of State maintains that the judge erred in  allowing  the
    appeal.  However the decision to allow the appeal under  the  rules  is
    criticised at point 4 of the grounds which states:

         "Therefore having found that the  [claimant]  could  not  meet  the
         requirement of the rules [57, 61 and 75], the  FTTJ  was  bound  to
         consider very compelling circumstances rather  than  an  outside  a
         rules consideration. As such it is respectfully submitted that  the
         FTTJ has erred in law  in  his  approach  and  application  of  the
         deportation regime."

29. The reference to "very compelling circumstances" here is a reference to
    the requirement of paragraph 398(c) of the Rules where it is said  "the
    Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider  whether
    paragraphs 399 and 399A  applies,  and  if  it  does  not,  the  public
    interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors  where
    there are very compelling circumstances over and above those  described
    in paragraphs 399 and 399A".

30. This criticism is misconceived. It is not for the Judge to follow rules
    directed to the Secretary of State. The Judge was obliged to apply Part
    5A. On the facts of this case as he found them the Judge was obliged to
    rule that section 117C did not apply because  the  claimant  is  not  a
    foreign criminal and to consider section 117B.

31. The Judge has given reasons for allowing the appeal. He found that  the
    relationship was not established when then claimant was in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully and  decided,  particularly  for  reasons  given  at
    paragraphs 77-79 to allow the appeal. Those findings are not criticised
    in the grounds.

32. It follows that although the  First-tier  Tribunal  clearly  erred  the
    Secretary of State has wholly failed to establish that  the  error  was
    material




Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 8 April 2019                   |




