
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09086/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th January 2020                          |On 30th  January 2020         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     C O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Smith of Counsel, instructed by Bankfield Heath
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Bashir
    made following a hearing on 18th October 2018 at Bradford.

 2.  The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Ghana.  She   claimed  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection and permission to remain in  the  UK  on  human
    rights grounds but was refused by the respondent on 4th July 2018.  The
    judge dismissed her appeal on all grounds.

 3. The appellant sought permission  to  challenge  the  decision  and  was
    granted permission by the Upper Tribunal on 20th February  2019  having
    first been refused permission at the First-tier.

 4. This matter first came before me  on  24th  May  2019.   The  appellant
    requested an adjournment of the appeal as she was  in  the  process  of
    applying for a British passport for her child which would  be  material
    to the outcome of the decision.

 5. There was a Case Management Review on 2nd September  2019  when  I  was
    told that the passport application had not yet been processed.

 6. At a further hearing on 18th  November  2019  I  was  informed  that  a
    British passport had now in fact been issued to the child.

 7. On that basis Ms Smith asked for leave to vary her grounds  for  appeal
    in order to challenge the judge's decision in relation to Article 8.

 8. Mr Diwnycz, the Presenting Officer on that occasion  had  no  objection
    and indeed accepted that the judge had erred in law.

 9. Judge Bashir recorded at paragraph 52 of his determination that it  had
    been asserted by the appellant that her child was entitled  to  British
    citizenship by virtue of his father's nationality at the  date  of  his
    birth.  The judge declined to make  any  finding  with  regard  to  the
    child's nationality.

10. He erred in law, first by failing to make  a  decision  on  a  material
    matter and second, in that he appeared to have been  operating  on  the
    basis of a mistake in fact. The judge believed that the  appellant  was
    not able to establish her  child's  British  nationality  when  at  all
    material times the respondent had  the  information  before  him  which
    could establish that the child was indeed British.

11. Accordingly the decision was set aside.

12. At the hearing on 20th January 2020 Mr McVeety conceded that the appeal
    should be allowed under Article 8. On that  basis  Ms  Smith  confirmed
    that she was no longer pursuing the challenge in relation to the asylum
    claim.

13. Mr McVeety  was  right  to  concede  this  case.   It  is  plainly  not
    reasonable to remove this  British  child.   On  the  findings  of  the
    original judge he suffers from a congenital heart condition  for  which
    he is still receiving treatment. Moreover on the findings of the  judge
    the appellant has no familial support and no immediate accommodation or
    employment in Ghana. The child would therefore be removed  to potential
    destitution.

14. This matter could and should have been resolved two years ago.




Decision

15. The original judge erred in law.  His decision is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as  follows.   The  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  is
    dismissed.  The appellant's appeal on human rights grounds is  allowed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





[pic]
Signed                              Date 27 January 2020


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


