
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09353/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 August and 2 November 2018             |On 22 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                              Sr (afghanistan)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, Counsel instructed by Lawrence & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke (13.08.18) and Mr S. Kandola (02.11.18),
                    Senior Home Office Presenting Officers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Samimi sitting at Hatton Cross on 23  October  2017)  dismissing
    his appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  to
    recognise him as a refugee, or as otherwise requiring international  or
    human rights protection.   The  Judge  accepted  his  account  of  past
    persecution at the hands of the Taliban, and found it would be safe and
    reasonable for the appellant to relocate internally  to  the  place  of
    residence of his maternal uncle, with whom he was in contact.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 25 May 2018, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:  "There  is  arguable  merit  in  the
    assertion in the grounds that the Judge made conflicting findings about
    the location of the appellant's uncle and the  appellant's  ability  to
    relocate to his uncle's village.  Since the Judge's findings in  regard
    to the appellant's uncle are arguably relevant to all the grounds,  all
    grounds may be argued."

Relevant Background Facts

 3. The appellant says  that  he  arrived  in  the  UK  on  10  March  2013
    clandestinely, and he is recorded as having claimed asylum  on  31  May
    2013.  When arrested by Immigration officers, he gave his name as being
    'Tutakhil Gullwali' with a  date  of  birth  of  1  January  1992.   He
    subsequently said that this was a false name and  date  of  birth,  and
    that he had given this false information because he had  panicked.   In
    the subsequent refusal letter, the respondent's case was  that  he  had
    attempted to deceive or mislead by providing a false name and  date  of
    birth.  While it was not disputed that his true identity  was  that  of
    'SR', it was contended that his true date of birth was 15 October 1994,
    not 15 October 1997.  This was because he was considered to be  clearly
    over the age of 18 at the time of his arrival, and the evidence that he
    provided in support of his date of birth of  15  October  1997  carried
    little weight "due to the passport photo being glued on  and  the  fact
    that it was filled in in pen."

 4. As summarised in  the  refusal  decision  of  12  September  2017,  the
    appellant's claim was that his father had been in the Taliban and  that
    he had disappeared in 2011.  After his father went missing, some of the
    Taliban members said that he should join them.  He  was  aged  thirteen
    and a half at the time. The Taliban knocked at his door, and  after  he
    opened it, they grabbed him and put him in a vehicle and took him to  a
    madrasa.  It was in the mountains.  He spent two to three months  doing
    menial jobs in the madrasa, such as washing dishes.  The  Taliban  also
    provided him with training on the Quran, and on Jihad,  and  they  beat
    him whenever he did something wrong.  He managed  to  escape  when  the
    madrasa was raided by the police and the Americans.  When he got  home,
    his maternal uncle arranged for him to leave  the  country  through  an
    agent.  Two days later, he fled Afghanistan.  The  screening  interview
    on 31 May 2013 had taken place some 11 months after his departure.

 5. The respondent refused the appellant's asylum  claim,  as  it  was  not
    accepted that his father had been in the Taliban, or that he  had  been
    kidnapped by the Taliban.  In addition, with regard to future risk,  he
    had failed to show that upon return the Taliban would have the means or
    the will to pursue him.  Internal relocation was a  viable  option  for
    him, as his fear of return only related to his home village  of  Zirani
    in Laghman province.  Zirani village  was  just  over  100  miles  from
    Kabul.  It would not be unreasonable to expect him to return to  Kabul,
    having regard to the case law of  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
    [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) and the fact that his mother and  maternal  uncle
    were still in Afghanistan.



The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Samimi.   The  Judge
    had received oral evidence from the appellant and took into  account  a
    Country Expert Report prepared by Dr Guistozzi.

 7. In her subsequent decision, the Judge's  findings  of  credibility  and
    fact were set out at paragraph  [10]-[24].   She  found  that,  in  the
    absence of an age-assessment interview, and given  the  appellant's  ID
    document, "which has not been verified by the Respondent", she gave the
    appellant the benefit of the doubt in relation to his  date  of  birth.
    She also accepted that he had been kidnapped by the Taliban.

 8. One of her reasons for accepting this was  that  the  letter  from  his
    maternal uncle confirmed that his  father  had  been  working  for  the
    Taliban before his disappearance.  He also corroborated the appellant's
    account of having been kidnapped by the Taliban for three  months.  She
    added at the end of [16]: "The Appellant's maternal uncle has confirmed
    that he has relocated to an unknown location in order  to  protect  his
    family.   On  one  occasion,  the  Appellant's  uncle  re-visited   the
    Appellant's home in order to collect  his  national  ID  (Taskira)  and
    found a letter from the Taliban."

 9. The Judge continued  in  paragraph  [17]:  "In  cross-examination,  the
    Appellant confirmed that he has been in contact with his uncle who  has
    sent him the letter from the Taliban.   The  appellant  said  that  his
    uncle would not be able to protect him as the Taliban would target him.
     However, I note that the appellant's uncle lives in  another  village,
    namely the village of Farman Khel, which is about 2.5 hours  away  from
    his own village.  There is no suggestion that the Appellant's uncle has
    been traced and targeted by the  Taliban  in  order  to  ascertain  the
    Appellant's whereabouts, or that  the  Appellant's  uncle  himself  has
    worked for the Taliban at any stage.  I find that whilst I  accept  the
    core of the Appellant's claim relating to having been kidnapped by  the
    Taliban, the evidence before me clearly does show that he is in contact
    with his maternal uncle who has been able to live with  his  family  in
    relative safety.  While it is reasonably likely that the Appellant  may
    be at risk of being recruited by the Taliban  on  return  to  his  home
    village, there is no reason why  he  cannot  relocate  to  his  uncle's
    village, with whom he is in contact with (sic)."

10. Having considered the expert evidence about the viability  of  internal
    relocation to Kabul, the Judge  reached  the  following  conclusion  at
    paragraph [23]: "In considering the internal relocation, the Appellant,
    who would be returning from the West, would  have  his  family  support
    network as he continued to maintain contact with  his  maternal  uncle,
    and would by virtue of his maternal uncle's support have  access  to  a
    home and family life.  I find in the circumstances of this case, whilst
    the appellant's internal relocation to the wider Kabul would be  unduly
    harsh, nevertheless, the Appellant would have the support of his family
    who could provide him with protection."

The Error of Law Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

11. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Clarke conceded at the outset that the Judge had made a factual
    error with regard to  the  location  of  the  appellant's  uncle.   The
    village of Farman Khel was where the appellant's uncle had lived in the
    past.  In his witness statement of 23 October 2017, to which the  Judge
    made reference at paragraph [16], the uncle said that he had  left  his
    house and his village to protect his nephew's family and that he  lived
    at a different address, which he could not disclose.

Reasons for finding an Error of Law

12. The Judge has made inconsistent findings  about  the  location  of  the
    appellant's uncle.  On the one hand, at paragraph [16], she appears  to
    accept the uncle's  evidence  that  he  has  relocated  to  an  unknown
    location; but, on the other hand, at paragraph [17],   she  confidently
    asserts that the uncle is living in the village of Farman  Khel,  which
    is about 2.5 hours away from the appellant's home village.

13. It is reasonable to question whether the  Judge's  error  is  material,
    given that, wherever the uncle is, it is reasonable for  the  Judge  to
    infer that the uncle is living in relative safety.   However,  even  if
    the uncle and his family are living in relative  safety,  it  does  not
    necessarily follow that it is reasonable to  expect  the  appellant  to
    join them. The Judge does not engage with the question of whether there
    is an Article 15(c) risk as defined in the Qualification Directive - "a
    serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or person by  reason
    of indiscriminate violence in situations  of  international  and  armed
    conflict" - in the area where the appellant's uncle is located  and  so
    she does not make a positive finding that  there  is  no  such  Article
    15(c) risk.

14. Dr Guistozzi's expert evidence  is  that  there  is  a  high  level  of
    violence in Laghman province. So  arguably  relocation  within  Laghman
    province is unreasonable because there is -  at  least  arguably  -  an
    Article 15(c) risk throughout Laghman province.   The  same  cannot  of
    course be said of Kabul province.  However, the Judge failed to make  a
    clear finding as to whether internal relocation to Kabul was  a  viable
    option for the appellant.  It is  not  clear  what  she  meant  by  the
    finding that the appellant's internal relocation "to the  wider  Kabul"
    would be unduly harsh. This finding sits  uneasily  with  the  parallel
    finding that the appellant could reasonably be  expected  to  join  his
    uncle in a village, as opposed to in Kabul city. It is also unclear how
    the Judge arrived at the  conclusion  that  relocation  "to  the  wider
    Kabul" would be unduly harsh, as  the  background  evidence  which  the
    Judge cites at paragraph [21] concerning growing  insecurity  does  not
    appear to relate to Kabul province.

15. The upshot is that the Judge's assessment of the viability of  internal
    relocation is unsatisfactory and flawed, and her findings on this topic
    are unsafe. Accordingly, the decision must be set aside and re-made.

Ruling on the Forum for Remaking

16. After hearing from Mr Fripp and Mr Clarke, I ruled  that  this  was  an
    appropriate case for retention by the Upper Tribunal.  This was because
    there was no challenge to the findings of fact made by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the issue of past persecution; and also because  the  issue
    of future risk, including Article  15  (c)  risk,  was  going  to  turn
    primarily on the application of the latest Country  Guidance  authority
    of AS and on the expert evidence of Dr Guistozzi.

The Resumed Hearing to Remake the Decision

17. For the purposes of the resumed hearing to  remake  the  decision,  the
    appellant's solicitors  filed  a  supplementary  bundle  containing  an
    update witness statement from the appellant dated 20 September 2018;  a
    supplementary  Country  Expert  Report  from  Dr  Guistozzi  dated   23
    September  2018;  UNHCR  eligibility  guidelines  for   assessing   the
    international protection needs of asylum seekers from Afghanistan dated
    30 August 2018; and an article from the  Independent  about  an  Afghan
    father who had been shot dead by the Taliban after  being  deported  by
    the Home Office.

18. At the outset of the  hearing,  Mr  Fripp  also  served  the  following
    documents: a note which he had prepared on the topic of sufficiency  of
    protection/internal relocation; an extract from the EASO  COIR  on  the
    security situation in Afghanistan dated January  2016;  a  Home  Office
    Country Policy and Information Note dated January 2018 on the topic  of
    Afghans  perceived  as  westernised;  a  Home  Office  Country   Policy
    Information  Note  on  the  security  and  humanitarian  situation   in
    Afghanistan dated April 2018; and AS (Safety of Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC).

19. The appellant was called as a witness, and he spoke  through  a  Pashtu
    interpreter  whom  he  clearly  understood.   He  adopted  his  witness
    statement of 20 September 2018 as  his  evidence  in  chief.   In  this
    statement he said that he still had telephone contact with  his  uncle.
    His uncle had told him not to return.  He made  it  clear  that  if  he
    returned, he would be putting his life in danger and also he  would  be
    endangering the lives of his uncle's family members and the life of his
    mother.

20. He said that his uncle would not assist him or allow him to  live  with
    him if he went back.  Also, he did not  believe  that  financially  his
    uncle would be able to support him.  He had no doubt that he would  not
    be safe from the Taliban anywhere in Laghman province.

21. The appellant was cross-examined by Mr Kandola, and  he  also  answered
    questions for clarification purposes from me.  As well as  his  mother,
    his uncle was looking after his  two  brothers  and  two  sisters.   He
    agreed that his brother Abdul was now 18.  He had last  spoken  to  his
    uncle about a month ago.  Sometimes his mobile was switched off when he
    attempted to telephone his uncle.   He  spoke  to  his  family  on  his
    uncle's mobile telephone.  He knew that they had moved  away  from  his
    uncle's home village, but he did not know  their  current  whereabouts.
    He had asked his uncle, but his uncle would not tell him.  He was asked
    why his uncle would not tell him.  He said it was in order to avoid him
    being deported.  Also, there would be difficulties.   His  uncle  could
    not help him because this would put his own family at risk.

22. He did not know what his sisters or brothers were doing.   He  had  not
    asked what his brothers were doing.  He assumed that his  sisters  were
    not working, as generally women in Afghanistan did not work.

23. In his closing submissions on behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mr  Kandola
    acknowledged that the  appellant  had  been  found  credible  in  other
    aspects of his claim, but he submitted that it was not credible that he
    did not know the whereabouts of his uncle  and  other  family  members.
    There was no good reason why his uncle should not inform the  appellant
    of their whereabouts.  The appellant's siblings were not at  risk.   He
    also noted that the primary reason for the  uncle's  alleged  reticence
    was that the appellant might be deported if he told the appellant where
    they were.

24. In any event, there was no reason to suppose that his uncle  would  not
    assist the appellant on his return.  He had coordinated the appellant's
    exit from Afghanistan, and there was no reason why the uncle would  not
    have the resources to assist  the  appellant,  even  if  he  was  in  a
    different province.

25. The expert evidence of Dr Guistozzi was at variance with  the  guidance
    given in AS, in that he asserted that there was  a  real  risk  of  the
    appellant being interrogated and tortured by the authorities in  Kabul.
    Dr Guistozzi's assumption that the appellant's father was  a  Commander
    in the Taliban was not borne out by the evidence.   Mr Kandola also did
    not accept that there had been a major deterioration  in  the  security
    situation in Kabul since October 2017.

26. In reply, Mr Fripp invited me to make a positive credibility finding in
    respect of the appellant's evidence about his uncle.  He submitted that
    it was reasonably likely to be  true.   The  uncle  had  understandable
    reasons for concealment.  He was the dominant male in the family  unit,
    and he would wish to protect himself and his own family.

27. With regard to the  security  situation  in  Kabul,  the  latest  UNHCR
    Guidelines showed that there  were  negative  trends  in  the  security
    situation such that international relocation  to  Kabul  had  generally
    ceased to be a  reasonable  option.   The  guidance  given  in  AS  was
    "coloured" by the latest guidance from the UNHCR.

28. In addition, AS acknowledged that individual risk factors needed to  be
    taken into account.  The appellant could not be expected to conceal his
    background, and he faced the problem of disclosure.  It  was  extremely
    likely, given Dr Guistozzi's updated report, that  on  his  return  the
    appellant would be asked about his past history at the airport or at  a
    checkpoint.  There were also  other  respects  in  which  he  would  be
    particularly vulnerable.  These were his long absence from the  country
    since the age of 12 or 13, and his westernisation.

Discussion and Findings on Remaking

29. The agreed starting point is that it is not safe for the  appellant  to
    return to Laghman province.  The issue is whether the appellant  has  a
    well-founded fear of persecution in Kabul, and, if not, whether he  can
    nonetheless reasonably be expected to stay in Kabul: see Paragraph 339O
    of the Rules.

Whether Risk of Persecution or Serious Harm in Kabul

30. The first issue which arises on the evidence is whether there is a real
    risk of the appellant suffering persecutory harm in Kabul either at the
    hands at the Taliban or at the hands of the authorities.   With  regard
    to the former, the guidance of the Tribunal in AS is that a person  who
    is of lower level interest to the Taliban (i.e. not a senior government
    or security services official, or a  spy),  is  not  at  real  risk  of
    persecution from the Taliban in Kabul.

31. I note in passing that,  in  reaching  this  conclusion,  the  Tribunal
    rejected the expert evidence of Dr Guistozzi that the  Taliban  keep  a
    black list of all those who are wanted by the Taliban (paragraph 174).

32. With regard to the appellant's particular profile, I note that  at  the
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, Counsel for the appellant said that
    Dr Guistozzi was wrong to refer to the appellant's father as a  Taliban
    Commander.

33. Moreover, in his updated report, Dr Guistozzi says that Taliban efforts
    to forcefully recruit the appellant would not extend far from his  home
    area. From the context, it is apparent that he is opining that the risk
    of forcible recruitment is confined to the  appellant's  home  district
    and surrounding districts of Laghman province, and that the  risk  does
    not extend throughout Laghman province.  A fortiori, the  risk  to  the
    appellant of adverse  interest  from  the  Taliban  in  Kabul  must  be
    minimal.

34. At paragraph 38 of the report, Dr Guistozzi says that in all likelihood
    the appellant would have to seek support, employment and  accommodation
    in Eastern Kabul, where ethnic Pashtuns usually  live.   He  says  that
    this is the area of Kabul which is most infiltrated by the Taliban, and
    there would be  a  likelihood  that  the  Taliban  would  approach  the
    appellant for recruitment.  But earlier in his report, at paragraph  4,
    Dr Guistozzi says that, with a few exceptions, there is no evidence  of
    the Taliban actually practising  forced  recruitment.  He  goes  on  to
    describe the few exceptions, and none of these would be  applicable  in
    Eastern Kabul.

35. Dr Guistozzi opines that the greater threat that  the  appellant  would
    face in Kabul is the adverse attention of the authorities on account of
    his family background and profile. However, risk  of  ill-treatment  by
    the authorities is not a factor identified by the  Tribunal  in  AS  as
    militating against the viability of internal relocation to Kabul.

36. The guidance in AS is that in general it would not be  unreasonable  or
    unduly harsh for a single adult male in  good  health  to  relocate  to
    Kabul, even if he does not have any  specific  connections  or  support
    network in Kabul.

37. However, the particular circumstances of the individual applicant  must
    be taken into account in the context of the conditions of the place  of
    relocation, including the person's age; the nature and quality  of  his
    support network/connections with Kabul/Afghanistan;  his  physical  and
    mental health; and his language, education and vocational skills.

38. In any event, even if the appellant was questioned about his background
    by the authorities in Kabul, there  are  not  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that  the  following  disclosure  to  the  authorities  would
    engender a real risk of him being tortured by the authorities in  Kabul
    on suspicion of being an  insurgent,  namely:  (a)  that  his  deceased
    father fought for the Taliban many years ago, and (b) that he  fled  to
    the  West  to  escape  forced  recruitment  by  the  Taliban  with  the
    assistance of his uncle who is not affiliated to the Taliban.

Whether Article 15(c) Risk in Kabul

39. Even taking  into  account  the  latest  UNHCR  Guidelines,  I  am  not
    persuaded that the situation in Kabul has deteriorated to a point where
    there is now an Article  15(c)  risk  in  Kabul  or  that  the  general
    situation in Kabul is such that the guidance given in  AS  set  out  at
    [36] above no longer holds good.

Whether Relocation to Kabul is unreasonable having  regard  to  the  general
circumstances prevailing there and the Appellant's personal circumstances

40. There are not substantial grounds for believing that the appellant will
    be completely bereft of any support from his maternal uncle  on  return
    to Kabul.

41. Since the agreed starting point is that there is an Article 15(c)  risk
    throughout Laghman province, there are  strong  grounds  for  believing
    that the uncle  must  have  relocated  with  his  own  family  and  the
    appellant's family to Kabul, which, as the Tribunal noted in AS,  is  a
    magnet for relocation from neighbouring provinces.  The probability  of
    this being the case is strengthened by the fact that the primary reason
    apparently given by  the  uncle  for  not  telling  the  appellant  his
    whereabouts is to prevent him from being deported.

42. But even if the uncle  has  not  relocated  to  Kabul,  there  are  not
    substantial grounds for believing that he would not be willing or  able
    to assist the appellant from a distance. He must  have  had  access  to
    considerable financial resources to fund the appellant's  trip  to  the
    West, and also to move his family and the appellant's family  from  his
    home village in Laghman province to a safer location.

43. I do not consider that the  personal  circumstances  of  the  appellant
    relied upon by Mr Fripp are such as to render his relocation  to  Kabul
    unreasonable, given  his  age,  his  state  of  health,  his  level  of
    education, his ability to speak Pashtu and his  family  connections  in
    Afghanistan.

44. In conclusion, I find that the appellant has not discharged the  burden
    of proving that he qualifies for recognition as a refugee, or  that  on
    return to Afghanistan he would face a real risk of serious harm of such
    severity as to cross the threshold of Article 3 ECHR.  It is  also  not
    shown that he qualifies for humanitarian protection in accordance  with
    paragraph 339C or for subsidiary protection under Article 15(c) of  the
    Qualification Directive.

45. With regard to a private life claim under Rule 276ADE, in the light  of
    my findings of fact under  Paragraph  339O  of  the  rules,  I  do  not
    consider  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration into life and society in Afghanistan.

46. With regard to an Article 8 claim outside  the  Rules,  I  accept  that
    questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar test should be answered  in  favour  of
    the appellant with regard to the establishment of private life  in  the
    UK.  Questions 3 and 4 of the Razgar test must be answered in favour of
    the respondent.  On the issue of  proportionality,  I  must  take  into
    account the  relevant  public  interest  considerations  arising  under
    section 117B of the 2002  Act.  None  of  these  militate  against  the
    proportionality of the appellant's removal in circumstances  where  his
    protection claim has failed.  The decision appealed against  strikes  a
    fair balance between the appellant's rights and interests and those  of
    wider society.  It is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought
    to  be  achieved,  namely  the  maintenance  of  firm   and   effective
    immigration controls.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted:

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 15 November 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

