
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09322/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (remote video means)     |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 20 October 2020                            |On 2 November 2020           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     RAB
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer of Counsel, instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using Skype.  A face
    to face hearing was not held to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19 and as all issues could be determined by  remote  means.   The
    documents were available in paper format on the court file.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Neill promulgated on 7 January 2020, in which the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claim dated 19 September 2019 was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant is a national  of  Iran,  who  has  lived  in  Iraq  from
    childhood until 2015, following which he made his  way  to  the  United
    Kingdom, arriving on 4 January 2017 and claimed  asylum  the  following
    day.  The Appellant's claim to be at risk on return to Iran due to  his
    personal and family connections with the KDPI and due to  his  interest
    in Christianity following arrival in the United Kingdom.

 4. The Respondent refused  the  application  for  the  following  reasons.
    First, it was not accepted that the Appellant was an Iranian  national,
    although it was accepted that he was Kurdish.  Secondly, the Respondent
    did not accept that the Appellant had any personal involvement with the
    KDPI due to  inconsistencies  in  the  claim  and  a  lack  of  detail.
    Thirdly, the Respondent did not accept that any of his  family  members
    had been killed or kidnapped because  of  involvement  with  the  KDPI,
    author on the basis of inconsistencies in  the  claim  and  a  lack  of
    detail.  Fourthly, it was not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  any
    significant interest in  Christianity  nor  has  he  converted  to  it.
    Further, the Appellant had  not  established  that  he  had  left  Iran
    illegally and  adverse  credibility  findings  were  made  pursuant  to
    section 8 on the basis that he had previously passed the number of safe
    countries before claiming asylum in the United Kingdom.   Overall,  the
    Respondent did not accept that the Appellant would be at risk on return
    to Iran on the basis of his Kurdish ethnicity and there were  no  other
    factors indicate a risk.  The Appellant's private and family  life,  as
    well as claimed mental health problems were taken into account  believe
    also refused on these grounds.

 5. Judge O'Neill dismissed the appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  7
    January 2020 on all grounds.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that
    there was realistic prospect that the Appellant an Iranian national and
    there was no dispute that he was of Kurdish ethnicity.   It  was  found
    that the Appellant's father was not of  any  adverse  interest  to  the
    Iranian authorities, nor  was  he  killed  by  them,  although  it  was
    accepted that it was possible that he supported the KDPI and the family
    moved to the IKR in Iraq for that reason.  Further, it was  found  that
    neither the Appellant's mother or sister  had  been  kidnapped  by  the
    Iranian authorities reason  of  any  family  involvement  in  the  KDPI
    either.  In relation to the Appellant's claimed  involvement  with  the
    KDPI, the First-tier Tribunal found that he had not made anything  more
    than a minor contribution to the KDPI.  The conclusion on this point is
    contained in paragraphs 56 and 57 of the decision as follows:

         "56. I note that in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 430 it was  held
         that SSH and HR was not authority for any proposition  in  relation
         to the risk on return for refused Kurdish asylum-seekers on account
         of their Kurdish ethnicity alone.  It was acknowledged  that  Kurds
         in Iran faced discrimination but that such discrimination is not at
         such a level  as  to  amount  to  persecution  or  Article  3  ill-
         treatment.

         However because the Iranian authorities  have  become  increasingly
         suspicious of Kurdish political activity it  is  said  in  HB  that
         returning  Kurds  are  reasonably  likely  to  be  subjected  to  a
         heightened  scrutiny  at  the  airport   pinch-point   of   return.
         According to this case the fact of being  an  undocumented  Kurdish
         returnee and combined with the legal exit, does not create  a  risk
         of persecution Article 3 ill-treatment.

         Never the less Kurdish ethnicity was found  to  be  a  risk  factor
         which, when combined with other factors, may create a real risk  of
         persecution or Article  3  ill-treatment.   Those  factors  include
         overt  political  activity  connected  to  Kurdish  self-governance
         (which I do not find in the Appellant's case) but also residence in
         the KRI (the independent  Kurdish  governate  in  Iraq).   In  this
         respect what the Appellant was doing there and why he went will  be
         significant.

         'A period of  residence  in  the  KRI  by  a  Kurdish  returnee  is
         reasonably likely  to  result  in  additional  questioning  by  the
         authorities on return.  Whether, this is  a  factor  that  will  be
         highly fact-specific and the degree of interest that such residence
         will excite will depend, non-exhaustively, on matters such  as  the
         length of residence in the KRI, what the person concerned was doing
         there why they left'.

         57.  I find the appellant will be of no interest to the authorities
         on account of his  or  his  father's  political  affiliations,  his
         surplus activity or his so-called Christian conversion.  He will be
         returning as a failed asylum seeker who is undocumented.  The  only
         factors of significance to the Appellant that  he  is  a  Kurd  who
         spent a considerable period of this life in the IKR.  The  question
         therefore arises as to whether,  because  of  his  relatively  long
         residence in the IKR he will be perceived as a  political  opponent
         and thus be enough to create a risk of persecution.

         He went as a child with his parents within their control.  He spent
         about 17 years in the IKR and grew up there, leaving in  2015  aged
         23.  I been referred to no background  material  on  expert  report
         which suggest that such residence in the IKR (mostly as  child)  is
         enough to greater risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment."

   6. The appeal was then dismissed on the basis that the Appellant did  not
      have a well-founded fear of persecution  in  Iran  by  reason  of  his
      religious belief or political activity or  association  by  reason  of
      perceived political opinion because of his residence in the IKR.

The appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals on the single ground that the First-tier Tribunal
    either misunderstood the country guidance in HB or  otherwise  departed
    from it without reasons.   On  the  findings  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, that the Appellant is a national of Iran;  that  he  and  his
    family moved to the IKR due to their support  for  the  KDPI;  that  he
    lived there for 17 years; that the Appellant worked  for  the  KDPI  in
    Iraq and engage in activities including smoking leaflets into Iran; and
    would be subject to additional questioning upon return to  Iran  as  to
    his activities with the KDPI in Iraq; it was said  that  the  Appellant
    fell squarely within paragraph (9) and (10) of the  head  note  setting
    out risk categories in HB such that his appeal should have been allowed
    protection grounds.

 8. At the oral hearing, the respondent  did  not  oppose  the  appeal  and
    submitted on the basis of the express findings made by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal about the Appellant, he would face a risk on return to Iran in
    accordance with the country guidance  in  HB  such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside and remade allowing the appeal.

Findings and reasons

 1. The Respondent's submissions agreeing with the error of law  identified
    by the Appellant were entirely appropriate and correct on the facts  of
    this case.  Whilst the  First-tier  Tribunal  refer  expressly  to  the
    country guidance in HB, it is clear that the Judge failed to apply this
    to the facts found in this  particular  case.   The  paragraphs  quoted
    above fail to consider  holistically  the  findings  of  fact  made  by
    reference to the fore guidance in HB, including  the  Appellant's  low-
    level political activity with the KDPI and his long  residence  in  the
    IKR which are expressly  considered  in  the  country  guidance  to  be
    factors giving rise to a real risk of persecution  or  Article  3  ill-
    treatment.  Although each case  is  fact  specific  and  the  level  of
    involvement, length of residence and reasons for leaving Iraq  must  be
    considered; these matters must be viewed in light of the low  threshold
    for suspicion of the Iranian authorities and  likely  extreme  reaction
    even to low-level activity.  In all of the circumstances, the  findings
    of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal.  Only within the risk  factors
    identified in HB, with no reason to depart from  that  binding  country
    guidance on the such that it was an error of  law  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to dismiss the appeal on protection grounds.

 2. As also accepted by the Respondent it is  therefore  necessary  to  set
    aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  decision  on
    appeal can be remade without any further hearing to allow the appeal to
    the reasons already set out above.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  remake  the  appeal
as follows:

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   G Jackson                           Date         21st October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
