
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/09999/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On January 21, 2019                  |On 12th February 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                          Mr Ahmed Krekar Muhammad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Siddiq, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is an Iraqi national who  claimed  to  have  entered  the
    United Kingdom in September 2017.  He claimed asylum on  September  26,
    2017 and the respondent refused his application on August 2, 2018.

 2. The appellant  appealed  that  decision  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on August 15, 2018 and his
    appeal was heard by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  G  Jones  on
    September 13, 2018 and in a decision promulgated on October 2, 2018 the
    Judge dismissed his appeal on all grounds.

 3. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  on  October  19,  2018.   Within  those
    grounds it was argued that the Judge had erred by  concluding  that  if
    the appellant and  his  partner  had  had  a  relationship  outside  of
    marriage the appellant would have faced a greater risk.   This  finding
    was made despite it not being  raised  in  his  asylum  interview,  the
    decision letter or at the hearing.  By failing to allow  the  appellant
    to address such an issue there was arguably an error of law.

 4. In granting permission to appeal Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Haria
    found it was arguable that such a finding in the circumstances outlined
    above may amount to a material error of law.

 5. On November 28, 2018 the respondent filed a Rule 24  response  opposing
    the appeal and submitting the Judge had directed himself  appropriately
    and had made findings open to him between paragraphs 56 and 58  of  his
    decision.  In particular,  the  conclusions  reached  at  paragraph  58
    formed the basis for the Judge rejecting the asylum claim  and  finding
    adversely on the appellant's credibility.

 6. No anonymity order is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Siddiq adopted the grounds of appeal as presented.  He submitted the
    Judge's approach to credibility, on  the  core  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant involved in an adulterous relationship, was  flawed.   Simply
    put, he submitted the Judge had not accepted the affair was  discovered
    and he referred to key findings in paragraphs 56 to 58 of the  decision
    where the Judge said it would be difficult if the relationship had been
    discovered for there to be no consequences for [A].

 8. At paragraph 58, the Judge had found the fact that  [A]  could  divorce
    her husband and had come to no harm undermined the  appellant's  claim.
    Mr Siddiq submitted it had never been put to the appellant why [A]  did
    not come to any harm and more specifically why she had not come to  any
    harm from her ex-husband, [R].  Limited questions had been put  to  the
    appellant in his interview and Mr Siddiq submitted that these questions
    did not address this issue.  Whilst the Judge had anchored his  finding
    on objective evidence, he had failed to consider the  individual  facts
    of this case when doing so.   In  closing,  Mr  Siddiq  submitted  that
    whilst it was clear [A] would not be at harm from her family the  Judge
    had erred by not considering why she would not be at risk from [R].

 9. Mr Tan adopted the contents of the Rule 24 letter  dated  November  28,
    2018 and referred to the findings at paragraphs 54 and 55  as  well  as
    the findings between paragraphs 56 and 58.  The Judge  had  come  to  a
    finding that she had come to no harm and had been able to  divorce  her
    husband  and  taking  the  earlier  findings  regarding   the   alleged
    relationship that had taken place after her marriage he  submitted  the
    Judge had given adequate  reasons.   Whilst  the  Judge  may  not  have
    addressed  the  specific  question  that  Mr  Siddiq  was  raising,  he
    submitted that the Judge had dealt with the issue at paragraph  56  and
    the matter had been raised indirectly in questions 74 and  182  of  the
    asylum interview.  Alternatively, even if it is a  matter  that  should
    have been specifically raised he  submitted  that  there  had  been  no
    challenge to the issue of internal relocation that was  dealt  with  at
    paragraphs 61 to 66 of the decision.

10. In response Mr Siddiq emphasised the need to establish clear facts  and
    findings with each case turning on its own merits.

    MY FINDINGS

11. This is an appeal brought by the appellant against a decision to refuse
    his protection claim.  Reading the Judge's decision,  it  is  clear  at
    paragraph 59 that the Judge accepted that the appellant and [A] had  at
    one time been in a relationship.  He had noted  the  evidence  to  have
    been that they had met in secret on a roof and had avoided going out in
    public places.  The issue which brought this matter to  the  Tribunal's
    attention was what was alleged to have happened after [A]  had  married
    [R].  The Judge considered that relationship and at paragraphs  54  and
    55 made a number of adverse findings about the appellant's relationship
    with [A] and in particular he did not  find  it  credible  that  having
    taken steps to meet in secret and discreetly that they would repeatedly
    risk meeting up at [A]'s matrimonial home and have taken photographs of
    themselves in her home in the knowledge that her ex-husband was a  high
    ranking Peshmerga soldier from a family that was said to have  a  great
    deal of power and influence in Kurdistan.

12. Those specific findings were not challenged in the  grounds  of  appeal
    and Mr Siddiq, after discussion during the hearing, argued the error of
    law on the basis that the Judge had failed  to  consider  the  specific
    risk posed by [R] to [A] and the appellant  were  he  to  return.   The
    argument advanced was that the Judge had not considered that  risk  and
    his finding that [A] had come to no harm failed  to  address  the  risk
    posed by [R].

13. In considering the risk to both the appellant and [A] the  Judge  noted
    the appellant's response during his asylum  interview  at  question  74
    when he stated that [A] had come to no harm and she would  only  be  at
    risk if he were to return to Iraq.  The challenge today  is  that  more
    weight should have  been  placed  on  the  position  of  [R]  and  that
    relationship that existed between him and [A].

14. I am satisfied that in considering the issue of risk the Judge  had  to
    establish the facts of the case and in doing so he rejected  the  claim
    put forward of events post [A]'s marriage to [R].   The  Judge  clearly
    did not accept the appellant's account and gave  detailed  reasons  for
    this in his decision.  Whilst the Judge did not specifically go  on  to
    consider a risk to [A] from [R], that has to be looked at  against  the
    background of the Judge's reasons for rejecting the claim.   The  Judge
    had clearly not  accepted  what  was  being  put  forward  and  he  was
    satisfied there were no previous problems for [A] and therefore he  was
    not persuaded she would be at  risk  of  an  honour  killing  and  gave
    reasons for this conclusion.

15. The Judge went  on  to  consider  objective  evidence  specifically  in
    relation  to  the  appellant  although  it  seems  the  thrust  of  the
    submissions to me today centred upon the alleged failure by  the  Judge
    to consider the risk to [A].

16. For the reasons I have given above I am satisfied the Judge having made
    the crucial findings he did in paragraphs 54 and 55, and  to  a  lesser
    extent the beginning of paragraph 56, there was no need to  consider  a
    direct threat from [R] because he had  rejected  that  element  of  the
    claim.

17. The Judge went on to consider internal relocation  on  the  basis  that
    even if there was some concern  about  [R]  there  was  the  option  of
    internal  relocation  and  again  this  specific  point  had  not  been
    challenged in the grounds of appeal.

18. It was argued by Mr Siddiq that this subsequent finding was flawed  for
    the same reason namely that the Judge found at paragraph  64  that  [A]
    had not come to any harm at all since he left. The decision needs to be
    read as a whole and whilst I understand the argument put forward by  Mr
    Siddiq I am not persuaded that the argument identifies a material error
    of law and for that reason I dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 7/2/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed
                                Date    7/2/2019
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

