
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09453/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 August 2020                    |On 19 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                     AOO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Adewusi from Crown and Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

This has been a remote hearing which had been consented to by the parties.
The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (v).  A face-to-face hearing
was not held because it was not practicable and all the issues could be
determined in a remote hearing.  The order made is as described at the end
of these reasons.



The appellant, who is a Nigerian national born on 20 September 1982, with
dependants comprising his wife and two children, has appealed to the Upper
Tribunal with permission against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
promulgated on 7 February 2020, dismissing on all grounds his appeal
against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 19 September 2019 to
refuse his claim for international protection and human rights.

At the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing the appellant's representative
abandoned the international protection element of the claim, namely asylum
and humanitarian protection.  Reliance was placed only on the appeal
against the refusal of leave to remain under Appendix FM, paragraph 276ADE,
and Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

The essence of the appellant's factual claim was that he feared return to
Nigeria as a Christian whose life had been threatened by Islamic
extremists.  In addition, the appellant claimed to have been threatened by
his own family, who were unhappy with his choice of wife, and it is said
that his mother caused problems with his wife's pregnancy by practising
voodoo against her.

The judge entirely rejected the appellant's core factual account, finding
he was not of adverse interest to Islamic extremists and not at risk from
his family.

The judge then went on to consider the family life arguments.  The judge
accepted that one of the children, R, was a "qualifying child", and
addressed whether it would be reasonable to expect that child to leave the
UK pursuant to Section 117B(6) and 276ADE(1)(iv).  At paragraph 26 the
judge applied KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 leaving out of account the
immigration history of the parents, to assess reasonableness on the basis
of the facts as they are in the real world.  The parents had no right to
remain.  Their asylum and humanitarian claims had been abandoned and their
core factual account disbelieved.  Even though R was born in the UK in
September of 2012 and had therefore lived here in excess of the seven year
threshold, taking account of the best interests, the judge concluded for
the reasons set out in the decision that it would be reasonable to expect
the child R to follow the rest of the family to Nigeria.  In that
assessment the judge followed the Appendix FM guidance setting out the
findings under headings of the relevant factors.  The judge then considered
Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules but concluded that there were no
compelling circumstances sufficient to justify granting leave to remain
outside the Rules.  It is clear that the judge also took into account the
best interests of the children pursuant to Section 55.

I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in the
light of the grounds of application for permission to appeal and the oral
submissions made to me in the remote hearing.

The grounds submit that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law in
assessing the best interests of the children, in particular that of the
eldest child and qualifying child.  Reliance is placed on MA (Pakistan) &
Ors v Upper Tribunal (IAC) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705, to the effect that
the fact that a child has been in the UK for seven years would need to be
given significant weight in the proportionality balancing exercise and that
the starting point is that leave should be granted unless there are
powerful reasons to the contrary.

Reliance is also placed on the allegedly serious medical condition of the
second child, E, who suffers from autism, which it is argued is not
treatable or supported in Nigeria.  In this regard, the grounds suggest
that because autism was not mentioned in the Home Office's medical
information on treatable conditions in Nigeria this implied that autism was
not treatable in Nigeria and therefore the child met the requirements of
very significant obstacles to integration under paragraph 276ADE.  It is,
therefore, argued that it would be impossible for the family to reintegrate
in Nigeria.

Curiously, the judge granting permission did not give any reasons for
granting permission, simply stating that the grounds may be argued.

As drafted I find the grounds are largely a disagreement with the decision
and an attempt to reargue the appeal.  It is argued that the judge erred in
law "by deciding that the children are to be removed from the UK, despite
the child qualification under the Rules."  However, the grounds ignore that
the Supreme Court has held that this reasonableness assessment has to be
made in the real world context.  In this case, as stated above, the parents
had no independent right to remain.  Their claim to remain rested entirely
on R as a qualifying child and to some extent the autism support needs of
another child, E.  The judge provided cogent reasons for concluding that it
would be in the children's best interests pursuant to Section 55 of the
Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and reasonable to expect both
children to return to Nigeria with their parents.  All the factors relied
on in the grounds were addressed by the judge in the decision.

In relation to the medical needs of the child E, Mr Adewusi submitted that
there was no evidence before the Tribunal that the child's autism needs
could be treated in Nigeria.  On the other hand, Mr McVeety pointed me to
paragraphs 151 to 154 of the decision where the respondent specifically
considered the claim in respect of the child's medical conditions and
specifically referred to autism.  Information is given at paragraph 153 of
an NGO, the Nigerian Autistic Society. At paragraph 153 it is said that
there are also awareness programmes to raise awareness of autism within
Nigeria, and at paragraph 154 that external information confirmed there was
a certified autism centre in Nigeria called Patrick Speech and Language,
which is an educational facility for people with autism which has
subsidised fees available for parents, allowing easier access to the
facility.  Mr Adewusi failed to engage with the argument that it was for
the appellant to demonstrate that there would be very significant obstacles
to integration. It was for the appellant to demonstrate that the child E
could not be adequately treated in Nigeria.  It was not for the respondent
to prove that he could even though the respondent has outlined evidence in
the refusal decision suggesting that there is such treatment. It is clear
that the appellant failed to discharge the burden in respect of treatment
for the child E.

Mr Adewusi also failed to acknowledge the decision of the Supreme Court in
KO (Nigeria).  As stated above, this held that the assessment of
reasonableness has to be made in the real world context.  Mr Adewusi relied
entirely on MA, which held that a qualifying child's best interests could
only be displaced by strong reasons.  Mr Adewusi is not up-to-date in the
legal authorities he has cited and, as Mr McVeety pointed out, it is not
the case that a child who suddenly reaches the age of 7 is automatically
entitled to win an appeal.  The matter has to be considered in the context
of the rest of the family and any other claims for leave to remain.  I am
satisfied that the judge did consider the matter in the context of the
correct factors and reached a decision which was sustainable on the
available evidence and adequately reasoned.  It follows that none of the
grounds of appeal are made out.  The child E failed in the argument that
there were very significant obstacles to integration and the child R failed
on the basis of being a qualifying child, the judge having found it
reasonable to expect that child to accompany the parents to Nigeria. The
judge set out all the factors that would support integration of that child
and the family in Nigeria.  It was open to the judge to reach those
conclusions and the findings are cogently reasoned.

In the premises I find no error of law in the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an
error of law.

The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appellant's appeal
remains dismissed on all grounds.

I make no order for costs.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                  Signed DMW Pickup


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated 13 August 2020

