
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09409/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th January 2019                          |On 18th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                     Z R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Haque (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision promulgated on 26th  October  2018,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Chana ("the judge") dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  a
    decision to refuse his protection claim.  There was  no  appearance  by
    the appellant at the hearing.  At  paragraphs  19  and  20,  the  judge
    addressed  this  matter  and  found  that   the   appellant   and   his
    representatives were properly served with notice of the  hearing.   She
    referred to a letter from  the  representatives  dated  25th  September
    2018, in which they stated that  they  had  no  instructions  from  the
    appellant to prepare for the hearing or to represent him.  She went on,
    in paragraph 20, as follows: "given that there was no  explanation  for
    the appellant's failure to attend the hearing,  I  proceeded  with  the
    appeal  and  I  heard  submissions  from  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer."

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on
    27th December 2018.  He found that  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge
    should have decided a new  adjournment  application  contained  in  the
    letter of 25th September.  That letter referred to a  letter  from  the
    appellant's GP dated 18th September 2018 and to what the judge granting
    permission described as "updated  medical  documents".   Moreover,  the
    contents of the letter of 25th September 2018 and the enclosures  might
    properly be construed as giving  an  explanation  for  the  appellant's
    failure to attend the hearing.

3.   There was no rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

4.   Mr Haque said that there were three grounds.  First, the  judge  failed
    to  follow  the  Procedure  Rules  in  relation  to   the   adjournment
    application contained in the letter dated 25th September 2018.  She did
    not properly engage with the letter.  Secondly, the judge assessed  the
    evidence in an unreasonable way and gave  inadequate  reasons  for  her
    findings.  The letter from the GP  dated  18th September  amounted  to
    updated medical evidence.  Thirdly, the judge failed  to  consider  all
    the relevant circumstances and erred in finding that the appellant  had
    given no explanation for his absence.  It was obvious from the  letters
    and medical documents that his ill-health was a likely explanation  for
    his failure to attend.

5.   Mr Avery said that the judge  might  have  been  in  some  difficulties
    because of the paucity of material before her.  There was a letter from
    the appellant's solicitors dated 25th September but  this  stated  that
    they had been unable to obtain instructions  from  their  client.   The
    judge was clearly aware of that  letter  and  referred  to  it  in  the
    decision at paragraph 19.  There appeared to be no  timescale  for  the
    judge to work on, if the appeal were adjourned and relisted.   In  view
    of the scanty evidence, the failure to adjourn  did  not  amount  to  a
    material error of law and as the letter of 25th September  was  written
    without instructions it might be doubted that it  amounted  technically
    to an adjournment application.

6.   In a brief response, Mr Haque said that the judge  decided  to  proceed
    with  the  hearing  without  considering  the   application   for   the
    adjournment.  That was clearly an error.

Findings and Conclusions on Error of Law

7.   It is clear  that  the  judge  had  before  her  the  letter  from  the
    appellant's solicitors dated 25th September  2018.   This  was  written
    following an earlier application  made  on  20th September  which  was
    refused on 24th September.  There were a number of enclosures including
    "updated medical documents and medications".  Whereas  the  adjournment
    application  made  by  letter  dated  20th  September   contained   the
    appellant's account of medicines prescribed to him, the letter of  25th
    September was accompanied by notes and documents from  the  appellant's
    GP, confirming  his  medical  history  and  identifying  the  medicines
    prescribed to him.  To that limited extent at least, the  evidence  was
    indeed "updated".

8.   As Mr Avery submitted, the letter of 25th September  includes  a  clear
    statement by the appellant's solicitors that they were unable to obtain
    his instructions.  This part of the letter is accurately summarised  by
    the judge in paragraph 19 of the decision.

9.   However, as they were entitled to  do,  the  appellant's  solicitors -
    still on the record as acting for him  -  made  a  further  adjournment
    application.  The letter dated 25th September is unambiguous  in  this
    respect.  The adjournment application appears  at  the  bottom  of  the
    first page of the letter and the very top of the second page.

10.  The judge's summary of the letter  makes  no  mention  at  all  of  the
    adjournment  application.   She  was  duty   bound   to   decide   that
    application,  even  though  it  appeared  to  have  been  made  by  the
    appellant's  solicitors  in  circumstances  where  they  had  no  clear
    instructions from him.  The basis for the adjournment  application  was
    the state of the appellant's health.  Notwithstanding the  decision  of
    the Tribunal to refuse an earlier adjournment application only the  day
    before the appellant's solicitors wrote their letter, fairness required
    the application to be engaged with and decided.

11.  Paragraphs 19 and 20 of the decision show that  the  judge  decided  to
    proceed  with  the  appeal  as  "there  was  no  explanation  for   the
    appellant's failure to attend".   That  falls  short  of  deciding  the
    adjournment application.  The failure to decide it and to give  reasons
    for either refusing  an  adjournment  or  adjourning  to  another  day,
    amounts to a clear and material error of law.

12.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and must be set aside and remade.  The parties were agreed that the
    appropriate venue is the First-tier Tribunal.   As  the  error  of  law
    concerns procedural unfairness, that is plainly right.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  It will be remade in the First-tier  Tribunal,  before  a
judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no anonymity direction.   As  this  is  a
protection appeal and the appellant has shown an error of law in the  First-
tier Tribunal decision, I make an order prohibiting the publication  of  any
material which might directly or indirectly lead members of  the  public  to
identify the appellant.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
