
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09347/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 August 2019                              |On 18 September 2019          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     OAD

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Warren, instructed by Dicksons, solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1974  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Jamaica. He entered the  United  Kingdom  in  1998  as  a  visitor.  He
    subsequently changed his  name  and  worked  illegally  under  a  false
    identity. He made a claim for asylum in 2001 which was refused  but  he
    succeeded in an appeal before an  adjudicator.  On  9  July  2002,  the
    appellant was granted exceptional leave to remain until  9  July  2006.
    The applied for and was granted indefinite leave to remain in May 2007.
    On 17 January 2014, the appellant was  convicted  of  manslaughter  and
    sentenced to 12 years imprisonment. On 12 July 2018, the appellant  was
    served with a deportation order  and  a  decision  refusing  his  human
    rights claim. The appellant appealed against that  latter  decision  to
    the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated  on  19  April
    2019, allowed the appeal and  Article  3  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds but dismissed it on Article 8 grounds. The Secretary  of  State
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing at Manchester on 2 August 2019, Ms  Warren,  who
    appeared for the appellant, told me  that  the  appellant  opposed  the
    respondent's appeal but also challenged the judge's findings as regards
    Article 8.

 3. I shall deal first with the appellant's challenge regarding the judge's
    Article 8 decision. The appellant is still in prison but is due  to  be
    released  in  September  2019.  The  appellant's  children   are   aged
    respectively 17 years, 16 years, 15 years, 11 years 10 years. The judge
    found that the appellant does not have a continuing  relationship  with
    the mother of the children he  does  have  as  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with the five children who are all, for  the  purposes  of
    the 2002 act, qualifying children. Judge found that the  appellant  has
    'the most significant relationships'  with  C  (17  years)  and  K  (15
    years). The judge considered written evidence [122] which C and  K  had
    submitted to the Tribunal in support of  the  appellant's  appeal.  The
    judge noted that the appellant, sentenced  to  more  than  four  years'
    imprisonment, had to show that there are very compelling  circumstances
    over and above those described in the Exceptions in section 117C of the
    2002 Act which  outweighed  the  public  interest  concerned  with  his
    deportation. At [126], the judge wrote;

         "As a  result  of  his  criminal  action  the  appellant  has  been
         separated from the children for appeared of some six years. I  have
         no doubt that period of separation has been difficult both for  the
         appellant and  the  children  and  that  the  children  would  have
         benefited had the appellant not been imprisoned and had  been  able
         to play a guiding role, particularly in regard to C and K. However,
         is a result of his criminal behaviour, he has not been able  to  be
         present during key years and that  is  a  factual  situation  which
         existed (sic). Their education is now nearing  completion  as  they
         approach adult hood."

 4. Ms Warren submitted that the judge had given insufficient  reasons  for
    concluding [124-126] that the appropriate test could not be  satisfied.
    The judge should have looked at the future in the period following  the
    appellants projected release from prison in 2019. I disagree. The judge
    has applied the correct test and the observations  which  he  makes  at
    [126] (see above) are wholly appropriate. The  judge  has  applied  the
    correct jurisprudence [124:  KO  (Nigeria)  2018  UKSC  53].  There  is
    nothing at all in the evidence which compels a different  outcome  from
    that reached by the judge; the findings which  he  has  made  were  all
    available to him on the evidence.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal considered previous findings in an  immigration
    appeal dating from 2001 in which an Adjudicator had  found  as  a  fact
    that the appellant had been involved in a violent incident in  Kingston
    Jamaica which is left two of his friends dead and his  sister  injured.
    The Adjudicator found that the criminal gangs who had  perpetrated  the
    attempt on his life and murdered his friends remained, at that time,  a
    real and significant threat  to  the  appellant  should  he  return  to
    Jamaica. Neither party suggested that the First-tier Tribunal should go
    behind those previous findings of  the  adjudicator.  Accordingly,  the
    judge took those findings as the starting point for his own analysis.

 6. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal turned on the  likelihood  or
    otherwise that the appellant  would  be  able  to  participate  in  the
    Witness Protection Programme (WPP) operated by the Jamaican government.
    Country guidance indicates that, if an individual is  admitted  to  the
    WPP, he/she will be afforded sufficient  protection  and  will  not  be
    exposed to a real risk on return to Jamaica. The Secretary  of  State's
    challenge to the judge's findings on Article 3 ECHR are  that  (i)  the
    judge has not  made  unequivocal  findings  regarding  the  appellant's
    ability to access the WPP; (ii) has failed to make  clear  findings  as
    regards the internal flight  alternative  available  to  the  appellant
    within Jamaica.

 7. The judge has produced an extremely thorough conscientious and detailed
    decision. At [101], the judge discusses the evidence, noting that there
    is unlikely to be any police investigation or  prosecution  ongoing  in
    respect of the violent incident involving the  appellant  in  Kingston.
    The judge noted that 'it may well  be  that  the  police  consider  the
    matter to be cleared up' that it was 'not clear... That  the  appellant
    would be eligible for inclusion in the WPP'. Judge also noted that, 'if
    [the appellant] were to give evidence and the police reopen  the  case,
    and admittance to the WPP might  be  possible.'  At  [102],  the  judge
    observed that 'there  may  well  no  longer  be  any  interest  in  the
    appellant so he would not be at risk anyone connected to  the  original
    shooting incident.' Judge concluded that 'there remains a  considerable
    degree of uncertainty as to what would  await  the  appellant  and  his
    return.'

 8. The  Secretary  of  State  submits  that  the  judges  failed  to  make
    unequivocal and firm findings as to whether the appellant could  access
    the WPP. I agree that the use of language ('may'; 'may well  be';  'not
    clear') by the judge  in  [101-102]  seems  to  indicate  that  he  was
    uncertain as to whether  the  appellant  could  access  the  WPP.  Less
    equivocal,  contingent  findings  of  fact  would  have  been  helpful.
    However, at [103], the judge considers the  relevant  country  guidance
    cases of JS and AB and, significantly, noted that there was  background
    material postdating those cases which cast doubt upon the effectiveness
    of the WPP and which also showed that gangs in Jamaica 'continue to run
    amok.' In the following paragraph the judge states, 'on the information
    before me I cannot conclude that the appellant will be admitted to  the
    WPP.' That  conclusion,  reached  by  application  of  the  appropriate
    standard of proof, is unequivocal and, in my opinion, is  supported  by
    the judge's observation that access to the WPP in any given case cannot
    be guaranteed.

 9. The judge had before him evidence from an MP and member of an  NGO.  He
    discusses this evidence at [107]. He notes that  'the  good  faith  and
    impartiality' of those witnesses was not challenged  but,  equally,  he
    did not find that either witness 'dealt specifically with the  question
    of the WPP.' The grounds wrongly assert that the judge found  that  the
    evidence of the two witnesses undermined the existing country  guidance
    and had been taken by the judge as a reason for departing  from  it.  I
    disagree. The judge's assessment of the witnesses's evidence  is  even-
    handed and, in my opinion, legally sound. There is no  suggestion  that
    the judge has found that the evidence of the  two  witnesses  justifies
    departure from the country guidance. Indeed, the judge has not departed
    from the country guidance; rather, he has, quite correctly,  sought  to
    determine whether this particular appellant would be able to access the
    WPP. It was open to the judge on the evidence to conclude that he would
    not. That conclusion is unequivocal. Unlike the judge, I have not heard
    the evidence or have I been required to make findings of fact. For that
    reason, if for no other, the  Upper  Tribunal  should  hesitate  before
    interfering with the considered findings of the First-tier Tribunal.  I
    find that the judge's conclusion that the appellant cannot  access  the
    WPP is sound in law.

10. It follows from the judge's finding that the  appellant  would  not  be
    safe outside the WPP but living within his home area  of  Jamaica.  The
    judge concluded that would be the case notwithstanding the  passage  of
    time since the violent incident in which he was involved. The  question
    remains whether the appellant could avail himself  of  internal  flight
    within Jamaica. The Secretary of State complains that the judge has not
    made any proper finding as regards  internal  flight.  I  disagree.  At
    [109], the judge observed that, 'in the absence of  admittance  to  the
    WPP, the appellant would be left to his own  devices  to  relocate  and
    change his identity. I find that would pose a number  of  problems  for
    him. He would be lacking the support which would  be  necessary  to  be
    able to create a false identity which would be likely to require a  set
    of documents and he would not easily obtain access to a safe house  and
    the ability to be able to relocate at short notice. He  would  have  to
    create a false history.' The judge observed  that  even  attempting  to
    contact his mother might expose the appellant  to  risk.  He  concluded
    that, 'the appellant would find considerable difficulty in keeping  his
    return secret and containing that fact from becoming widely known.'

11. In the light of those findings, I do not agree with the assertion  made
    on the grounds of appeal [7] that 'the judge has failed to  make  clear
    findings regarding the appellant's ability to relocate internally...' I
    consider his findings to be clear. He has not departed from the country
    guidance but rather has determined that, on the particular facts,  this
    appellant would not be admitted to the WPP. It is against that  factual
    background that he has assessed risk when and he has  reached  findings
    available to him. I  find  that  the  judge's  conclusions  as  regards
    Article 3 ECHR and humanitarian protection are sound and  there  is  no
    reason for me to interfere with them.





Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed. The appeal  of  the  appellant
in respect of the First-tier Tribunal's dismissal  of  the  Article  8  ECHR
appeal is also dismissed.









Signed                              Date 2 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




























