
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09096/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th June 2019                    |On 15th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     R A
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original  appellant
(referred to  as  the  Claimant  in  this  decision)  whose  name  has  been
initialised in this decision as R A.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could  give
rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Secretary of State:  Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For R A:    Mr R Drabble, QC, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                      Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease  of  reference,  we  shall  refer  to  the  Appellant  in  the
    proceedings before the Upper Tribunal as the Secretary of State and  to
    the Respondent as the Claimant.

 2. This is the remaking of the decision in the Claimant's  case  following
    the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Coker, promulgated  on  9  October
    2018 and appended  below,  in  which  she  found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law when allowing the Claimant's  appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision  of  12  August  2016,  refusing  her
    protection and human rights claims. The allowance of the appeal by  the
    First-tier Tribunal had related solely to the Claimant's  human  rights
    claim. Her protection claim was rejected and has not been  the  subject
    of any challenge to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. In summary, the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  its  approach  to  a
    medical report on the Claimant's mental health by failing to  recognise
    that the account of claimed past experiences provided to the author had
    been disbelieved by a judge in a  previous  appeal.  In  addition,  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in relation to the weight attributable to
    the  public  interest  in  deportation.  The  decision   allowing   the
    Claimant's appeal on human rights grounds was duly set  aside  and  the
    matter set down for a resumed hearing, with accompanying directions  to
    the parties.

Relevant immigration and procedural history

 4. The Claimant is a Sri Lankan national, born in April 1989, who  entered
    the United Kingdom in January 2010 with entry clearance as  a  student.
    Having had her leave curtailed  because  of  employment  undertaken  in
    breach of conditions, the Claimant was issued with a document notifying
    her of her liability to removal. In April 2011 she was arrested for the
    possession/control of a false identity document. On 3 May 2011 she  was
    convicted and sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment. A claim for  asylum
    was made shortly thereafter. The Secretary of State refused that  claim
    and made a decision to deport the Claimant pursuant to section 32(5) of
    the UK Borders Act 2007. A deportation order was signed on  27  October
    2011. An appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was  unsuccessful,  as  were
    attempts to challenge  that  decision.  In  due  course,  the  Claimant
    submitted further evidence, particularly  in  relation  to  her  mental
    health.  The   Secretary   of   State   accepted   that   the   further
    representations constituted a fresh claim, but refused it.  Her  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal and  she
    became appeal rights exhausted on 19 February 2015.

 5. Following this, a number of further representations  were  put  to  the
    Secretary of State in 2015 and 2016. These led to the  refusal  of  the
    Claimant's  latest  protection  and  human  rights  claims,  with  that
    decision being the subject of the appeal before the  latest  First-tier
    Tribunal judge and now before us.



The issues arising in this appeal

 6. Whilst certain areas of dispute between the parties remain, there is an
    uncontroversial core to the scenario with which we are  concerned  when
    remaking the decision in  this  appeal.  The  Claimant  is  a  "foreign
    criminal" within the meaning of section  117D(2)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  as  amended  ("NIAA  2002")  who  is
    married to a Sri Lankan national, NK. NK is a  recognised  refugee  and
    has limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a result (this  is
    described as, "refugee leave to remain" on his residence permit). Until
    very recently, the couple had two children,  born  in  April  2016  and
    October 2017, both of whom are Sri Lankan nationals and  both  of  whom
    have limited leave to remain in the same  terms  as  their  father.  In
    April 2019, the Claimant gave birth to the couple's youngest child.  He
    too has Sri Lankan nationality. It does not appear  as  though  he  has
    been granted leave to remain as yet.

 7. As confirmed by the Presenting Officer before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and by Ms Isherwood before us, it is not being asserted that either  NK
    or the two older children can  go  with  the  Claimant  to  Sri  Lanka.
    Notwithstanding what is stated in para. 16 of her skeleton argument  to
    the effect that it was for the Claimant to prove that NK was "still  in
    need of protection" (an assertion which we were  told  had  been  based
    upon an aspect of the Secretary of State's guidance on  criminality  in
    article  8  cases[1]),  Ms  Isherwood  quite  rightly  recognised   the
    insuperable difficulties in the path of such an assertion.  First,  any
    guidance published by the Secretary of State is just that:  it  has  no
    persuasive, let alone authoritative, value in respect of  the  question
    of NK's status. Second, and more importantly, NK status  as  a  refugee
    under the Refugee Convention is ongoing  unless  and  until  revocation
    action is successfully taken against him.  Ms Isherwood confirmed there
    was no question of any such action being contemplated by the  Secretary
    of State in this case.

 8. Ms Isherwood also confirmed, again in  our  view  quite  rightly,  that
    there is no question of the Claimant  being  separated  from  her  baby
    whom, the evidence clearly shows, is currently being breastfed.

 9. Therefore, on the undisputed factual matrix set out  above,  this  case
    brings into sharp relief the issue of the separation of a family  unit.
    Here, it is (somewhat unusually) the mother of children who  is  to  be
    deported. She would depart the United Kingdom with  her  baby,  leaving
    behind her husband and two older children. It of  course  follows  that
    the baby will be separated from his father and siblings for  what  will
    very probably be an indefinite period.

10. The Claimant's response to this scenario is, as clearly set out in  the
    skeleton argument from Mr Drabble, QC, twofold. First,  expressed  here
    in summary form only, it is said that despite the fact that NK only has
    limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom, his refugee  status  has
    the effect that he is, or should be treated as if he is,  "settled"  in
    this country for the purposes of section 33(2A) of the Immigration  Act
    1971 and, in turn, section 117D(1)(b) NIAA 2002. This  is  because  the
    declaratory nature of refugee status means  that  it  is  lost,  or  no
    longer prevents expulsion, only on very limited grounds set out in  the
    1951 Convention (i.e. Articles 1C and 33(2)).  It  follows,  argues  Mr
    Drabble, that absent the  existence  of  such  grounds,  a  refugee  is
    permitted to remain in the country of refuge for an indefinite  period.
    The term "settled" within the definition  of  "qualifying  partner"  in
    section 117D(1)(b) NIAA 2002 must be interpreted so as to reflect  this
    state of affairs.

11. The question of whether or not the two  older  children  are  "settled"
    does not come into play because such a status is not an  ingredient  in
    the definition of whether a child is "qualifying" or not under  section
    117D(1) NIAA 2002 or the Immigration Rules ("the Rules").

12. If the interpretive argument is wrong for whatever reason,  and  NK  is
    not a "qualifying partner" for the purposes  of  section  117D(1)  NIAA
    2002 and thus section 117C, Mr Drabble submits that this case discloses
    "very compelling circumstances  over  and  above"  the  two  exceptions
    contained in section 117C(4) and (5) and paras. 399-399A of the  Rules.
    On this alternative basis, it is said that the Claimant is entitled  to
    succeed in her appeal.

13. Without  intending  any  disrespect  to  the  potential  merits  of  Mr
    Drabble's primary submission, we took the view that, in the  particular
    circumstances of this case, it would be  appropriate  to  consider  his
    second submission first. Depending on the view  we  took  on  this,  we
    would receive oral submissions on the interpretive point.

The relevant legal framework

14. The relevant provisions of Part 5 of the NIAA 2002 and paras.  398-399A
    of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") are by now very familiar and  do
    not require setting out here.

The evidence before us

15. In reaching our decision in this appeal  we  have  had  regard  to  the
    following sources of documentary evidence:

      i. the Secretary of State's bundle prepared for the hearing before the
         First-tier Tribunal;

     ii. the Claimant's bundle, indexed and paginated  1-411,  prepared  for
         the hearing before us;

    iii. a "Response to an information request", dated 23 February 2018  and
         provided by the Secretary of State in  relation  to  mental  health
         treatment in Sri Lanka.

16. We heard oral evidence from the Claimant and NK, both of whom used  the
    independent Tamil interpreter arranged by the Upper  Tribunal  for  the
    hearing. A full note of the oral evidence is contained in the record of
    proceedings. In summary, the Claimant and  her  husband  adopted  their
    respective witness statements and were questioned at some length by  Ms
    Isherwood.  They  both  provided  additional  information  about  their
    current circumstances, their view of what would happen  if  deportation
    occurred, and the extent of any familial connections with Sri Lanka.

Submissions of the parties

For the Claimant

17. Mr Drabble relied  on  his  skeleton  argument.  He  placed  particular
    emphasis on NK's refugee status and the refugee leave to remain enjoyed
    by the two older children. Whilst he accepted that every case is  fact-
    specific, it was submitted that the accepted inability of  NK  and  the
    two children to go to Sri Lanka was a  powerful  factor  in  favour  of
    showing very compelling circumstances. Mr Drabble took us  through  the
    expert evidence, in  particular  that  from  Dr  C  Obuaya,  Consultant
    Psychiatrist, and Ms  N  Newell,  an  Independent  Social  Worker,  and
    submitted  that  the  Claimant's  already  fragile  family  unit  would
    completely fall apart were deportation to take place. The  consequences
    for all concerned would, it was submitted, be very severe.

For the Secretary of State

18. Ms Isherwood relied on her skeleton argument. She  submitted  that  the
    medical evidence relating to the Claimant's scarring and mental  health
    (at least the PTSD) predicated on an account of past events  that  have
    been disbelieved by the First-tier Tribunal in the  past.  This  should
    reduce the weight attributable to the relevant reports.

19. Whilst accepting that the family unit would be split, it was  submitted
    that NK's refugee status was not of  itself  sufficient  to  show  very
    compelling circumstances. When asked whether there  were  any  specific
    challenges made to the Independent Social Worker's report, Ms Isherwood
    queried whether a single interview conducted with the Claimant  and  NK
    was sufficient for the author to know whether she  was  been  told  the
    truth. It was also  noted  that  there  were  no  reports  from  social
    services. She submitted that there was a lack of reasoning as to why NK
    would be unable to care for the two older children by  himself.  It  is
    right to  record  that  Ms  Isherwood  had  at  one  stage  during  her
    submissions indicated that she was  "in  difficulties"  in  seeking  to
    resist the  arguments  and  supporting  evidence  put  forward  on  the
    Claimant's behalf. Having said that, she did not  concede  the  appeal,
    and we make it clear that we have taken all  of  her  submissions  into
    consideration.

Findings of fact

20. There are a number of matters which are  not  in  dispute  between  the
    parties and we are able to state them as representing our  findings  of
    fact in brief terms.

21. The Claimant is, and has at all material times been, in a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with  NK.  NK  is  a  recognised  refugee  with
    limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom until  20  January  2020.
    The couple's two older children also have limited leave to remain until
    that same date. The children's travel documents, like that of  NK,  are
    not valid for travel to Sri Lanka.

22. The couple's youngest child was born in April 2019. It is  quite  clear
    from the evidence as a whole that the  Claimant  is  breastfeeding  the
    baby.

23. The Claimant and NK both accept  that  there  has  been  a  history  of
    domestic  violence  within  their  relationship,   with   NK   as   the
    perpetrator. This fact had led to the entirely  plausible  intervention
    by social services and, as we find is the case, the two older  children
    being made subject to a Child Protection Plan in 2018. In  the  absence
    of specific evidence, we are not in a position to find that  this  plan
    remains in place. However, it is highly likely (and  Ms  Isherwood  has
    not suggested otherwise) that even if the plan has ceased,  the  family
    unit remain on the local authorities' radar, as it were.

24. The index offence in this case was committed  on  24  April  2011.  The
    Claimant had in her possession the identity document of another  person
    and attempted to use it to leave the United Kingdom. She was  convicted
    on 3 May 2011, having pleaded guilty at the earliest  opportunity.  She
    was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment. The  Claimant  has  no  other
    offences recorded against her.

25. We turn now to matters which, to a greater  or  lesser  extent,  remain
    controversial.

26. The question of  the  Claimant's  mental  health  is  not  an  entirely
    straightforward one to answer. She has had  three  decisions  from  the
    First-tier Tribunal over the course of time. The  first  decision  from
    2012 rejected her credibility in robust terms. We note that  there  was
    no medical evidence before that judge.  In  the  second  appeal  before
    Judge McIntosh in 2014,  medical  reports  were  produced  relating  to
    scarring and PTSD. Whilst dismissing the appeal on the basis  that  the
    Claimant's overall profile did not  disclose  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution, it is apparent to us that the judge broadly  accepted  the
    expert evidence, including the diagnosis of PTSD. The  latest  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal again  rejected  the  Claimant's  protection
    claim, concluding in the first instance that she should not be believed
    as to her account of past experiences, or alternatively that  any  such
    events did not place her at risk on return now. Having said that, Judge
    Aziz accepted that the Claimants mental health was "fragile",  and  did
    not go behind the diagnoses of PTSD, Recurrent Depressive Disorder, and
    a current episode of severe depression with psychotic features. We bear
    this history of findings in mind, as we do  the  conclusions  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Coker para. 10 of her error of law decision.

27. We now have a fuller picture of  the  Claimant's  mental  health.  This
    includes not only the 2017 report  from  Dr  Obuaya,  but  his  updated
    report from February 2019, the reports considered by Judge McIntosh  in
    2014, and, importantly, a good deal of  additional  evidence  from  the
    Claimant's local NHS mental health team, her GP, and printouts  of  her
    GP patient record. This body of evidence has not been  the  subject  of
    specific challenge by the Secretary  of  State.  We  place  significant
    weight upon it.

28. Taking this evidence in the round and placing it in the context of  the
    Claimant's overall procedural history, we find it  to  be  more  likely
    than not that she currently suffers from PTSD, and  severe  depression.
    She is on appropriate medication and remains  under  the  care  of  her
    mental health team. We find that the Claimant  has  been  seen  by  the
    mental health Crisis Team on several  occasions  as  a  result  of  her
    mental health conditions and domestic  circumstances.  On  the  medical
    evidence before us, we find that on 16 August  2016  the  Claimant  was
    admitted to hospital after taking an overdose of  medication.  She  was
    discharged the following day.  This  incident  led  to  a  safeguarding
    referral being made to social services regarding  her  baby,  then  her
    only child. It is in our  view  significant  that  notwithstanding  the
    presence of her baby, the Claimant took the action that she did.

29. There is no protection claim before  us  and  no  suggestion  that  the
    Claimant has a well-founded fear  of  persecution  or  is  at  risk  of
    serious harm on return to Sri Lanka. However, together with the rest of
    the evidence, her mental health history leads us to find  that  she  in
    fact holds a genuine subjective fear of returning to her home  country.
    This in turn goes to the likely impact that removal to Sri  Lanka  will
    have on her  overall  mental  health,  particularly  in  light  of  the
    undisputed fact that she would be separated from NK and her  two  older
    children.

30. Anxiety and distress caused by separation from those children  was  the
    subject of what we consider to  be  credible  oral  evidence  from  the
    Claimant. Her evidence is firmly  underpinned  by  the  opinion  of  Dr
    Obuaya expressed in his report of 2017:

         "...separation from  her  husband...or  indeed  her  children,  are
         likely to be interpreted by [RA] as significant losses and put  her
         at risk of experiencing a deterioration in her mental  health  i.e.
         worsening of her PTSD and depressive symptoms."

31. This opinion is re-stated in Dr Obuaya's 2019 report.

32. The effect of separation is also addressed by Dr Obuaya in the  context
    of the risk of self-harm and suicide. In his 2017 report he states:

         "Although the presence of  suicidal  thoughts  is  very  common,  a
         strong predictive factor for completed suicide is  a  serious  past
         attempt, which [RA] has done. The perinatal period  is  a  time  of
         heightened risk  in  mothers  with  an  established  mental  health
         diagnosis, which she has. She has  identified  her  children  as  a
         protective factor against attempted suicide, but in my opinion that
         only reduces the risk from being very high to moderately high."

33. In his 2019 report, Dr Obuaya reduces the level of risk of  suicide  or
    self-harm in part because of the absence of further attempts, but  also
    because the presence of the two children and the  Claimant's  pregnancy
    continued to act as "protective factors." Even then, Dr Obuaya  was  of
    the view that the risk would "increase significantly" were  removal  to
    take place. We find this to be important. The Claimant's departure from
    the United Kingdom would involve separation from two  of  her  children
    and thereby the removal of the "protective factor". Whilst the presence
    of a new baby might in another case  create  an  additional  beneficial
    factor, this Claimant is mentally unwell, still  within  the  perinatal
    period, and has taken an overdose in  the  past,  all  of  which  point
    strongly against a protective influence having a meaningful impact.

34. Bringing all of the above together, we find that the fact of separation
    is, of itself, likely to have a very significant detrimental impact  on
    the Claimant's mental health.

35. We turn to NK's circumstances. In his most recent witness statement, NK
    acknowledges that he has used alcohol during difficult times  over  the
    last few years There are numerous references to him abusing alcohol  in
    the Independent Social Worker's report and we take account of a comment
    within the Claimant's GP patient  record.  This  evidence  is  entirely
    consistent with the opinion of Dr Obuaya in his February 2019 report on
    NK's mental  health.  He  provides  a  diagnosis  of  "Harmful  Use  of
    Alcohol",  a  condition  falling  below  the  threshold  for   "Alcohol
    Dependence Syndrome". The author concludes as follows:

         "[NK] is likely to perceive separation from his  wife  as  a  major
         loss. There is a high risk that his harmful use  of  alcohol  would
         spiral out of control, were he to resort to  alcohol  as  a  coping
         mechanism against such a loss. In  the  short-term,  this  risk  is
         high."

36.  We place significant weight on Dr  Obuaya's  unchallenged  report.  We
    find that there is indeed a high risk that NK would resort to  greater,
    harmful use of alcohol on a regular basis were he to be separated  from
    the Claimant (and for that matter his new-born baby).

37. In respect of the Independent  Social  Worker's  report,  Ms  Isherwood
    raised three concerns: first, that it was unclear what "social services
    report" was being referred to in Ms Newell's report; second, that there
    was an apparent inconsistency regarding NK's employment status;  third,
    that there was inadequate explanation in Ms  Newell's  report  for  the
    overall conclusion that NK would be unable to cope with caring for  his
    children were the  Claimant to leave the United Kingdom.

38. As to the first point, we conclude by way of inference that the "social
    services report" was in fact the minutes taken  at  the  Initial  Child
    Protection Conference, held on 30 July  2018.  These  are  specifically
    referred to in Ms Newell's report as one of the sources of  information
    of which she had sight when undertaking her assessment and they  appear
    in the Claimant's bundle. These minutes do, as stated  in  Ms  Newell's
    report, confirm the history of domestic violence within the family unit
    and the lasting negative impact this has had. Even if  the  author  had
    had no information from social services before her, the  occurrence  of
    domestic violence is documented in the medical  evidence  and  has  not
    been disputed  by  the  Secretary  of  State.  For  these  reasons,  Ms
    Isherwood's first criticism falls away.

39. The second point is misconceived. The reference in the report  to  NK's
    unemployment is in the past tense, whereas it is clear that at the time
    of the assessment he was in work.

40. We reject Ms Isherwood's third and final criticism.  No  challenge  has
    been made to the author's experience  and  qualifications,  and  it  is
    clear to us  that  she  was  eminently  positioned  to  carry  out  the
    assessment  and  provide  the  opinions  stated  in  her  report.   The
    assessment of NK's  ability  to  care  for  the  children  without  the
    Claimant was carried out with reference to  a  variety  of  sources  of
    evidence, including interviews with NK and the Claimant, the minutes of
    the social services conference in 2018, and  medical  reports,  all  of
    which went to the core issues of the domestic  violence,  NK's  use  of
    alcohol, and the inter-dependency between him and  the  Claimant.  That
    body of evidence fully supported Ms Newell's  well-reasoned  conclusion
    that:

         "Given the family's history of DV,  perpetuated  by  [NK]  and  his
         alcohol dependency, it is in (sic) my view that  he  would  not  be
         able to adequately care for the  children  without  their  mother's
         support."

41.  Having  disposed  of  the  criticisms  levelled  against  this  expert
    evidence, we now state our finding that Ms Newell's report is a  source
    of reliable evidence to which we attach very considerable weight.

42. A particularly important aspect of this evidence is contained under the
    heading "Conclusion and Recommendations". This states:

         "The  evidence  suggests  that  the  children's  basic  needs   are
         currently being met by both parents, despite  the  fact  that  [RA]
         suffers with mental health issues and [NK] is alcohol dependent. It
         is fair to say that the children's emotional  well-being  has  been
         affected by their parent issues, but it is in (sic)  my  view  that
         the long-term outcomes for these children would be  devastating  if
         [RA] were removed from their lives, due to deportation.

         It is clear that [NK] is not in a position  to  care  for  3  small
         children independently of his partner. If they were left solely  in
         his care the  risk  factors  would  increase  drastically  and  the
         children are likely to be placed in  local  authority  care,  there
         does not appear to be any family members who  could  take  care  of
         them on a permanent basis.

         ...[RA's] departure from the UK is likely to  lead  to  devastating
         outcomes for her and the family."

43. We find that the passage quoted above represents an accurate picture of
    the likely factual consequences for NK and the children if the Claimant
    is deported. That only two of the three children would  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom is, we find, immaterial: it  remains  unlikely  that  NK
    could adequately cope with their care.

44. The final aspect of our findings relates to any  support  the  Claimant
    may be able to access in Sri Lanka. This issue was the subject of  many
    of the questions put to NK in oral evidence. We find that NK's parents,
    who are relatively elderly and retired, live in a town  on  the  Jaffna
    peninsula in the north of Sri Lanka. We find that they have  their  own
    property. We are willing to accept that they suffer from certain health
    conditions, although none of these are of particular severity.  On  the
    basis of the oral evidence from NK and the Claimant, we find  that  the
    latter has never met her husband's parents. We find that NK has an aunt
    living on an island off the coast of northern Sri Lanka. Again, we find
    that the Claimant  has  never  met  this  individual.  We  accept  NK's
    evidence that one of his brothers remains missing in Sri Lanka and that
    he has another residing in the United Kingdom.  Although  we  have  not
    been provided with details concerning the second brother,  NK  was  not
    questioned on this and there is no evidence  to  suggest  that  he  has
    played, or would play, any material part in assisting NK with the  care
    of the children in this country. We find that NK has a  sister  in  Sri
    Lanka who is married and with whom he has  no  contact.  As  with  NK's
    other relatives, we accept that the Claimant has never met the sister.

45. In light of the above, it  is  unlikely  that  the  Claimant  would  be
    provided with meaningful  practical  or  emotional  support  from  NK's
    relatives. Further, the consequences for NK of the Claimant's departure
    from the United Kingdom is likely to include a loss or decrease in  his
    earning capacity on account of an increased reliance on  alcohol.  This
    in turn is likely to prevent him from  being  able  to  provide  stable
    financial support to the Claimant and the baby in Sri Lanka.

46. As to the Claimant's family  in  Sri  Lanka,  we  note  her  consistent
    evidence that her parents  and  siblings  (save  for  the  brother  who
    relocated to Canada) went missing years ago, and that her aunt had been
    detained in 2015. However,  in  her  three  appeals,  the  judges  have
    expressly found (or at least proceeded on the  assumption)  that  there
    are family members in that country, and that contact could  potentially
    be re-established. The Claimant was not cross-examined on this issue at
    the hearing and Ms Isherwood made no submissions on it.

47. It is more likely than not that there are family members in Sri  Lanka,
    specifically the Claimant's parents and aunt. However, we are satisfied
    that the Claimant has had no  contact  with  them  for  a  considerable
    period  of  time  now.  Re-establishing  communications   must   be   a
    possibility,  but  at  this  point  and  in  light  of  the  Claimant's
    circumstances, we find it to be remote.

Conclusions

48. As stated earlier in our decision, we have proceeded to determine  this
    appeal on the assumption that NK is not a "qualifying partner" for  the
    purposes of either section 117C NIAA 2002 or para. 399(b) of the Rules,
    although we make it clear that we are not expressing any  view  on  the
    merits of Mr Drabble's primary submission.

49. It is also the case that the two older children do not fall within  the
    definition of "qualifying" children under section 117C and para. 399(a)
    because of their nationality and short residence in the United Kingdom.

50. Thus, notwithstanding the fact that her sentence  of  imprisonment  was
    less than 4 years, the  Claimant  cannot  rely  on  Exception  2  under
    section 117C(5) or that under para. 399(a).

51. It is clearly the case that the Claimant cannot  rely  on  Exception  1
    under section 117C(4) or para. 399A.

52. Therefore, the Claimant needs to show that there are  "very  compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1  and  2",
    with reference to  section  117C(6)  and  the  interpretation  of  this
    provision and guidance provided by the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan)
    [2017] 1 WLR 207, at paras. 24-32.

53. The threshold of what constitutes "very  compelling  circumstances"  is
    "extremely   demanding"   (RA   (s.117C:   "unduly   harsh";   offence:
    seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 123 (IAC), at para. 22).

54. In undertaking the assessment of whether such circumstances do exist in
    this case, we conduct a "wide-ranging evaluative exercise"  (see  para.
    16 of MS (s. 117C (6):  "very  compelling  circumstances")  Philippines
    [2019] UKUT 00122 (IAC)).

55. On the Secretary of State's side of the balance sheet,  the  first  and
    most  significant  factor  is  the  undoubtedly  very  powerful  public
    interest,  as  expressed  by  the  Executive  in  the  Rules,   through
    Parliament by virtue of section 32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  and
    section 117C(1) NIAA 2002, and  emphasised  by  the  higher  courts  in
    numerous cases over the course of time.

56. One facet of the public interest is deterrence and  we  take  it  fully
    into account. The fact is that the Claimant has been  convicted  of  an
    offence and there is a legitimate concern on the  part  of  the  public
    that appropriate action should be taken by the  state  against  foreign
    nationals who break the law.

57. Another issue is that of re-offending. We have no  pre-sentence  report
    or OASys report before us (it seems as though none were ever produced).
    The index offence is the Claimant's sole conviction and  the  Secretary
    of State has never suggested that there was any material  risk  of  any
    repetition of a similar offence, or indeed any other. We conclude  that
    the risk of re-offending is negligible.

58. We must, and do, consider the seriousness of the particular offence for
    which the Claimant was convicted in 2011. We take as our starting point
    the brief sentencing remarks of HHJ Williams.  The  Claimant  had  been
    provided with the identity card of her co-defendant's wife in order  to
    attempt to leave the United Kingdom and  evade  the  attention  of  the
    authorities. The Judge viewed this as a  "serious  offence",  observing
    that identity theft was a "very serious matter". In light of the  early
    guilty plea  and  other  mitigating  factors,  the  "absolute  minimum"
    sentence of 12 months' imprisonment was imposed. Having regard  to  all
    the circumstances,  we  conclude  that  the  particular  facts  of  the
    Claimant's offence do not  significantly  enhance  the  already  strong
    public interest in deportation.

59. We bear in mind relevant considerations under section 117B  NIAA  2002.
    It is the case that the Claimant is, and has been since 2010,  residing
    in the United Kingdom unlawfully. This  brings  into  play  the  public
    interest in maintaining effective immigration  controls.  In  addition,
    her relationship with NK was established and continued during a  period
    of unlawful status. Although NK is not a "qualifying partner"  for  the
    purposes of our approach this appeal, the absence of lawful  status  is
    liable to have an effect on the weight attributable to  the  Claimant's
    family life with her husband. Having said that, for reasons we set  out
    below, there are particular circumstances in this case  which  strongly
    militate against any significant reduction in weight.

60. Although the Claimant  gave  her  oral  evidence  before  us  with  the
    assistance of an interpreter, there are references in  the  GP  patient
    record print outs to her being able to speak "good" English. We have no
    reason to doubt this; we regard the English language issue as a neutral
    factor. The same applies to the  question  of  financial  independence.
    There is no evidence to suggest that the Claimant is reliant on  public
    funds, although we take into account the fact  that  she  has  received
    treatment on the NHS over time.

61. We now move across to the Claimant's side of the balance  sheet.  Under
    the approach set out in para. 36 of NA (Pakistan), in  the  case  of  a
    "medium offender" (i.e. those sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
    less than four years, as the Claimant was) it is  ordinarily  necessary
    to begin with an assessment of whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  for
    family members to follow the deportee out of United Kingdom or for  the
    family unit to be split. As stated previously however, the Claimant  is
    unable to rely on Exception 2.

62. Even if reliance could be placed on Exception 2, there is  in  fact  no
    assessment to be made as to whether it would be unduly harsh for NK and
    the two older children to leave  the  United  Kingdom  and  follow  the
    Claimant to Sri Lanka.  NK's  refugee  status  and  the  basis  of  the
    children's leave to remain precludes any possibility whatsoever of this
    occurring, whether it be unduly harsh or not, a reality  recognised  by
    the Secretary of State.

63. This is a point worthy of note. In a case in which an individual can in
    principle rely on Exception 2 but is  unable  in  fact  to  show  undue
    harshness (either in respect of a "qualifying partner" or a "qualifying
    child") on the evidence put forward, there will  in  most  cases  be  a
    residual choice, albeit often a very  difficult  one,  for  the  family
    member(s) to follow the deportee to the country  of  origin.  The  same
    applies in a case in which an individual cannot  rely  on  Exception  2
    because of the length of their sentence or (as in this appeal)  because
    the  family  member(s)  are  not  "qualifying",  but,   following   the
    recommended approach elucidated in para. 37 of NA (Pakistan), they have
    unsuccessfully sought to prove "undue harshness"  as  an  indicator  of
    "very compelling circumstances".

64. The present case provides a concrete example of a scenario in which  no
    such residual choice on relocation  can  be  made,  however  difficult.
    There is simply no choice at all.

65. That the absence of a  choice  arises  because  of  a  family  member's
    refugee status is of significance in that it represents one of  only  a
    small number of reasons we can conceive of  which  would  preclude  any
    possibility of relocation.

66. The issue discussed above is a factor of very considerable force in our
    assessment of whether "very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
    those described in Exceptions 1 and  2"  exist.  It  is  not,  however,
    determinative. We must now turn to the question of separation.

67. The splitting up of the family unit would see the Claimant removed from
    her husband and two older children, and her  baby  separated  from  his
    father and siblings. We conclude that the separation is  likely  to  be
    for an indefinite period.

68. We are fully cognisant of the fact  that  deportation  proceedings  may
    often result in family units being  split  up  and  that  the  relevant
    threshold for showing undue harshness  is  indeed  high  (KO  (Nigeria)
    [2018] 1 WLR 5273, at paras. 23 and 27). On  the  particular  facts  of
    this case and for the reasons set out below, we have no  hesitation  in
    concluding that the consequences of separating NK from the Claimant and
    the two older children from their mother and  baby  brother  would  not
    simply be unduly harsh, but very significantly  above  and  beyond  the
    level of severity required to cross that particular threshold.

69. In light of the  evidence  before  us  and  our  findings  thereon,  we
    conclude that the Claimant's departure with his baby son  would  result
    in NK's already harmful use of alcohol  becoming  significantly  worse.
    His ability to adequately look after the children is in our  view  even
    now largely contingent on the  Claimant's  presence.  It  is  close  to
    inevitable that her absence will lead to NK  being  unable  to  provide
    stable and appropriate childcare for the two remaining  children.  This
    in turn is very likely to  have  what  the  Independent  Social  Worker
    described as "devastating outcomes" for the children, one of  which  is
    likely to be (given the family unit's history and NK's abuse of alcohol
    in the equation), care proceedings and consequent placement  away  from
    the family home. NK would then be left in the situation of having  been
    deprived of his wife and all three of his  children.  The  overwhelming
    severity of this  scenario  for  NK  and,  more  importantly,  the  two
    children, is self-evident.

70. We conclude that on this basis alone, this is one of those  rare  cases
    in which it is shown that there are "very compelling circumstances over
    and above" those described in the two Exceptions under section  117C(4)
    and (5) and para. 399(a) and (b) of the Rules, the effect of this being
    that the very powerful public interest is outweighed.

71. There are additional factors  of  very  great  force  relating  to  the
    position of the Claimant and her baby if deportation occurs. First,  it
    is highly likely that she will become aware of what will in  effect  be
    the disintegration of the already fragile  familial  situation  in  the
    United Kingdom. This in itself is  extremely  likely  to  have  serious
    implications for her  mental  health.  Second,  her  mental  health  is
    already precarious and, as we have found, removal is likely  to  result
    in a significant deterioration  because  of  the  separation  from  her
    husband and two older children. Third, NK's remaining relatives in  Sri
    Lanka are strangers to her and the likelihood of  practical  assistance
    from her own family (even assuming  that  contact  could  be  made)  is
    remote, particularly in the short-term. Fourth, the  preceding  factors
    are all to be seen in the context of the Claimant being the sole  carer
    for a baby. Taking these factors on a cumulative basis, there is a high
    risk  not  only  of  the   Claimant's   mental   health   significantly
    deteriorating, but, importantly, the best interests of the  baby  being
    severely compromised, both in terms of emotional and practical care.

72. Even if relevant medical treatment was in theory available in Sri Lanka
    (as may be the case in light of the Secretary of State's document of 23
    February 2018), the cumulative effect of the circumstances in which the
    Claimant will find herself drives us to  the  conclusion  that  she  is
    highly unlikely to access it (at least on a regular basis) or,  if  she
    did, that it would not significantly reduce the risk of a very  serious
    impairment in her ability to provide adequate care for her  baby,  with
    all that entails.

73. Although not strictly necessary for the purposes of  this  appeal,  the
    strength of the circumstances relating to the Claimant's  situation  on
    return to Sri Lanka goes to elevate our conclusion at para. 70 from the
    firm to close to the inevitable.

74. Mr Drabble's first submission, as set out in  para.  10,  above,  gives
    rise to potentially significant questions of law. However, in light  of
    our conclusion on the "very compelling circumstances"  issue,  we  need
    not address it in this appeal.

Anonymity

75. The First-tier Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  order  pursuant  to  rule
    45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
    We continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

That decision has been set aside.

We re-make the decision by allowing R A's  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
Secretary of State's refusal of her human rights  claim  is  unlawful  under
section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

Signed      [pic]            Date: 3 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09096/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5th October 2018                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     RA
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z Kiss Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Cheng, instructed by Duncan Lewis

                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  RA.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings


         1. RA entered the UK on 26th January 2010 on a student visa  valid
            until 31 December 2012.  On  28th  October  2010,  having  been
            encountered working in breach  of  conditions,  her  leave  was
            cancelled, and she was served with removal papers. She  claimed
            asylum, that claim being  refused  on  24  November  2010.  She
            absconded. On 24 April 2011 she was encountered  attempting  to
            embark on false documents. She was detained and on 3  May  2011
            was convicted  for  possession/control  of  a  false/improperly
            obtained  identity  document  and  sentenced   to   12   months
            imprisonment.


         2. Her asylum and human rights claims were refused on  27  October
            2011 and a deportation order signed, in accordance with  s32(5)
            UK Borders Act 2007, the  same  day.  Her  appeal  against  the
            refusal of her asylum and human rights claim was  dismissed  on
            31 January 2012, applications for permission to appeal  refused
            and she became appeal rights exhausted on 19th March 2012.

         3.  After  submitting  fresh  evidence,  removal  directions  were
            cancelled, and she was released from detention. Her submissions
            were treated as a fresh asylum and human  rights  claim  and  a
            decision to refuse the claim was made dated 10th January  2014;
            a decision refusing to revoke the deportation order was made on
            the same day. Her appeal was dismissed on all grounds by First-
            tier Tribunal Judge McIntosh for reasons set out in a  decision
            promulgated on 5th September 2014.

         4. RA made further submissions which were again treated as a fresh
            claim but refused with a right of appeal, for reasons  set  out
            in a letter dated 12th August 2016. Her human rights appeal was
            allowed, and her protection claim appeal  dismissed  by  First-
            tier Tribunal Judge Aziz in a decision promulgated following  a
            hearing on 5th June 2018.

         5. The SSHD sought permission to appeal the decision of the First-
            tier Tribunal judge allowing the human rights claim appeal.  He
            was granted permission on the grounds that it was arguable  the
            First-tier Tribunal  judge  had  failed  to  accord  sufficient
            weight to or to take into account the relevant public  interest
            in deportation and to take into account that her  partner  will
            be able to take care of her children in her absence. It was, he
            said, also arguable that the judge speculated as to the  future
            deterioration of her mental  health  and  the  availability  of
            mental health services in Sri Lanka.

         6.  There  has  been  no  Rule  24  response   from   RA's   legal
            representatives.

         7. RA married her husband in a  religious  ceremony  on  6th  July
            2015, their relationship having commenced in January  2015.  At
            the time of their marriage neither had leave to remain  in  the
            UK; her husband was, on 21 January 2015 recognised as a refugee
            and has leave to remain until 20 January 2020.  They  have  two
            children. The first was born on 15th April 2016 and the  second
            on 26th October 2017. At the date of the Tribunal  hearing  she
            was breast feeding the youngest child.

         8. Regarding RA's mental health,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
            found:

            89. Finally, I factor into account [RA's] mental health. Whilst
                accepting [RA] has not been able to establish that she is a
                suicide risk, it is accepted by  the  respondent  that  her
                mental  health  has  deteriorated  since  her  last  appeal
                hearing in 2014. I have had sight  of  Dr  Chiedu  Obuaya's
                psychiatric report dated 14 December 2017. He  confirms  at
                paragraphs 32 and 33 of the report that [RA] has  PTSD  and
                depression. At paragraph 35 he states that she also fulfils
                the criteria for Recurrent Depressive Disorder and  Current
                Episode Severe Depression with psychotic features.
            90. During his submissions, Mr Dixon also asked me to take into
                account the likelihood of further deterioration that  would
                most likely occur in circumstances where [RA] is  separated
                from her husband and her two young children. I accept  that
                being separated from her two young children and her husband
                is  'very  likely'  to   exacerbate   her   mental   health
                deterioration and I factor this into account.
            91. I also find the report to be  helpful  when  assessing  the
                alternative scenario of [RA's]  two  children  accompanying
                her to Sri Lanka with her husband remaining here.  Even  in
                these circumstances, I still find that there is  likely  to
                be a material risk of deterioration in [RA's] mental health
                and this will inevitably impact upon her ability  to  raise
                her very young children, especially without the  assistance
                of her husband.
            92. Even if I  am  wrong  on  this  and  there  is  no  further
                deterioration in [RA's]  mental  health,  the  Tribunal  is
                looking at the proportion of deporting [her] to  Sri  Lanka
                and of her returning to her country of birth with  her  two
                very young children. She would be without the assistance of
                her husband. She would have to rebuild  her  life  in  such
                circumstances. To do  all  this  with  her  current  mental
                health condition would be very  difficult,  even  with  the
                assistance of friends  and  family.  Once  again,  this  is
                clearly not in the children's best interests.
            93. Looking at all the factors in the round, I  find  that  the
                appellant has been able to establish that  there  are  very
                compelling circumstances. I fully  take  into  account  the
                strong public interest in deportation. As  noted  above,  I
                also factor into  account  when  assessing  proportionality
                that the crime for which [RA] was convicted was non-violent
                and non-drug-related.
            94. I balance this against the fact that  the  Home  Office  is
                proposing  to  separate  a  mother  from  two  very   young
                children.....Their  rights  outweigh  the   strong   public
                interest in deportation.
            95. Even if it were being suggested  that  the  children  could
                return to Sri Lanka with their mother (with [RA's]  husband
                remaining in the United Kingdom), I would still  find  that
                proportionality should be exercised in  [RA's]  favour  and
                that there are very compelling circumstances. [RA's] mental
                health is  fragile.  She  has  been  diagnosed  with  PTSD,
                depression  and  fulfils   the   criteria   for   recurrent
                Depressive Disorder and Current Episode  Severe  Depression
                with psychotic features. [RA] is currently assisted by  her
                husband in raising her two very young children. To have her
                removed to Sri Lanka with her two  young  children  in  her
                current  condition  and  without  the  assistance  of   her
                husband, would have  materially  adverse  impact  upon  her
                ability to raise her  two  young  children,  placing  their
                safety and well-being at risk...


         9. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not  find  that  RA's  mental
            health approached the Article 3 threshold.  There  are  complex
            matters that  are  required  to  be  taken  into  account  when
            considering Article 8 and mental health issues which  were  not
            adequately addressed by the First-tier Tribunal judge.


        10. Dr Obuaya's report is predicated upon his understanding that RA
            had been detained and tortured in Sri Lanka and that her mental
            health problems stemmed from this. Although ably  submitted  by
            her counsel that the report's conclusions could and  should  be
            read as credible evidence of her health  problems  irrespective
            of  the  understanding  by  the  Dr  of  her  previous  claimed
            mistreatment in Sri Lanka, I do not agree. The  core  tenet  of
            his report comes from his understanding  of  her  psychological
            history. He is not her treating doctor. The First-tier Tribunal
            judge relies upon that report to reach his findings  which  are
            predicated upon an unreliable report. Or at the  very  least  a
            report which does not enable sustainable findings to be made as
            to  future  deterioration  of  mental  health   where   it   is
            acknowledged that RA has not been able to establish that she is
            a suicide risk and the evidence does not provide an opinion  as
            to the consequences to her  health  upon  separation  from  her
            children or her husband.

        11.  Furthermore,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  in   assessing
            proportionality, although referring to the seriousness  of  the
            offence reflected in the sentence of 12 months imprisonment, in
            effect reduced the weight to be placed upon the public interest
            in deportation because of the nature of the offence  which  did
            not involve drugs or violence. He gave inadequate  reasons  for
            finding that this was permissible.

        12. The First-tier Tribunal judge has erred in law in reaching  his
            decision  that the deportation of RA would be disproportionate.

        13. I set aside the decision to be remade and  make  the  following
            directions:

             Directions


            1.  Both  parties  have  leave  to  file  further  and   updated
               documentary evidence, such evidence  to  be  filed  no  later
               than 14  days  prior  to  the  resumed  hearing.  If  witness
               evidence is  filed,  the  witness  statement  must  stand  as
               evidence in chief.


            2. RA, through her solicitors, to notify the  Tribunal  and  the
               SSHD no later than 7 days prior  to  the  hearing  if  it  is
               intended to call oral evidence.

            3. Both parties to file and serve skeleton  arguments  no  later
               than 7 days prior to the hearing addressing,  in  particular,
               the following legal issues:

                  a) Can a refugee with limited leave to remain  be  treated
                     for the purposes of Part V Nationality Immigration  and
                     Asylum Act 2002 and the  Immigration  Rules  paragraphs
                     A398 to 399D as a qualified person?
                  b) To what extent, if any, does the fact that  one  parent
                     is recognised  as  a  refugee  with  limited  leave  to
                     remain, impact upon whether it is unduly  harsh  and/or
                     very  compelling  circumstances  for  the   non-refugee
                     spouse to be deported?
                  c) Does the test of 'very compelling  circumstances'  have
                     to be applied in determining whether deportation  would
                     be a breach of Article 8?
                  d) Is there scope, within the  legislative  framework  and
                     the Immigration Rules, for consideration of the  nature
                     of the offence to be factored into  the  weight  to  be
                     given to the public interest in deportation.


            4. The matter to be relisted before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Coker
               on first available date after 7th January 2019, 2  hours,  no
               interpreter.


       Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision; to be relisted first  available  date  after
7th January 2018.

                                             Date 5th October 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1]
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/a
ttachment_data/file/801622/Article-8-criminality-cases-v8.0ext.pdf.

