
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09707/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 September 2019               |On 27 September 2019               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan


                                   Between

                                     lYR
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Dirie, instructed by Wick & Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. By my decision promulgated on 24 July 2019 I set aside  the  decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal. I now remake that decision.

    2. The appellant is a Sunni Kurd citizen of Iraq born  on  24  September
       1996.

The Appellant's Claim

    3. The appellant claims that:

        a. he cannot be expected to return to his home area because of  the
           risk he would face from indiscriminate violence which meets  the
           threshold  under  Article  15(c)  the  Qualification   Directive
           (2004/83/EC);

        b. because he does not have (and would not be  able  to  obtain)  a
           civil status identity card (CSID) he would face a real  risk  of
           destitution in all parts of Iraq such that article 3 ECHR  would
           be engaged and/or it would be unduly harsh for him  to  relocate
           internally anywhere in Iraq;

        c. even with a CSID he cannot safely relocate to the IKR because he
           will be connected  to  his  father  and  uncle,  who  worked  in
           intelligence for Saddam Hussain and/or it would be unduly  harsh
           for him in the IKR because of a lack of family  support  and  an
           inability to find work or afford accommodation; and

        d. even with a CSID it would be unduly harsh  and  unreasonable  to
           expect him to relocate to Baghdad  because  he  does  not  speak
           Arabic, is Sunni and Kurdish, has very limited education, is  of
           fighting age, and would be a target  for  kidnappers  given  the
           time he spent in the West.

    4. The appellant's account, in summary, is as follows:

        a. He is from a town called Shingal in Mosul.

        b. He has very limited education and is illiterate; and speaks only
           minimal Arabic.

        c. Both his parents are dead and he lived with his  paternal  uncle
           and uncle's family in Shingal until 2014.

        d. In 2014 fighting broke out in his home area and he moved to  the
           mountains and then to Syria. He then returned to Iraq  and  went
           to the Dakar camp  with  his  uncle.  He  claims  to  have  been
           threatened by Yazidis in the camp.

        e. His uncle and father worked in intelligence for  Saddam  Hussain
           (but he has no knowledge of their roles).  His  uncle  told  him
           that this would put him at risk in the IKR.

        f. He left Iraq for Turkey with his cousins  but  became  separated
           from them on route to the UK. He has not had contact with any of
           his family since arriving in the UK and  has  not  attempted  to
           contact them through social media or otherwise.

        g. He is not in  possession  of  his  civil  status  identity  card
           ("CSID"), passport or any other identification documents.

    5. I heard oral evidence from the  appellant.  Responding  to  questions
       from Ms Everett, the appellant maintained that he has not had contact
       with his uncle or any family or friends in Iraq and has no  knowledge
       of their whereabouts. His explanation for not attempting  to  contact
       friends or family via social media was  that  he  is  illiterate.  He
       stated that when he travelled to  Europe  he  was  dependent  on  his
       cousins to maintain contact with his uncle but  he  became  separated
       from them. In response  to  questioning  about  a  blood  transfusion
       referred to in his screening interview, the appellant stated that  he
       could not remember when it had taken place but  that  it  was  before
       fighting broke out in his village.

The Respondent's Position

    6. The respondent accepted that the appellant is a Kurdish  Muslim  from
       Iraq, but rejected the entirety of the rest  of  his  claim.  In  the
       reasons for refusal letter it was  acknowledged  that  the  level  of
       indiscriminate violence in the area from which the appellant  claimed
       to originate met the article 15(c) threshold but  it  was  maintained
       that the appellant could relocate to the IKR.

    7. Ms Everett argued that the appellant has not been honest about losing
       contact with his uncle and that, upon  being  returned  to  Iraq,  he
       would have the support of his uncle who would be able to  assist  him
       in all matters including obtaining his  CSID.  She  argued  that  the
       appellant's claim that he has  lost  (and  is  unable  to  establish)
       contact with his uncle should  not  be  accepted  because  he  lacked
       credibility.

    8. In her submissions, Ms Everett highlighted  several  aspects  of  the
       appellant's account which she considered to  be  undermining  of  his
       credibility. Firstly, Ms Everett drew attention to  an  inconsistency
       between the appellant's statement in his screening interview that  he
       had a blood transfusion  a  year  earlier  (i.e.  in  2015)  and  his
       response to questioning in cross examination when he stated that  the
       transfusion took place before the  fighting  in  his  home  area  (in
       2014). This is a discrepancy of about one year.  Secondly, Ms Everett
       argued that that the lack of arrangements to keep in contact with his
       uncle and family  when  travelling  to  the  UK  was  not  plausible.
       Thirdly, she did not consider it plausible that the  appellant  would
       not have used social media (or asked someone to assist him, if he was
       unable himself) to try and locate his uncle of family.

Findings of Fact

    9. Having carefully considered the evidence that was before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal, the appellant's oral evidence, and the submissions  of
       Ms Everett and Ms Dirie, I have formed the view  that  the  appellant
       has been truthful when describing what occurred to him  in  Iraq  and
       his loss of contact with his family. This is because:

        a. The appellant's account has been broadly consistent. Ms  Everett
           highlighted a discrepancy about the date of a blood transfusion.
           I  agree  with  Ms  Everett  that  there  is  a  difference   of
           approximately  one  year  between  the  account  given  in   the
           screening interview and at the hearing; but I do not agree  that
           this has any  relevance  to  the  appellant's  credibility.  The
           appellant is a young illiterate man  whose  screening  interview
           took place on the day he arrived in the UK. Stating that a blood
           transfusion - which has no particular relevance to the  claim  -
           took place a year ago instead of 2 years ago  does  not,  in  my
           view, tell us anything about his credibility. It simply tells us
           that he did not remember how long  ago  the  operation  was.  In
           cross  examination,  the  appellant   gave   a   straightforward
           response, explaining that although he could not recall when  the
           operation took place he did remember  that  it  was  before  the
           fighting that took place in his village. I do not consider it to
           be damaging to credibility that a person does not  remember  how
           long ago an operation took place but can remember whether or not
           it was before a momentous event in his life  (such  as  fighting
           that forced him to leave his home).

        b. The appellant's account is plausible. Firstly, it is  consistent
           with the objective evidence, which indicates  that  fighting  in
           his home area occurred as  claimed.  Secondly,  even  though  it
           might be expected that the appellant  would  have  made  efforts
           through social media to contact his family, given his illiteracy
           and lack of education I consider it plausible that he  has  not.
           Similarly, it is plausible that he relied on his cousins to keep
           in contact with his uncle and that he lost the ability to remain
           in contact when he became separated from them.

   10. Applying the lower standard of proof applicable in protection claims,
       I accept, and find as a fact, that the appellant (a) is  from  Mosul;
       (b) does not have a CSID or other Iraqi identification document;  (c)
       is not in contact with family in Iraq and does  not  have  family  or
       friends to whom he could turn for assistance; (d) speaks only limited
       Arabic; and (e) has only a low level of education and is illiterate.

Article 15(c) risk in the appellant's home area

   11. The first question to address is whether the appellant can return  to
       his home area. According to AA (Article 15(c)  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT
       00544 (and the amended country guidance in AA (Iraq) v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA  Civ  944),  the  level  of
       indiscriminate violence in his home area reaches  the  article  15(c)
       threshold under the Qualification  Directive  (2004/83/EC).  Although
       there clearly have been substantial changes in the  appellant's  home
       area since AA was decided, the respondent has not submitted  evidence
       to show that the threat to civilians from indiscriminate violence has
       diminished. In the absence of any  such  evidence,  I  am  unable  to
       depart from the extant country guidance  caselaw.  I  therefore  find
       that the appellant cannot be expected to  return  to  his  home  area
       because of the risk of serious harm under article 15(c).

Internal relocation

   12. As the appellant cannot be expected to return to his home  area,  the
       issue to be addressed is whether he can relocate internally.

   13. It is clear from both AA and AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal  relocation)
       Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC) that without a CSID it is very difficult  to
       function and survive in Iraq, and there  is  a  significant  risk  of
       destitution. In AA the respondent conceded that  a  returnee  who  is
       unable to obtain a CSID would face a real risk of destitution in  all
       parts of Iraq engaging article 3 ECHR. In AAH the Tribunal  found  at
       paragraph 98:

           "With those caveats in mind we  accept  that  a  person  who  is
           unable to replace a missing CSID,  and  who  has  no  family  or
           others to whom he could turn for assistance, is likely  to  face
           significant  difficulties  in  accessing  housing,   employment,
           healthcare and other services. We do not need to  dwell  on  the
           issue of whether a return to a situation of  destitution  would,
           of itself, breach Article 3 - see for example the  consideration
           of this issue by the Court of Appeal in Said v SSHD  [2016]  Imm
           AR 1084 and MA (Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ 994 - it is  sufficient
           that we conclude that it would not be reasonable  to  require  a
           returnee to internally relocate to a situation of destitution."

   14. Given my findings of fact at paragraph 10 above  that  the  appellant
       does not have a CSID or  family/friends  to  whom  he  can  turn  for
       assistance, following AAH, internal relocation will not be reasonable
       unless the appellant is able to replace his missing CSID.

   15. Having regard to the country guidance  in  both  AAH  and  AA,  I  am
       satisfied that it is not reasonably likely that the appellant will be
       able to replace his CSID. This is because

        a. He does not have any of the other  documentation  identified  in
           paragraph 1(i) of the headnote to AAH;

        b. The relevant civil registry  office  is  in  an  area  that  was
           formerly held by ISIL and is likely to be destroyed;

        c. In order to access the relevant civil registry office (if it has
           not been destroyed) the appellant would  need  to  travel  to  a
           location where the risk of  indiscriminate  violence  meets  the
           threshold under article 15(c) and he cannot be  expected  to  do
           this; and

        d. he does not have contact with family members and therefore  does
           not have access to assistance from someone who would be able  to
           assist in locating the original place of registration.

   16. In conclusion, I find that:

        a. The appellant cannot be returned to his home area because of the
           risk of indiscriminate violence which meets the threshold  under
           article 15(c);

        b. it is  not  reasonable  to  expect  the  appellant  to  relocate
           internally to anywhere in Iraq (including the  IKR)  because  he
           does not (and will be  unable  to  obtain  within  a  reasonable
           timeframe) a CSID and will not have the  support  of  family  or
           friends.

   17. The appeal is therefore allowed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

|                                   |                                   |
|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge        |Dated:   26 September 2019         |
|Sheridan                           |                                   |

