
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09762/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House without a Hearing   |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 6 July 2020                                |On 7 September 2020          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     SM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION IN FORCE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because the appellant is  an  asylum  seeker  and  therefore
    entitled to privacy.

 2. Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rule 2008 provides:

         'Decision with or without a hearing

         34.  (1) Subject to paragraph (2), the Upper Tribunal may make  any
             decision without a hearing.

             (2)  The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed
             by a party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider
             any matter, and the form of any such hearing.'

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunal  Judge  Lane,  prompted  by  the  extraordinary   demands   on
    resources, particularly the difficulties  in  finding  a  place  for  a
    socially distanced  hearing,  following  the  well-publicised  national
    emergency arising from the spread  of  the  Corona-19  virus,  and  the
    obligation  under  Rule  2(2)(e)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 to avoid delay "so far as compatible  with  proper
    consideration of the issues" caused directions to be sent on  20  April
    2020 suggesting that the appeal was suitable for a disposal  without  a
    hearing and directing the parties to make representations in accordance
    with that observation.

 4. The Directions were sent to the parties on 20 April 2020 and required a
    response no later than 21 days after that.

 5. The appellant has replied with a skeleton argument used at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and written submissions and other  matters  but  did  not
    express any view on determining the  appeal  without  a  hearing.   The
    Secretary of State has not responded.

 6. Clearly the time for a response has lapsed.

 7. I am satisfied that notice was given and it is right to proceed without
    a hearing. The issues raised in the papers are  clear  and,  apparently
    meritorious.

 8. I see no need for a long decision here.  The problems with  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision lie not in what the judge did but in  what  he
    failed to do.

 9. The judge was not persuaded that  the  appellant  was  involved  in  or
    sympathetic towards Kurdish  activism  during  his  time  in  Iran.   A
    difficulty with this finding  is  that  there  was  evidence  from  the
    appellant's sister supporting that claim.  That evidence does not  seem
    to have been considered with any care or any detailed findings made and
    such findings as there are are  undervalued  by  the  judge's  apparent
    error in assigning the appellant's sister to the male gender.  This  is
    a surprising mistake for an experienced judge but it seems to have been
    made.

10. Second, and in some ways linked to the first, there has been no  proper
    consideration of the appellant's claim not merely to have attended pro-
    Kurdish separatist demonstrations in London but to have  thereby  faced
    the risk of having been "noticed" by the Iranian authorities. The judge
    has made no clear findings about whether any risk may arise from  this.



11. As the appellant's submissions point out there are reasons  to  believe
    that the Iranian authorities are keen to know who protests  about  them
    in the United Kingdom.  It is trite law that a  person's  sincerity  is
    not material.  What matters is how they are perceived and the judge has
    not dealt with the possibility that the appellant would be  in  trouble
    even if the judge was right to find he was insincere in his support for
    Kurdish separatism, in the event of his return.

12. This is not to encourage the appellant to think  that  he  has  a  very
    strong case.  There are difficulties but there may be answers to  those
    difficulties and I am quite satisfied  they  have  not  been  addressed
    adequately or at all in the decision.

13. This is a case where the appellant has not had a proper  hearing.   The
    core of his case has not been considered and it  is  fair  to  him  and
    right that the appeal is determined again in the First-tier Tribunal.

14. I find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law.   I  set  aside  its
    decision and I direct that the appeal be heard again in the  First-tier
    Tribunal by a different judge.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated above.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 July 2020                    |

