
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09424/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 December 2019                   |On 13 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                   mr A R
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M Chaggar, Counsel instructed by Fountain
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran of Kurdish ethnicity born on 16  May
    2001 (as found by the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the respondent dated 24
    July 2018 to refuse the appellant's protection claim.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 28 May 2019 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hatton
    dismissed the appellant's protection appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on the grounds that:

      1) The judge had  made  positive  credibility  findings  including  in
         relation to the appellant's age and had set out that the  appellant
         was a child and that the relevant considerations applied  and  that
         the appellant had  provided  consistent  evidence  in  relation  to
         distributing of leaflets [31].  The judge  also  accepted  at  [41]
         that the appellant was not a party member due to being a child.  It
         was argued that having accepted the  appellant's  consistency  with
         his interview and the central  part  of  his  claim  to  have  been
         involved in distributing leaflets, the judge went on  to  find  the
         appellant not credible including in speculating about  hypothetical
         and irrelevant matters and most notably in finding at [43] that the
         appellant had stated that at the time he left Iran his  father  was
         unwell whereas it had been the appellant's consistent case that  he
         learned his father was unwell after he left Iran and Counsel's case
         report was attached to the grounds of appeal.

 3. The parties had agreed prior to the commencement of  the  hearing  that
    the decision contained a material error of law.  Mrs Aboni conceded the
    appeal, primarily due to the error of fact in relation to the recording
    of the evidence as to when the appellant learnt his father was ill  and
    the negative credibility findings that the judge went on to make  about
    this finding of fact.  I agree with  the  respondent's  view  that  the
    decision could not stand.

 4. Neither party required a reasoned decision in light of their agreement,
    a course open to the Tribunal pursuant to rule 40(3)(a) and (b) of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is infected by this error which
    appears to be a misunderstanding of the evidence; whereas  the  correct
    position, maintained on behalf of the appellant, is also  reflected  in
    the judge's Record of Proceedings.

 6. I am satisfied that this is material as it cannot be said  definitively
    that the  judge  would  have  reached  the  same  conclusions  he  did,
    including him negative plausibility findings, had he not made the error
    he did in relation to the appellant's evidence about his father,  which
    was the judge's first consideration on credibility at [43] to [46].

 7. Although I accept the judge went on to find  that  the  most  important
    element of the appellant's claim was in relation to his claim about the
    actions of the police, which   given  the  judge's  previous  error  it
    cannot be said that he would have necessarily reached the same decision
    had he not misstated the appellant's evidence about his father.



Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.  No findings are preserved.  The appeal is remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for hearing de novo other than before Judge Hatton.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date:  12 December 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee has been paid I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date:  12 December 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

