
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09194/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16th November 2018                   |On 27th December 2018               |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  barze [a]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Bexson (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Hagan promulgated on  24th  October  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham, Sheldon Court on 18th October 2017.  In the  decision,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born  on  4th  June
    1996.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  4th
    August 2017,  refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he is a  Sunni  Muslim  of
    Kurdish ethnicity, who worked as a guard at a carpark in Iraq from  the
    age of 10 until 2014, and this  carpark  was  in  the  town  centre  of
    Makhmur, which was the Appellant's home town.  The business  was  owned
    by a man called Mr [I].  He had a son called [S].   The  Appellant  and
    [S] had a history of arguments and disputes.  An argument arose on  8th
    August 2014.  Later on that day ISIS seized the town of Makhmur.   They
    wanted to remove money from the carpark office and [S]  tried  to  stop
    them.  They took him away with the others.  The Appellant  subsequently
    learned that [S] had been shot.  Mr [I] now believes that the Appellant
    was responsible for his son's death.  The Appellant fears that he would
    seek vengeance against the Appellant were he to  return  to  Iraq  (see
    paragraph 4).

 4. The Appellant also states that he was taken by ISIS to Mosul.   He  was
    held in captivity for four months.  He was released  on  14th  December
    2014 after a "Sheikh", who knew the Appellant's family, had learned  of
    his detention, and interceded with ISIS.  The Appellant  went  to  stay
    then at the Sheikh's home.  He  remained  there  until  15th  September
    2015.  It was while he was there that  he  learned  that  [S]'s  family
    believed him to be responsible for [S]'s death.  The Appellant had left
    Iraq concealed in a water tanker, travelling  through  Turkey  and  via
    Syria,  before  eventually  coming  to  the   UK   where   he   entered
    clandestinely on 21st March 2017, and claimed asylum.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge accepted the Appellant's account, and noted that  the  Sheikh
    had been willing to intercede on his behalf because the Sheikh had seen
    this as a matter of family  duty,  because  he  was  married  into  the
    Appellant's family.  The Sheikh was a  powerful  man  himself,  with  a
    following of some 3,000 followers (paragraph 38).  The judge was  clear
    that "that aspect of the Appellant's account is clear, consistent,  and
    reasonably credible" (paragraph 39).

 6. However, in relation to the Appellant's ability to return  back  safely
    to Iraq, the judge was less  impressed  by  the  Appellant's  evidence.
    Having taken into account the Court of Appeal case of AA (Iraq) [2017],
    the judge noted the importance of a CSID card (see  paragraph  43)  and
    observed that a difficulty in not having a CSID card was:-

         "a difficulty only for those returned to Baghdad.  Since  he  comes
         from the IKR, that is not usually how return would  be  undertaken.
         If, because of the current  difficulties,  return  were  to  be  to
         Baghdad to make his way to the IKR, then he would need a  CSID,  or
         the means to obtain one reasonably  soon  after  arrival  in  Iraq"
         (paragraph 43).

 7. However, the judge went on to say that:-

         "I do not know whether the Appellant has a CSID.  He says  that  he
         has no documents at all.  He is not a wholly reliable witness,  and
         he obviously has an incentive to put obstacles in the  way  of  his
         return.  Likewise, he says he has no contact with his family.  I do
         not know whether that was right or not" (paragraph 44).

    The judge went on to then say that the Appellant  had  not  established
    that he could not obtain a CSID card  from  the  Civil  Status  Affairs
    Office were he to return there because he had the support of the Sheikh
    and his extended family there (paragraph 44).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  failed  to  make
    sufficient findings on which to provide a  reasonable  decision  as  to
    whether the Appellant did have a Civil  Status  ID  card  (CSID).   The
    judge also failed to have proper regard to the objective evidence as to
    individuals returning without a CSID.  The  judge  moreover  failed  to
    have proper regard to the risk to the Appellant on return in the  light
    of his detention by ISIS.  Finally, the judge failed to have regard  to
    the Respondent's policy on the feasibility of return.

10. On 1st February 2018, permission to appeal was granted.   This  was  on
    the basis that the judge (at paragraph 39) had accepted the Appellant's
    claim that he  had  been  detained  by  ISIS  for  four  months  before
    eventually escaping.  Moreover, the judge had  accepted  (at  paragraph
    40) that the Appellant had not been targeted  personally  by  ISIS  and
    could return.  He had then  also  found  (at  paragraph  41)  that  the
    Appellant was from IKR.  Although the judge had  considered  AA  (Iraq)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 944, and had found that the  inability  to  return  the
    Appellant to the IKR (at paragraph 42) was not open  to  him  as  Erbil
    Airport was temporarily closed, he had  also  confusingly  stated  that
    "although the factors giving rise to the closure of the airport may  be
    a basis for such a conclusion".  Indeed, the judge had then also stated
    that the Appellant would face difficulties (at  paragraph  46)  without
    actually specifying whether the judge was referring to the  IKR  or  to
    Baghdad.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 16th November 2018, Ms Bexson, appearing as
    Counsel  on  the  Appellant's  behalf,  relied  upon  the  grounds   of
    application.  She submitted that the judge's findings about the ability
    of the  Appellant  to  obtain  a  CSID  card  (at  paragraph  44)  were
    insufficient and indeterminate, and lacked adequate reasoning, such  as
    to amount to an error of law.  For example, the  judge  stated  at  the
    outset that, "I do not know whether the Appellant has a  CSID",  before
    proceeding to say three sentences later that, "I do  not  know  whether
    that was right or not", when addressing  the  Appellant's  own  account
    that he had no contact with his family.  The fact was  that  the  judge
    had to make a finding whether the Appellant was in contact with  family
    members such as to enable him to obtain a CSID card.  In the same  way,
    although the Appellant had received support from the  powerful  Sheikh,
    this person was now said to be  in  the  IKR,  and  Erbil  Airport  was
    closed.  In this context, it was confusing for  the  judge  to  observe
    that "he has not established that he could  obtain  one  [i.e.  a  CSID
    card] from the Civil Status Affairs Office".

12. Indeed, the statement by the judge that, "Even if he  lacks  documents,
    he may be able to obtain a CSID if  he  has  family  members  or  other
    individuals who are prepared to vouch for him"  (paragraph  44).   This
    was speculative.  The judge had to make the finding as to  whether  the
    Appellant did indeed have family members or others who were willing  to
    help him to obtain a CSID card.  Without a clear finding being made  on
    this issue, it could not simply be assumed  that  the  Appellant  would
    have the ability to procure a CSID card, as required by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017].

13. This was an important error because as is made clear (at  paragraph  10
    of the grounds) the Appellant had made it quite clear that  he  had  no
    contact with his family members since he had been captured by ISIS.  In
    the same way, it is not credible  for  the  judge  to  state  that  the
    Appellant would not be targeted by  ISIS,  given  that  the  judge  had
    accepted that the Appellant had indeed been detained by ISIS  for  some
    four months (see paragraphs 12 to 13 of the grounds of application).

14. For her part, Ms Aboni submitted that there was no error of law in  the
    judge's decision.  The judge had accepted that the Appellant  was  from
    the IKR.  He would go to the IKR although the airport was at  the  time
    temporarily closed, but is now open.  The judge had made it  clear  (at
    paragraph 43) that "the difficulty [is]  only  for  those  returned  to
    Baghdad" with respect to the requirement of having  a  CSID  card,  and
    that "Since he comes from the IKR, that is not usually how return would
    be undertaken" and he would not need a CSID card, such as to avoid  the
    risk of real  destitution.   Ms  Aboni  submitted  that  all  that  the
    Appellant would need was to be  able  to  fly  to  Erbil  Airport  and,
    following clearance from there, he would  be  able  to  enter  the  IKR
    without any restriction, and without there being any  requirement  upon
    him that he should have a CSID card.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007), such that I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First, this is a case where  the
    judge has given insufficient and inadequate reasons with respect to the
    Appellant's ability to procure a CSID card were he to return to  Kabul.
    The findings made at paragraph 44  conflict  with  what  is  stated  at
    paragraphs 9 and 10 of Annex A to  AA  (Iraq)  [2017],  which  contains
    guidance that "regardless of the feasibility of his return, it would be
    necessary to decide whether he has a CSID, or will be  able  to  obtain
    one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq" (paragraph 9 of the Annex).
     It is also in conflict with what is said in that case that:-

         "Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P should as a
         general matter be able to obtain one from the Civil Status  Affairs
         Office for P's home Governorate, using an Iraqi  passport  (whether
         current or expired), if P has one.  If  P  does  not  have  such  a
         passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID  may  depend  on  whether  P
         knows  the  page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  holding   P's
         information ..." (see paragraph 10 of the Annex).

16. The fact is that the difficulty that the judge found himself in,  which
    was a difficulty not of the judge's making, given that  the  judge  had
    found the Appellant to be lacking in plausibility in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's ability to go back to Iraq, was such that  the  judge  only
    concluded that, "I do not know whether the Appellant has a  CSID",  and
    only concluded, in relation to the Appellant's claim  that  he  had  no
    contact with his family that, "I do not know whether that was right  or
    not" (paragraph 44).




17. In these circumstances,  it  could  not  safely  be  assumed  that  the
    Appellant would indeed be able to obtain a CSID  card  from  the  Civil
    Status Affairs Office.  It is true that the judge states that "Even  if
    he lacks documents, he may be able to obtain a CSID if  he  has  family
    members or other individuals who are prepared to  vouch  for  him"  (at
    paragraph 44), but the Appellant's own case had been that he  had  lost
    contact with his family members after he had been captured by ISIS (see
    paragraph 10 of the grounds).

18. Second, the conclusion by the judge, that the Appellant was not at risk
    of ISIS, did not sit well, with the recognition that the Appellant  had
    indeed been detained by ISIS for a period of time,  and  then  released
    only after the intervention of the Sheikh.  Dr Fatah, the expert,  gave
    evidence (see paragraph 40 of the decision) that "Makhmur was  captured
    by ISIS on 8th August 2014, but was recaptured  by  the  Peshmerga  two
    days later on 10th August 2014.", Thereafter ISIS attempted  to  retake
    the town in July 2016  but  "was  repelled  by  the  Iraqi  Army."  The
    conclusion from this by the judge is that "on the Appellant's own case,
    he was not targeted by ISIS.  His case is that he was  seized  by  them
    because he was in Makhmur when they attacked"  (paragraph  40).   This,
    however, is a distinction without a difference.  The Appellant is  from
    IKR (see paragraph 41 of the decision), and  the  judge  observed  that
    there had been some changes on the ground but:-

         "those changes are that some  areas  previously  held  by  the  IKR
         forces are now again in dispute.  Most significantly, that includes
         Kirkuk and the surrounding areas.  It is not the  case  that  these
         problems extend  throughout  the  IKR.   I  see  no  basis  for  my
         departing from the guidance given save to that  degree"  (paragraph
         45).

19. However, the judge on the other hand recognised immediately  thereafter
    that:-

         "I accept that the Appellant would face difficulties, but I am  not
         persuaded by the evidence that they would be so extreme as to  give
         rise to an article  3  risk,  or  to  make  removal  unduly  harsh"
         (paragraph 46).

20. These conclusions do not make clear whether the judge is  referring  to
    the Appellant's difficulties with respect to his return to the  IKR  or
    to Baghdad.

21. In short, the means by which the Appellant would be returnable, whether
    to Baghdad, and thus requiring a CSID card to enable him to go  to  the
    IKR, the place of  his  origin;  or  whether  he  would  be  returnable
    directly to the IKR, are matters that are not  properly  explained,  in
    the light of the fact that the Appellant had been the victim of  attack
    and detention by ISIS,  such  that  he  was  released  only  after  the
    intervention of the Sheikh.

Notice of Decision

22. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007), such that I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  This appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal,  to
    be determined by a judge other than Judge O'Hagan, pursuant to Practice
    Statement 7.2A.

23. An anonymity direction is not made.

24. The appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th December 2018










