
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/09666/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 July 2020                    |On 31 July 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     MA

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)



For the appellant:     Mr James Howard, of Counsel

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred
to are in a bundle of XX pages, the contents of which I have  noted  and
taken full account of. The order made is described at the  end  of  these
reasons.

1. The appellant, who claims to be a Syrian national  born  on  3.4.96,  has
   appealed to the Upper Tribunal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal promulgated 12.11.19,  dismissing  on  all  grounds  his  appeal
   against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 1.10.19, to  refuse
   his claim for international protection.

2. The appeal was originally listed to be heard at Manchester Civil  Justice
   Centre on 31.3.20, a date which had to be vacated because of the COVID-19
   pandemic.  Prior  to  that  date,  on  28.2.20,  the  appellant  made  an
   application under Rule 15(2A) to admit documentary evidence of his Syrian
   identity, which he claimed to have recently received from Syria.

3. The Upper Tribunal issued  directions  on  28.4.20,  proposing  that  the
   appeal should be held remotely, directing the appellant  to  prepare  and
   lodge an agreed consolidated bundle.

4. Pursuant to these directions,  on  11.5.20  the  appellant  made  further
   written submissions, enclosing the further evidence relied on in the Rule
   15(2A) application.

5. The  respondent  has  also  responded  to  the  directions  with  written
   submissions, dated  13.5.20.  Objection  is  taken  to  the  Rule  15(2A)
   application, on the basis that no permission was granted in  relation  to
   this issue and the evidence was not before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In
   response to the article  8  issue,  it  is  accepted  that  the  impugned
   decision contains no substantive article 8 consideration. However, it  is
   submitted that the omission is not material  as  there  was  no  evidence
   before the Tribunal as to any private life in the UK.

6. On 26.5.20, the appellant made further written submissions, arguing  that
   the evidence of identity should be admitted.

7. On 4.6.20, the Upper Tribunal issued further directions for  the  listing
   of the appeal as a remote hearing.

Preliminary Issue

8. At the remote hearing I dealt  as  a  preliminary  issue  with  the  Rule
   15(2A) application. Mr McVeety  explained  that  he  had  not  seen  this
   material, though it may have been seen by someone from  the  respondent's
   side as there are submissions opposing the application. I summarised  the
   nature of the evidence and Mr Howard showed through the video  call  that
   he had what were described  as  the  originals  of  the  Syrian  identity
   documents. Mr Howard also submitted that the material was relevant to the
   article 8 issue including 276ADE very significant obstacles.

9. However, permission was not granted on this ground and this evidence  was
   not before the First-tier Tribunal. The hearing before the Upper Tribunal
   was only concerned with whether there was a material error of law in  the
   making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The material  has  not
   been considered by the respondent. In the circumstances, I did not  admit
   the further evidence. It is, however,  open  to  the  appellant  to  make
   further representations or a fresh claim to the respondent,  pursuant  to
   paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.

The Article 8 Issue

10. I have carefully considered the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
   dismissing the appeal in the light of the submissions and the grounds  of
   application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

11. It was common ground at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  that  if  the
   appellant was a national of Syria, as claimed, he would succeed  on  that
   basis alone, pursuant to  the  Country  Guidance  of  KB  (Failed  asylum
   seekers and forced returnees) Syria CG [2012] UKUT 00426 (IAC).  However,
   for the cogent reasons set out from [31] onwards, the Tribunal  concluded
   that the appellant had failed to establish to the lower standard of proof
   that he was a Syrian  national,  so  that  his  claim  for  international
   protection (asylum and humanitarian protection) must fail.

12. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Woodcraft on 23.12.19, on ground 4 only, on the basis that  it  was
   arguable that although article 8 ECHR was raised in the oral  submissions
   at the hearing (see [27.d]), and at [13] the judge made a  correct  self-
   direction, the decision failed to address article 8 at all.  I also  note
   that article 8 was raised in the grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

13. At [40] of the decision, Judge Buckley stated that the appeal must  fail
   on all grounds. The statement under the heading of 'Decision' also  makes
   clear that "the asylum claim, humanitarian  protection  claim  and  human
   rights claim are all refused."

14. The appellant claimed no partner or dependent child in  the  UK.  It  is
   obvious that the only potential human rights claim was  on  private  life
   grounds, as Mr Howard conceded.

15. At [27.d] the judge recorded the appellant's  representative  submission
   that in relation  to  article  8  removal  would  be  a  disproportionate
   interference and there would be significant  obstacles  to  return.  This
   submission appears to allude  to  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
   Rules, which require the appellant to demonstrate  that  there  are  very
   significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  in  Syria.  The  submission
   depended on the appellant's claims in relation to events in Syria and  on
   the Country Guidance. However, as the unimpeachable finding was that  the
   appellant is not a Syrian national and not from Syria, he cannot  succeed
   on the basis of very significant obstacles to integration  on  return  to
   Syria. Mr Howard also accepted this point, on the basis of  the  evidence
   that was before the First-tier Tribunal.

16. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal omitted to address the  article
   8 claim at all,  either  within  or  without  the  Rules.  There  was  no
   assessment of the claimed private life and no proportionality assessment.
   To that extent, there was an error in the  decision-making  process;  the
   claim having been raised, the judge should  have  addressed  it,  however
   briefly, given the circumstances.

17. Whilst there can be no appeal on an Immigration Rule basis  in  relation
   to human rights and article 8 ECHR, whether, or the extent to  which,  an
   appellant qualifies  under  the  Rules  is  relevant  to  any  article  8
   proportionality assessment. If the Rules cannot be met the appellant  can
   in reality only succeed on article 8 grounds outside the Rules  if  there
   are such compelling circumstances sufficient, exceptionally,  to  justify
   granting leave to remain on the basis  that  to  do  otherwise  would  be
   unjustifiably harsh.

18. As he claims to have arrived in the UK on 18.12.17,  the  appellant  has
   only been in the UK for a little over two and a half years.  Any  private
   life he has developed in the UK during  that  time  must  necessarily  be
   limited. His immigration history reveals that between 2012  and  2018  he
   encountered the authorities in the Netherlands, Norway,  and  Sweden,  in
   each of which countries he was fingerprinted.  He  also  claims  to  have
   travelled through Turkey, Greece, Italy and France  before  reaching  the
   UK. He claims to have lived in Greece for five months, Italy  for  twelve
   months, and France for six months. It is not clear from which country  he
   emanates but it is not necessary  for  the  Tribunal  to  determine  that
   issue. The fact remains that over the years he has spent  a  considerable
   period living  or  travelling  through  various  European  countries  and
   comparatively little time in the UK.   He has lived outside of the UK for
   most of his life and in other European countries for collectively  longer
   than he has been in the UK.

19. It is unclear on what basis he claims any significant  private  life  in
   the UK. His grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal do no more  than
   raise article 8, providing no detail of the claim. It is not  clear  that
   the submissions made on  his  behalf  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  gave
   anything more than lip service to the article  8  claim;  certainly,  the
   judge  recorded  no  particulars  of  his  claim  and  the   respondent's
   submissions point out that there was no evidence of private life  in  the
   UK before the First-tier Tribunal. I accept that the appellant  may  well
   have developed friendships and acquaintances and in part become  used  to
   the culture and society of the UK. However, there does not appear to have
   been any evidence to that effect before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  it
   necessarily follows, there could have been no lawful basis on  which  the
   appeal could have succeeded on article 8 grounds. It is  surprising  that
   permission was granted on that ground at all.

20. In the circumstances and for the reasons set  out  above,  whilst  there
   was an error of law in the sense that the  judge  should  have  addressed
   article 8, the error is not material  as  the  appeal  could  never  have
   succeeded on human rights grounds on the evidence before the Tribunal.

Decision

      There is no material error of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal;

      The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed;

      It follows that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the
      appellant's appeal must stand as made.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       21 July 2020



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       21 July 2020





