
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/09299/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 April 2018                         | On 11 May 2018                    |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     SQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION continued)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Harley, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Miss Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 19 February 1998 who claimed
    asylum on 13 February 2015 having entered the UK clandestinely on 9
    January 2015.  His application for asylum was refused on 8 September
    2017.  The Secretary of State determined that the appellant was not
    entitled to protection either under the Refugee Convention or under
    Article 15(c) of Council Directive 2004/83/EC ("the Qualification
    Directive").  The appellant's human rights claims under Articles 2, 3
    and 8 of the ECHR were also rejected.  The appellant appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was heard by Judge Aujla ("the
    Judge").  In a decision promulgated on 22 January 2018 the judge
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant is now appealing against that
    decision.

Background and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The appellant claims to be an Iraqi of Kurdish ethnicity from Kirkuk
    who played the lute and is from a musical family.  This was accepted by
    both the Secretary of State and the Judge.

 3. The appellant also claims to have suffered threats and violence because
    of his musical activities including that he was abducted and witnessed
    his cousin's beheading. These claims were not accepted by either the
    Secretary of State or the Judge. The Judge found the appellant's
    account to contain inconsistencies and to be, at least in part,
    implausible.

 4. It is not necessary to consider the asylum claim further because the
    dismissal of this aspect of the First-tier Tribunal's decision is not
    being challenged.

 5. With respect to the appellant's humanitarian protection claim under
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive the judge, having set out
    relevant extracts from the extant country guidance case of AA (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) as amended by the Court of
    Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944, stated (at paragraph 43 of the
    decision) the following:-

         "The Respondent made the decision on 07 September 2017.  The
         country guidance decision of the Court of Appeal in AA was
         promulgated on 11 July 2017.  There have been fundamental changes
         in Iraq regarding the presence of ISIS since then.  Although as yet
         there appeared to be no official reports from the UN, US State
         Department, Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International or any other
         international human rights organisation, it is clear from media
         reports that ISIS have been eliminated from Iraq.  Around 09
         December 2017, the Iraqi Prime Minister declared an end to three-
         year war against ISIS and that the last remnants of the terror
         cult, which no doubt included Al Qaeda members who the Appellant
         claimed he feared, had been driven out of the country.  Media
         reports referred to the area in and around Kirkuk and the
         surrounding areas including the border area with IKR.  Whilst I am
         duty-bound to follow country guidance decisions, it is clear to me
         that in this particular case there has been a fundamental change in
         the security situation in the whole of Iraq, in particular the area
         where the Appellant hailed from.  It is therefore my view that the
         Appellant's fear on return from Al Qaeda or ISIS was now non-
         existent."

 6. The appellant submitted in support of his claim a country report by Ms
    Sheri Laizer dated 5 January 2018.  The only reference to this report
    in the decision is at paragraph 32 where the judge stated:

         "Most important of all, I have carefully considered and taken into
         account the expert report by Sheri J Laizer..."

 7. The appellant also submitted a medico-legal report by a GP, Dr Sinha.
    The report considered the appellant's mental health and physical
    injuries.  In respect of the appellant's mental health Dr Sinha
    concluded that he suffers from severe depressive episodes and PTSD.
    Regarding his physical injuries, applying the Istanbul Protocol, Dr
    Sinha assessed the appellant's scars finding several to be highly
    consistent with the attributed cause (knife and gunshot wounds).

 8. The judge did not accept Dr Sinha's conclusions about the physical
    injuries or the appellant's mental health.  At paragraph 48 the judge
    stated:-

         "I have not accepted the medical reports as evidence of the
         Appellant's claimed mental health problems, in the absence of
         appropriate evidence.  I therefore find that Appellant was fit and
         well and in good health.  He does not have any physical or mental
         health difficulties."

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 9. The central argument made in the grounds of appeal and pursued before
    me by Ms Harley is that the report of Ms Laizer was highly relevant to
    whether the appellant would be at risk under Article 15(c) of the
    Qualification Directive but was not adequately (or at all) considered
    by the Judge.

10. Ms Isherwood acknowledged that she was in difficulty disputing this
    challenge to the decision given that the Judge, despite highlighting
    the relevance of Ms Laizer's report at paragraph 32 (quoted above at
    paragraph 6), failed to address any of its findings or conclusions or
    make any further mention of it.

Error of Law

11. The evidence of Ms Laizer was undoubtedly relevant and material to the
    decision.  In an up-to-date report she set out in detail her expert
    opinion, inter alia, on the current risk to civilians in Kirkuk, the
    feasibility of travelling from Baghdad to the Iraqi Kurdish Region
    ("IKR"), the risks of relocating to Baghdad and the risks faced by
    musicians.

12. As highlighted by Ms Harley, Ms Laizer's report was particularly
    relevant because it provided up-to-date information Kirkuk after
    October 2017 following the retaking of the area by Iraqi Army forces
    and Shia militia.  The other information before the judge about the
    circumstances in Kirkuk, including in particular the relevant Home
    Office Guidance and the extant country guidance case of AA, all
    predated the fundamental changes that took place in October 2017.

13. The judge's assessment of the objective evidence is at paragraph 43 of
    the decision (quoted above at paragraph 5). Reviewing this paragraph
    and the decision as a whole, it appears that the judge has assessed the
    risks in Iraq and in particular Kirkuk (and whether the changes since
    AA justify a departure from the guidance in that case) without having
    regard to Ms Laizer's evidence. This was a material error of law and
    the decision will need to be made afresh.

14. Having delivered my decision on there being an error of law I asked the
    parties whether they were ready for the decision to be remade.  Ms
    Isherwood submitted that because a new country guidance case on Iraq is
    expected imminently I should adjourn in order to remake the decision
    after the new case is promulgated.  Ms Harley submitted that I should
    proceed to remake the decision immediately given that there was no (or
    minimal) factual dispute.  I expressed my agreement with Ms Harley.  My
    role is to assess the case based on the facts and law as they stand at
    the date of the hearing.  Given the factual matrix was broadly agreed
    (and both parties felt the case could proceed without further factual
    evidence being given) there was nothing to prevent me remaking the
    decision based on the law as it currently stood. I pointed out to the
    parties that if a new country guidance case was promulgated before my
    decision was promulgated, it would be necessary for this to be taken
    into account and it was agreed that if this were to occur a further
    hearing would most likely be necessary.

Remade Decision

15. The argument pursued by Ms Harley in remaking of the appeal was that:-

      1) the appellant is at risk under 15(c) of the Qualification Directive
         in Kirkuk; and

      2) it would not be reasonable or safe for him to relocate either to
         Baghdad or the Iraqi Kurdish area.

Relevant Facts

  16. It was common ground that the appellant is Kurdish, from Kurkuk, a
      musician, speaks Kurdish Sorani and only a little Arabic, has an uncle
      with whom he is in contact in Kirkuk, and does not have a Civil Status
      Identify Document ("CSID").




  17. The appellant claims to have lost contact with his family other than
      his uncle and to not have family in Baghdad. This claim was not
      accepted by Ms Isherwood. Having reviewed the evidence that was before
      the First-tier Tribunal, applying the lower standard of proof, I find
      that although the appellant may have contact with family members other
      than his uncle he does not have any family or other connection to
      Baghdad or the IKR.

Article 15(c) Risk

18. The issue under Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive is whether
    there is a real risk of the appellant suffering serious harm if he
    returns to Kirkuk.  Serious harm in this context consists of a serious
    and individual threat to the appellant's life by reason of
    indiscriminate violence due to armed conflict.

19. Applying the lower standard of proof I am satisfied that there is a
    serious risk under Article 15(c) in Kirkuk.  My starting point is that
    the panel in the country guidance case of AA, which at the date of
    drafting this decision is the extant and applicable country guidance
    case, stated that the intensity of armed conflict in the contested
    areas (which includes Kirkuk) is such that Article 15(c) applies.

20. However, I recognise, and it was common ground before me, that the
    circumstances in Kirkuk have changed.  This was highlighted by the
    Secretary of State in the refusal letter dated 8 September 2017 where
    it was observed that ISIS no longer controls Kirkuk and the violence in
    that area has reduced.  However, the analysis in the refusal letter
    which appears to primarily be based on Home Office Guidance dated March
    2017 predates the substantial changes that took place towards the end
    of 2017 as set out in Ms Laizer's report.

21. The evidence before me from Ms Laizer about the current situation in
    Kirkuk, where (according to Ms Laizer) state forces and Shia militia
    have taken control in some areas, is that the risk to civilians is
    higher than that which prevailed when AA was decided.

22. Ms Isherwood argued that only limited weight should be given to Ms
    Laizer's report because she has relied on twitter and newspaper
    reports.  However, as observed by Ms Harley, Ms Laizer has also
    supported her report with references to the Foreign & Commonwealth
    Office, UNHCR, the Iraqi Government and the Foreign Office.  In a fast
    changing situation an expert will need to rely on multiple sources and
    I am satisfied that Ms Laizer has relied on sources appropriately such
    that her report gives a reasonable (and the best available to me)
    snapshot of the situation in Kirkuk at the present time.

23. In light of Miss Laizer's report I do not accept that I should depart
    from AA in respect of the risk to civilians in Kirkuk from
    indiscriminate violence, although I accept that the source of that
    violence has now changed.

Internal relocation

24. Having found that the appellant would face an Article 15(c) risk if he
    returned to Kirkuk, the question to be determined is whether it is
    reasonable and safe for him to relocate either to Baghdad or to the
    IKR.

25. In AA, as confirmed by the subsequent Court of Appeal decision in
    relation to AA, the finding on internal relocation to Baghdad is as
    follows:-

         "14.     As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly
             harsh for a person from a contested area [which includes
             Kirkuk] to relocate to Baghdad City or (subject to paragraph 2
             above) the Baghdad Belts.

         15.      In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh
             for P to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are,
             however, likely to be relevant:

             (a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one ...;

             (b)   whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are less
                  likely to find employment);

             (c)  whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able
                  to accommodate him;

             (d)   whether P is a lone female (women face greater
                  difficulties than men in finding employment);

             (e)   whether P can find a sponsor to access a hotel room or
                  rent accommodation;

             (f)   whether P is from a minority community;

             (g)       whether there is support available for P bearing in
                  mind there is some evidence that returned failed asylum
                  seekers are provided with the support generally given to
                  IDPs."

26. Neither party argued that I should depart from this aspect of AA.

27. Applying the factors enumerated in AA, I find as follows:

      1) The appellant does not have a CSID and would not be able to obtain
         one given that to do so he would need to return Kirkik where there
         is an Article 15(c) risk.

      2) The appellant does not speak Arabic to a sufficient level to
         work/function in Baghdad.

      3) The appellant does not have family members in Baghdad or contacts
         who could accommodate him.

      4) The appellant does not have a sponsor in which would enable him to
         access a hotel room or rent accommodation.

      5) The appellant is from a minority community.

28. Taking these factors together it would, in my view, be unreasonable and
    unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate to Baghdad.

29. The next question is whether the appellant could relocate to the IKR.
    AA makes it clear that the appellant would not be returned direct to
    that region given he does not originate from it.  The issue, therefore,
    is whether he could be expected to, and could safely, travel to the IKR
    having been returned to Baghdad.  It is explained in AA as follows:-

         "Whether P, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be expected to
         avoid any potential undue harshness in that city by travelling to
         the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is likely to involve an
         assessment of (a) the practicality of travel from Baghdad to the
         IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of K's securing
         employment in the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance from
         family and friends in the IKR."

30. The evidence before me is that the appellant does not have family and
    friends in the IKR and is not someone who could easily, or at all, find
    employment in that region.  In terms of the practicality of travel, he
    would need a CSID but I have found that he does not have, and cannot
    reasonably obtain, one. I am therefore satisfied that it would be
    unreasonable and unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate to the IKR
    via Baghdad.

31. Accordingly, I find that:-

      1) the appellant would face a risk of indiscriminate violence in
         Kirkuk, such that he cannot be returned to that (his home) area;

      2) relocation to Baghdad would be unreasonable/unduly harsh because of
         the factors outlined in AA. In particular, he does not have, and it
         is not reasonably likely that he would be able to obtain, a CSID;
         and he lacks family or other support in Baghdad; and

      3) it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh to expect him to travel from
         Baghdad to the IKR given the absence of family support and CSID.

32. The appellant's humanitarian protection claim is therefore allowed.

Decision

   A. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
      law and is set aside.




   B.   I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's humanitarian
      protection claim.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  21 April 2018        |

