
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09608/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|on 23 November 2017                       |on 27 November 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 HAMID NADRI
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Todd, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge   Fox,
    promulgated on 15 May 2017.

 2. Mr Matthews did not concede that there is any substance  in  ground  1,
    which says that the judge incorrectly took  "section  8"  issues  as  a
    starting point.

 3. Ground 2 is that the judge misapprehended the appellant's evidence,  in
    that the appellant had not said he was the  map-reader  for  his  unit,
    which the judge saw as undermining  his  claim  to  be  uneducated  and
    illiterate.  Mr  Matthews  said  that  the  respondent's  note  of  the
    evidence confirmed this ground was well taken.

 4. The judge unfortunately has fallen into an error of fact, on  a  matter
    to which he gave quite a degree of significance,  and  which  therefore
    amounts to an error of law.

 5. Ground 3 is of lesser force, but Mr Matthews  accepted  it  might  also
    disclose  that  evidence   about   demonstrations   might   have   been
    misapprehended or overlooked.

 6. By concession and agreement, the case is resolved as follows.

 7. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

 8. The nature of the case is such that  it  is  appropriate  in  terms  of
    section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice  Statement  7.2  to
    remit the case to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

 9. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Fox.

10. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            24 November 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




