
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09711/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th December 2018                          |On 18th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                 Besart [F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 15th September 1999.  The
Appellant claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 31st March 2015.
He claimed asylum on 16th June 2015 on the basis of his membership of a
particular social group, namely that he was of Gypsy/Jevg ethnicity.  That
application was refused by the Secretary of State on 19th November 2015.
At the time of application and refusal the Appellant was a minor.  The
Appellant went through the appeal system and his appeal was dismissed by
the First-tier Tribunal Judge on 5th May 2016.  The Appellant submitted an
application for further leave to remain on 1st March 2017 and that leave to
remain was refused on 25th July 2018.  The Appellant appealed against the
refusal and the appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Sweet
sitting at Hatton Cross on 5th September 2018.  In a Decision and Reasons
promulgated on 18th December 2018 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on
all grounds.

The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal on 28th
September 2018.  Those grounds contended that the Tribunal had failed to
undertake an assessment within the Immigration Rules as per paragraph
276ADE(vi) and secondly, that the Tribunal had erred in the approach to
Article 8 outside the Rules by failing to take into account material
considerations/failing to give adequate reasons.  On 11th October 2018
First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert granted permission to appeal.  Judge
Lambert noted that the decision disclosed adequate evidence-based reasons
for concluding that there was no basis for departing from the findings in
the previous appeal by the Appellant and that there was no new evidence
sufficient to establish risk as a result of discrimination against Roma in
Albania and that the Appellant would not be at risk on return and there was
no breach of Article 8.  The grounds maintain that there was a failure to
make an assessment as to whether there were very significant obstacles
under paragraph 276ADE(vi).  Judge Lambert considered that it was correct
that although the judge records at paragraph 24 the fact that Counsel for
the Appellant made submissions on this point there was no assessment in the
decision.  Whether or not that is a material error of law in view of the
other findings made by this and the previous judge as to the treatment of
Roma people in Albania may, as Judge Lambert considered, be debatable.

It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me to determine whether or
not there is a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal Judge.  There is no attendance by the Appellant.  His instructed
solicitors served notice that they no longer represent the Appellant by
letter to the Tribunal dated 20th November 2018.  Notice of hearing was
sent on 2nd November 2018 to both the Appellant's home address and to his
instructed solicitors.  There is no suggestion that any correspondence has
been returned and I am satisfied that the Appellant has been duly served
and notified of the hearing.  He has chosen therefore not to appear.  The
Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr
Bramble.

Submissions

Mr Bramble advises that the judge was entitled to take as his starting
point the findings of the initial First-tier Tribunal Judge and that the
question arises as to whether or not the judge has fallen into error with
regard to his approach to paragraph 276ADE.  He submits, however, that if
the Appellant is unable to succeed on asylum grounds he finds it difficult
to see in a case of this instance how the Appellant could possibly succeed
on proving that there are significant obstacles to returning.  He
acknowledges that at paragraph 32 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
decision the judge has made a finding that he is not persuaded that the
Appellant has formed a private life to the extent that it would be
disproportionate to return him to Albania and that there is nothing within
the decision that would show that even if there is any error it is
material.  He submits that it would be necessary for the Appellant to show
that it would be appropriate for a Roma from Albania in the Appellant's
particular circumstances to show significant obstacles in returning.  He
submits that no such finding has been made.

Mr Bramble goes on to comment that the question is based on the fact that
the judge in the first decision had made findings on the Appellant having
family in Albania and, having made such a decision and come to the
conclusions that he has family in Albania, as set out at paragraph 89 of
that decision, that the judge was entitled to rely on it and even if there
has been scant regard at paragraph 32 to such finding the question remains
as to its materiality, that there are no very significant obstacles, that
the threshold has not been reached and that the Appellant therefore has not
shown that there is a material error of law in the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

Areas of legislative interpretation, failure to follow binding authority or
to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material considerations
by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching irrational
conclusions on fact or evaluation or to give legally inadequate reasons for
the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute errors of law.

It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless irrationality is
alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
deal with every factual issue of argument.  Disagreement with an
Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of the evidence or
assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does not give rise to
an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's assessment of
proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no error of
law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to have regard
to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him to have taken
no account of evidence which was not before him.  Rationality is a very
high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational just because some
alternative explanation has been rejected or can be said to be possible.
Nor is it necessary to consider every possible alternative inference
consistent with truthfulness because an Immigration Judge concludes that
the story is untrue.  If a point of evidence of significance has been
ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take into account a material
consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

Mr Bramble acknowledges that the conclusions reached at paragraph 32 are
scant in their conclusions but he relies on the materiality of any finding,
bearing in mind the previous findings set out at paragraphs 26 to 31 and
the findings made by the original judge who dismissed the appeal back in
2016.

He has reminded me that the judge has made conclusions at paragraphs 26 to
30 to the extent that the Appellant's claim for asylum fails along with the
claims pursuant to Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention of Human
Rights.  The judge has referred to the previous decision and the findings
of the First-tier Tribunal Judge therein and the reflection therein that as
a minor the Appellant's family had been found in Albania and that having
such family, even if they have relocated and are still in Albania there are
no very significant obstacles to the Appellant returning.

Whilst the findings of the judge are not detailed I am satisfied that they
do set out conclusions and reasons that the judge was entitled to reach and
that there is before the Tribunal, or indeed was at that stage, no reason
to show why the Appellant could not return to Albania, and no medical
evidence that the Appellant would be returning to a situation where he
would be found to be vulnerable as a young adult.  Even if the scantness of
the findings can be criticised I am not satisfied that the threshold is
reached by which there would be any error of law that was material and in
such circumstances the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of
the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains no material error of
law.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
