
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09334/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 August 2019                    |On 03 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     GY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R. Popal, Counsel instructed by Greater London
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, GY, is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born in  September  1992.
    He  appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox
    promulgated on 30 October 2018 dismissing his appeal against a decision
    of the respondent dated 13 July 2018, refusing his claim for asylum and
    humanitarian protection.

Factual background

 2. The appellant claims to be at risk from the Sri Lankan  authorities  on
    account of suspected LTTE links. His case is that he  was  detained  in
    January 2013, mistreated and  tortured  in  detention,  and  eventually
    released following the payment of a  bribe  by  his  father.  The  next
    month, he obtained a student visa to come to the  United  Kingdom.   He
    contends that the authorities visited his father at the family home  in
    April 2013, presenting an arrest warrant in his name, without leaving a
    copy. His father was later arrested in Sri Lanka but  released  without
    charge. Subsequently, the appellant claims to  have  arranged  for  his
    father to instruct local legal representation in Sri Lanka to obtain  a
    copy of the arrest warrant which was issued against him,  in  order  to
    support his asylum claim. He claims that the  existence  of  an  extant
    arrest warrant means that the authorities continue to take an  interest
    in him, and that if he returns to Sri Lanka he will face persecution on
    account of his suspected LTTE links.

 3. The appellant provided  the  respondent  with  a  copy  of  the  arrest
    warrant, plus correspondence with his lawyer in Sri Lanka  relating  to
    its provenance.  He also provided two  medical  reports  demonstrating,
    first, scarring on his  body  "consistent  with"  the  account  he  has
    provided of torture (Dr Arnold), and secondly, concluding that  he  has
    post-traumatic  stress  disorder  and  other  mental  health   symptoms
    "typical of"  the  detention  account  he  has  provided  (Dr  Halari).
    "Consistent with" and "typical of" are terms taken  from  the  Istanbul
    Protocol on diagnosing the symptoms of torture.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. Judge Fox dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  the  following  bases.
    First, the judge considered that the medical reports were unreliable as
    they were based primarily on the account  provided  by  the  appellant,
    with no "meaningful consideration" as to whether other potential causes
    of the appellant's symptoms could be responsible. The judge  found  the
    analysis in the medical reports to be brief, and struggled to reconcile
    the description the appellant had provided of  part  of  his  detention
    incident with the language used in the report. For  example,  at  [52],
    the judge said that it was "an unusual choice of vocabulary to describe
    [the arrest incident] as being beaten  on  the  cheek  without  further
    detail of sustained attack". There were details in the medical  reports
    which did not feature elsewhere in the appellant's case,  such  as  his
    account of  being  raped.  The  judge  discounted  the  arrest  warrant
    documents on the basis that corruption is endemic in Sri Lanka and that
    it is possible that they were obtained fraudulently.  When  considering
    the  arrest  warrants  in  the  round  with  the  remaining  subjective
    evidence, they were of "limited probative value".

Permission to appeal

 5. Permission was granted by Judge O'Callaghan on  all  three  grounds  of
    appeal:

      a. Ground 1:   Judge  Fox  failed  to  apply  the  Joint  Presidential
         Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010  concerning  vulnerable  witnesses  and
         appellants and AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
         Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 in that  he  failed  to  take  into
         account  the   appellant's   vulnerability   when   assessing   his
         credibility;

      b. Ground 2: The judge made material errors of fact when assessing the
         report of Dr Halari;

      c. Ground 3: The judge failed to  make  any  findings  concerning  the
         documents that had been supplied in support of the probative  value
         of the arrest warrant, in  particular  correspondence  between  the
         appellant's London lawyers and his attorney in Sri Lanka.

Discussion

 6. There is force in the submissions of Ms Popal that the judge failed  to
    take the appellant's vulnerability  into  account  when  assessing  his
    evidence.  The judge did refer to the appellant's vulnerability in  his
    decision, but that was in the context of rejecting submissions made  by
    Ms Jegarajah, who then represented the appellant, specifically inviting
    the judge  to  take  account  of  the  appellant's  vulnerability  when
    assessing his evidence. At [56], the judge said:

         "The author [of the second  report,  Dr  Halari]  claims  that  the
         appellant is a vulnerable witness; paragraph  73  onwards.  However
         this was not raised as a preliminary issue and only relied upon  in
         closing submissions.  The  appellant  had  no  apparent  difficulty
         engaging with the appeal hearing. His interests were  protected  by
         Ms Jegarajah at  all  material  times  who  expressed  no  concerns
         throughout the hearing and conducted an  extensive  examination-in-
         chief without issue. In these circumstances the second report is of
         limited probative value."

 7. The judge appears to have conflated the distinct issue of accommodating
    any vulnerability the appellant may have exhibited during  the  hearing
    itself, and the consequential need to make reasonable adjustments, with
    the quite separate requirement  to  ensure  that  the  evidence  of  an
    appellant is assessed by reference to any particular vulnerabilities he
    or she may  have.  In  relation  to  accommodating  the  needs  of  the
    appellant during the hearing, the judge rightly pointed  out  that  the
    appellant was represented  by  experienced  counsel,  and  had  had  no
    apparent difficulties in engaging with the proceedings before  him.  No
    complaint can be made about  the  fairness  of  the  hearing  on  these
    grounds.

 8. However, in relation to the operative analysis the judge  conducted  of
    the appellant's evidence, it was necessary for the  judge  to  consider
    whether the mental health conditions experienced by the appellant could
    have given rise to the credibility concerns  the  judge  had  with  the
    appellant's evidence.  At [55], the  judge  noted  that  the  appellant
    specifically had claimed to suffer from a  poor  memory,  and  that  he
    struggled to recall dates. As the judge noted, at [73] and following of
    Dr Halari's report, the appellant had been described as being likely to
    get anxious and confused when giving evidence,  and  that  he  suffered
    from moderate of cognitive impairment which could hamper his fitness to
    instruct a legal representative due to his poor (mild) memory.

 9. Paragraphs 13 and 14 of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.  2  of
    2010 state the following, in  the  context  of  assessing  a  witness's
    evidence after a hearing:

         "13. The weight to be placed  upon  factors  of  vulnerability  may
         differ depending  on  the  matter  under  appeal,  the  burden  and
         standard of proof and whether the individual is  a  witness  or  an
         appellant.

         14.  Consider the evidence, allowing for possible different degrees
         of understanding by witnesses and appellant compared to  those  are
         not vulnerable, in the context of evidence from  others  associated
         with the appellant and the background evidence  before  you.  Where
         there were clear discrepancies in the oral evidence,  consider  the
         extent to which  the  age,  vulnerability  or  sensitivity  of  the
         witness was an element of that discrepancy or lack of clarity."

10. At [22] of AM (Afghanistan), the Senior President of Tribunals endorsed
    the submissions he recorded at [21.d] concerning the need  to  consider
    the impact of an appellant  or  witness's  medical  conditions  on  the
    quality of their evidence.  He said:

         "expert medical evidence can be critical in  providing  explanation
         for difficulties in giving a coherent  and  consistent  account  of
         past events and for identifying any relevant safeguards required to
         meet  vulnerabilities  that  can  lead  to  disadvantage   in   the
         determination process, for example, in the  ability  to  give  oral
         testimony and under what conditions..."

11. At no point in his decision did the judge consider  the  above  points.
    He was specifically invited to do so  by  Ms  Jegarajah.   As  set  out
    below, the concerns the judge had with the medical reports relied  upon
    by the appellant are without merit.  The judge  was  seized  of  expert
    medical evidence which suggested that the appellant struggled with  his
    ability to recall certain facts, especially those relating to traumatic
    events.  Yet the judge did not consider whether  those  symptoms  could
    have been responsible  for  the  appellant's  difficulty  in  recalling
    certain matters at different stages of the asylum process, for  example
    when giving an initial account to the respondent during  his  screening
    interview, the substantive interview, to the  two  doctors,  and  later
    before him. For  example,  at  [67],  the  judge  is  critical  of  the
    appellant for not mentioning  LTTE  connections  during  his  screening
    interview, making  only  a  "belated"  reference  to  them  during  his
    substantive interview. The  judge  also  expressed  concerns  that  the
    appellant  had  not  mentioned  his  detention  during  his   screening
    interview. Although at [69], the judge considers the  possibility  that
    the appellant may have misunderstood the questions put  to  him  during
    his screening  and  substantive  interviews,  he  asserts  that  it  is
    "reasonable to expect him to recall the core of the claim as  expressed
    in later representations". The judge does not consider his "reasonable"
    expectation in light of the medical  evidence  which  expressly  states
    that the appellant has difficulty remembering matters.

12. Ms Cunha accepted that the judge erred in expecting  the  appellant  to
    raise vulnerability, but contended that the error was not material.   I
    disagree.

13. The analysis above is not to suggest that the mere suggestion of memory
    difficulties is enough to iron over any creases or fill in the gaps  in
    an otherwise unmeritorious claim for asylum. It may well have been  the
    case that, had the judge expressly considered such  matters  and  taken
    proper account of the appellant's vulnerability, he would have  reached
    the same conclusion. However, that analysis has not  taken  place.   As
    the Senior President noted in AM (Afghanistan) at [21.f],  the  highest
    standards of procedural fairness are  required  in  asylum  cases.  The
    judge's decision expressly  to  reject  Ms  Jegarajah's  invitation  to
    factor in the appellant's vulnerability into his  assessment,  and  his
    failure to inform his assessment of the appellant's credibility on this
    basis of his own motion, amounts to an error of law  which  calls  into
    question the entirety of the judge's credibility assessment.

Ground 2 - medical reports

14. In relation to ground two,  the  judge  does  express  some  legitimate
    concerns in relation to  the  contents  of  Dr  Halari's  report.   For
    example, see his observation at [48] that her single sentence dismissal
    of other causes of  the  possible  trauma  at  [68]  was  not  properly
    reasoned.  It was also open to the judge to have some concerns that  Dr
    Arnold's report had been compiled on  the  basis  of  a  draft  witness
    statement in the name of the appellant, in addition to  a  consultation
    with the appellant, in circumstances when the draft  witness  statement
    in question had not been provided to the judge (see  [57]).   Ms  Cunha
    submits that the judge conducted a thorough assessment of  the  medical
    evidence and reached legitimate findings.  Certainly, many  aspects  of
    the judge's assessment of the medical evidence did not feature an error
    of law.  However, I accept Ms  Popal's  submissions  that  the  judge's
    overall analysis of the medical evidence was flawed,  for  the  reasons
    set out below.

15. At [49], the judge was critical of the omission in Dr  Halari's  report
    at [29] of any details concerning the appellant's  claimed  beating  to
    his cheek, or the nature of the mistreatment he endured.  It is  hardly
    surprising that Dr Halari, a Consultant Psychologist, did not engage in
    a scarring analysis in her psychological report.   Dr  Arnold  provided
    the scarring report.  The  judge  thus  highlighted  as  an  error  the
    absence of scarring analysis in the psychological report.

16. The judge does not explain at [52] why the description of being  beaten
    on the cheek provided by  the  appellant  "was  an  unusual  choice  of
    vocabulary".  It is not  immediately  apparent  why  such  an  "unusual
    choice" renders this aspect of the report unreliable.  It is not  clear
    why repeated punches to the side of the appellant's face, for  example,
    should not be described as a beating on the cheek.  The  judge  appears
    to be bringing his own subjective expectations of how the police in Sri
    Lanka would operate and how a person mistreated by them would  describe
    it.

17. At [55], the judge contends that  the  appellant's  ability  to  recall
    certain details during his consultation with Dr H - for example at [31]
    to [33] - undermines the report's conclusion that the appellant suffers
    from difficulties with memory recall.  In making that observation,  the
    judge does not appear to have engaged with [24]  of  the  report  which
    states that, "in eliciting a torture account, I  used  the  'T  funnel'
    approach of starting with open questions and narrowing down  the  field
    of enquiry with closed questions."

18. The judge also ascribed less weight to the medical report of Dr  Halari
    as it, "relies exclusively  on  the  appellant's  account  of  events".
    Although the judge cited - without operative  analysis  -  JL  (medical
    reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC),  his  approach  was
    essentially to treat the report  as  having  no  probative  value.   At
    Headnote (4), the Upper Tribunal in JL said:

         "Even where medical experts rely heavily on the  account  given  by
         the person concerned, that does not mean their reports lack or lose
         their status as independent evidence, although it may  reduce  very
         considerably the weight that can be attached to them."

    While the judge was legitimately entitled  to  take  into  account  the
    experts' reliance on the appellant's account  of  events  as  a  factor
    leading to the reports attracting less weight, an  examination  of  his
    operative analysis reveals that he placed no  weight  on  the  reports.
    The judge treated the reports as  lacking  the  status  of  independent
    evidence that they enjoyed.    In addition, the judge did not take into
    account [10]  of  Dr  Halari's  report,  which  states  that,  although
    psychology relies  on  the  patient's  account,  there  remain  certain
    clinical signs which are revealed during psychiatric  or  psychological
    examinations that do not rely on the content of the patient's  account.
    In dismissing the probative value of the expert reports on  account  of
    them being based on the narrative provided by the appellant, the  judge
    did not take into account the clinical nature of  the  presentation  of
    the appellant, as outlined in the reports.

19. The judge's criticism of the medical evidence relies primarily  on  the
    differing nature of the accounts provided by the appellant to  each  of
    the doctors.  For the reasons outlined above, many of the criticisms of
    the evidence are not sustainable.  I consider the  differences  in  the
    accounts provided by the appellant at different stages of  the  process
    to be negligible; they are not so much inconsistencies  as  differences
    in emphasis.  The judge erred in law by failing providing  insufficient
    reasons for ascribing minimal weight to the medical evidence, including
    by giving reasons which featured material errors of fact.  As this went
    to the heart of the judge's credibility assessment, the entirety of his
    assessment of the medical evidence was infected by a material error  of
    law.

Ground 3 - arrest warrants

20. At [71], the judge considered "the supporting  documents"  provided  by
    the appellant to support his case. This must have been a  reference  to
    the arrest warrant he included in his evidence (see  [39]).  The  judge
    found that the "supporting documents" were of limited  probative  value
    in these terms:

         "[71]    ... emphasis was placed upon the supporting  documents  to
         assist  the  appellant's  credibility.  It  is  possible  that  the
         supporting documents have been issued by the  authorities.  However
         it is information in the public domain that genuine  documents  can
         be obtained fraudulently due to endemic corruption  in  Sri  Lankan
         society; GJ and others (post-civil war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
         [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) ("GJ") considered.

         [72] When the subject of evidence is considered in conjunction with
         the documentary evidence the supporting documents  are  of  limited
         probative value; Tanveer Ahmed applied."

21. Ms Cunha submits that, even if the judge's analysis of these  documents
    was flawed, it was immaterial.  He reached  legitimate  conclusions  on
    the entirety of the evidence which were not infected by his approach to
    the analysis of the  documents,  submits  Ms  Cunha.   I  accept  that,
    superficially at least, the judge said  he  considered  the  supporting
    documents in the round, with the other evidence.   Whether his analysis
    was lawful requires a more forensic  examination  of  the  approach  he
    took.

22. I find that there are two errors  with  the  judge's  approach  to  the
    arrest warrants.

23. First, in his generic reference  to  the  "supporting  documents",  the
    judge has made no references to the correspondence from the appellant's
    Sri Lankan Attorney-at-Law in Colombo, Mr R. Raveendiran.  In a  letter
    dated 29 September 2018 at S61 of the appellant's bundle, Mr  R  writes
    that he attended the Magistrate's Court of Colombo, and paid in cash to
    obtain a copy of the arrest warrant that had been issued in relation to
    the appellant. At S62, there is a copy of the receipt provided  by  the
    court to the attorney. At S63 is a copy of Mr R's entry in the Lawyers'
    Directory of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka.

24. The judge did not appear to have analysed these documents, nor assessed
    their probative value in assisting to demonstrate the reliability -  or
    otherwise - of the arrest warrant provided by  the  appellant.  In  his
    unspecific reference to "the supporting documents", the judge  did  not
    explain whether he had conducted this analysis. It is  not,  therefore,
    possible to have the requisite confidence that the judge  analysed  all
    relevant evidence when reaching his conclusion that the arrest  warrant
    was of limited probative value.

25. That is not to say that the judge would have been bound to  accept  the
    documents as reliable had he set out his analysis in further depth;  it
    is simply the case that it is not possible  to  ascertain  whether  the
    judge had analysed these documents, and if so what his reasons were for
    dismissing their reliability.  For example, it is not clear whether the
    judge had found that the Attorney had  acted  dishonestly,  or  that  a
    court official, unbeknown to the Attorney, had acted corruptly  at  the
    appellant's  behest.   Simply  referring,  in  broad  terms,   to   the
    prevalence of fraudulent documents does not provide the reader  of  the
    decision with reasons for why the judge found these specific  documents
    to lack merit.

26. Secondly, in order to merit a finding that documents are fraudulent, it
    is necessary for there  to  be  significant  supporting  evidence.  The
    burden lies on the respondent to establish that document is fraudulent,
    pursuant to the approach set out in Tanveer Ahmed (Documents unreliable
    and forged) Pakistan * [2002] UKIAT 00439.  At  [38],  the  Immigration
    Appeal Tribunal said, with emphasis added:

         "1.  In asylum and human rights  cases  it  is  for  an  individual
         claimant to show that a document on which he seeks to rely  can  be
         relied on.

         2.   The decision maker should consider whether a document  is  one
         on which reliance should properly be placed after  looking  at  all
         the evidence in the round.

         3.   Only very rarely will there be the need to make an  allegation
         of forgery, or evidence strong enough to support it. The allegation
         should not be made without such evidence. Failure to establish  the
         allegation on the balance of  probabilities  to  the  higher  civil
         standard does not show that a document is  reliable.  The  decision
         maker still needs to apply principles 1 and 2."

27.  It is axiomatic that if the respondent cannot make  an  allegation  of
    fraud without "strong enough evidence to  support  it",  then  a  judge
    should not make a finding of forgery or fraud  without  such  evidence.
    If the allegation should not be made without  such  evidence  (see  the
    emphasis added, above), then a finding should not be made without  such
    evidence.  The evidence relied upon by the judge was the  generic  risk
    of fraudulent documents being obtained  from  the  authorities  in  Sri
    Lanka as outlined in GJ, without referring  to  any  specific  evidence
    relating to the appellant.

28. For these reasons, the judge's analysis of the arrest warrant  and  the
    unspecified "supported documents" was flawed. The  appeal  succeeds  in
    relation to ground 3.

Conclusion

29. The culmination of each of the  grounds  of  appeal  being  established
    means that the decision of Judge Fox cannot stand. The entirety of  the
    credibility assessment conducted  in  relation  to  the  appellant  was
    flawed.  The  only  remedy  available  to  this   tribunal   in   those
    circumstances is to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal to
    be heard by a judge other than Judge Fox.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed.  The decision of Judge Fox is set aside.

The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  by  a  judge
other than Judge Fox.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]                      Date 27 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
