
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09528/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Centre                             |                                   |
|On 2 April 2019                    |On 10 April 2019                   |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                YOUSIF SIDIQI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Greer instructed by Quality Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Siddiqi promulgated on 3 December 2019, which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the refusal of a protection claim on all
    grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 13 June 1989 and is a  national  of  Iran  of
    Kurdish ethnicity.

 4. The Appellant arrived in the UK on 1 November 2007 and  claimed  asylum
    on the basis of his involvement in Iran with the KDPI.  His  claim  was
    refused on 18 January 2008 and his appeal was dismissed after a hearing
    on 25 March 2008.

 5. He made fresh submissions on 25 May 2017 on the basis of his sur  place
    activities both his involvement  with  the  KDPI  in  the  UK  and  his
    internet activity

 6. On 13  July  2018  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) There is no evidence that his Facebook page or  Twitter  which  are
         both blocked in Iran have been seen by anyone in Iran.

      b) There was little activity on his Facebook page and in  addition  to
         the small footprint the activity was very recent.

      c) The previous decision was that the Appellant had no KDPI profile in
         Iran .

      d) The Appellants role at the demonstrations  would  appear  to  be  a
         minor one not an organiser or leader.

      e) There is  no  evidence  that  the  photographs  of  the  Appellants
         attendance at these events were taken by mainstream media  or  that
         he could be identified given that it had previously been found that
         he was not a political activist in Iran.

      f) The report from Dr Joffee addresses the risk faced by high  profile
         activists. It is also generic and does not address  the  Appellants
         situation. There was no basis for the claim that the  treatment  of
         Kurds generally had deteriorated to the point where all Kurds  were
         at risk on return: this view is confirmed in caselaw and the COIS.

      g) Therefore it was not accepted that the Appellant would be  detained
         and persecuted on arrival simply on the basis that he  was  a  Kurd
         who had exited illegally and had attended rallies.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Saddiqi  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision.

 8. Grounds of appeal were lodged  arguing  that  the  in  respect  of  his
    surplice activities the Judge had given weight to  immaterial  matters;
    that she had misunderstood what was said in SSH and HR  (illegal  exit:
    failed asylum seeker)  Iran  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00308  (IAC)  about  the
    treatment at the point of return; she had made a  mistake  of  fact  in
    respect of his Facebook activity.

 9.  On  27  December  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Keefe   refused
    permission and the application was renewed.

10. On 4 February 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Mc William gave  permission  to
    appeal stating 'The Judge found that the Appellant would be  questioned
    and detained at the airport. It is  arguable  that  the  risk  was  not
    considered in the light of this.'

11. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Greer  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

    (a)    In respect of Ground 2 he argued that  the  tribunal  recognised
         that conditions in detention facilities in Iran are such  that  any
         individual placed in detention for any period would face a risk  of
         inhuman and degrading treatment and  therefore  her  assessment  at
         paragraph 37(c) was irreconcilable with her conclusion at paragraph
         38.

    (b)    He accepted that there was a distinction drawn  in  SSH  between
         those summarily questioned at the airport and those taken away  for
         further questioning but she had said he would be detained and  that
         crossed the threshold of risk.

    (c)    In respect of Ground 3 he  relied  on  paragraphs  4-10  of  his
         skeleton  argument.  In  determining  whether  the  Appellant   was
         genuinely  involved  in  the  KDPI  the  Judge  took  into  account
         immaterial matters. He produced a large number of posts from  2015-
         2018  showing  online  interest  and  attendance  at   9   separate
         demonstrations. Therefore it was difficult to understand  what  the
         Judge meant by 'meaningful'' or 'not genuine': he was there and his
         attendance was regular.

    (d)    The Judge found against the Appellant on the basis he was not  a
         member of the KDPI when the Respondents own Policy Note  recognises
         that the 3 levels  of  involvement  with  the  KDPI  which  include
         membership, supporter or find are all at risk.

    (e)    The Judge also imposed a higher threshold for risk in  that  she
         finds that the absence  of  a  leadership  or  organisational  role
         undermines his claim to be at  risk  whereas  paragraph  3  of  the
         Respondents own guidance is that those involved with Kurdish groups
         at any level are at risk.

    (f)    In relation to Ground 3 the Judge at paragraph 37(e) finds  that
         there was no evidence that his contacts, his Facebook friends, were
         located in Iran when  it  was  the  unchallenged  evidence  of  the
         Appellant that they were and  this  was  not  challenged  in  cross
         examination or by the Judge (this was confirmed  by  Mr  Bates  who
         checked his ROP)

    (g)    The Judge suggested that the Appellant could delete his Facebook
         account and would not be at risk but the  Appellants  evidence  was
         that he had lifted  the  photographs  from  the  KDPI  website  and
         therefore even if he deletes  his  Facebook  page  the  risk  still
         exists.

12. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Bates submitted that:

      a) She agreed that if the Judge meant 'detained' in the way  the  term
         is used in SSH that Article 3 would be contravened but it is  clear
         that it is not what the Judge meant. She meant stopped  and  spoken
         to at the airport on arrival and such questioning would not put him
         at risk. She does not suggest that he was someone of such  interest
         that he would be taken away for  questioning  as  that  required  a
         significant profile.

      b) He accepted that the Appellant asserted he had friends in Iran  and
         this was unchallenged but was that  mistake  of  fact  material  as
         there was no suggestion that the fact that  his  online  activities
         were known to his friends in Iran had led  to  any  interest  being
         shown in him by the Iranian authorities in questioning  his  family
         about him.

      c) The Judge was entitled to take into account that the Appellant  was
         not a member of the KDPI and there was no evidence in the form of a
         letter of support or attendance by anyone  from  the  KDPI  on  his
         behalf.

      d) There was no evidence before the Tribunal that the photographs were
         lifted from the KDPI website.

      e) The reasons were sustainable and the Judge  was  entitled  to  find
         that  simple  attendance  at  demonstrations  did  not  raise   the
         Appellants profile sufficiently for his sur place activities to put
         him at risk.

      f) The Appellant could delete his Facebook account before applying for
         travel documents: if it was not a genuine  claim  this  was  not  a
         protected right as it was not a core belief

13. In reply Mr Greer on behalf of the Appellant submitted

      a) The Judge applied the terminology used in SSH 'detained'.

      b) The Judge was not entitled to place reliance on  a  Scottish  case,
         MA, to suggest that questioning at the airport did not put  him  at
         risk as it was not a country guidance case and was not binding.  It
         was not put to the parties to address.

      c) He accepted that there was no evidence from  the  KDPI  website  to
         suggest the photographs originated from there.

      d) The decision suggests that the Appellant is merely a member of  the
         public at the demonstrations but he is  in  a  prominent  position,
         reading a poem, holding a placard.

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

15. The Judge clearly recognised when the Judgement is read as a whole that
    she had to determine whether the Appellants involvement in the KDPI  in
    the UK was genuine and could be  perceived  as  such  and  whether  his
    activities could come to the attention of the Iranian  authorities  and
    put him at risk.

16. Against a background of a previous unchallenged decision in  which  his
    claim to have been involved with the KDPI in Iran  and  wanted  by  the
    authorities was rejected and his evidence that his family had not  been
    visited by the authorities suggesting they were aware of his activities
    abroad the Judge concluded that the Appellants involvement  in  the  UK
    was extremely limited  (37(b))  and  was  not  genuine  and  would  not
    therefore put him at risk. She was entitled to take  into  account  the
    short period of Facebook postings (31 (a)); the fact that  he  had  had
    not even attempted to become a member of the KDPI in  the  UK  (31(b));
    there was no evidence from the KDPI either in the form of a  letter  of
    support or witnesses either officially or personally given his claim to
    have had an organisational role albeit she found  this  aspect  of  his
    claim was vague (31(c) ).

17.  What is clear is that the Judge  did  not  find  that  the  Appellants
    involvement in political activities was either such as to  give  him  a
    profile  or  indeed  genuinely  motivated  because  she   stated   that
    explicitly at 37(e) and (g). In reaching that decision I  am  satisfied
    that she was entitled to take that into account  the  country  guidance
    that prevailed at the time of her decision which she set out  in  full.
    That caselaw made plain that the profile of the applicant was  relevant
    and not every person who attended demonstrations was at risk. Mr  Greer
    criticised her use of the word 'meaningful' and sought  to  argue  that
    the  Judge  thereby  placed  an  artificially  high  threshold  on  the
    Appellant to establish that he had a high profile  role  in  supporting
    the KDPI in the UK in his sur  place  activities  when  the  background
    material suggested that any activity in support of Kurdish rights would
    be perceived as putting  an  applicant  at  risk  because  the  Iranian
    authorities had a 'hair trigger' response to such behaviour.  Mr  Greer
    is quoting however from the headnote of the country guidance case of HB
    (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 430 (IAC) which was  heard  20-22  February
    and 25 May 2018 and promulgated 12 December 2018, ie a case promulgated
    the week after the hearing before Judge Sidiqi.

18. The Judge was applying  the  case  law  and  background  material  that
    applied before her and I am satisfied from SA (Sri Lanka)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 683 there was no error
    of law by the Upper Tribunal in deciding an asylum claim on  the  basis
    of the country guidance then in force.

19.  Mr Greer argued that the Judges finding that the  Appellant  would  be
    'detained and  questioned  'on  arrival  was  irreconcilable  with  her
    conclusion at paragraph 38 that the Appellant was not  at  risk.  I  am
    satisfied however that the Judge recognised exactly what is  recognised
    at paragraph 23 of SSH that there  are  two  situations  for  returning
    failed asylum seekers in Iran. I set this paragraph out in full  as  it
    makes clear that there is  the  potential  for  an  initial  period  of
    detention and questioning which may in fact take place at a court at or
    near the airport which is unlikely to go no further if the  person  has
    no profile to excite interest (as she found with this Appellant)  or  a
    period of further detention  and  questioning  in  prison  which  might
    breach Article 3. I am  satisfied  that  there  the  use  of  the  word
    'detained 'is not determinative of the issue given that any questioning
    even at the airport requires the person to be held for a period of time
    for the questions to be put:

         "This has to be seen, as with all these pieces of evidence, in  the
         context of the evidence overall. In our view the evidence does  not
         establish that a failed asylum seeker who had left  Iran  illegally
         would  be  subjected  on  return  to  a  period  of  detention   or
         questioning such that there is  a  real  risk  of  Article  3  ill-
         treatment. The evidence in our view shows no more  than  that  they
         will be questioned, and that if there are any  particular  concerns
         arising from their previous activities either in  Iran  or  in  the
         United Kingdom or whichever country they are  returned  from,  then
         there would  be  a  risk  of  further  questioning,  detention  and
         potential ill-treatment. In this regard it is relevant to return to
         Dr Kakhki's evidence in  re-examination  where  he  said  that  the
         treatment they would receive would depend on their individual case.
         If they co-operated and  accepted  that  they  left  illegally  and
         claimed asylum abroad then  there  would  be  no  reason  for  ill-
         treatment, and questioning would be for a fairly brief period. That
         seems to us to sum up the position well, and as  a  consequence  we
         conclude that a person with no history other than that of  being  a
         failed asylum seeker who had exited  illegally  and  who  could  be
         expected to tell the truth when questioned would not  face  a  real
         risk of ill-treatment during  the  period  of  questioning  at  the
         airport. We should add that we see no reason to doubt  Dr  Kakhki's
         evidence that there is a special court at or near the airport which
         considers the cases of returnees but the evidence does not  show  a
         real risk of ill-treatment in breach  of  Article  3  amounting  to
         persecution as a consequence of attending at the court."

20. I am satisfied therefore that any fair reading of the decision  overall
    is that the Judge is contemplating the first sort of questioning as  he
    would be of no interest and there is nothing inherently wrong in  using
    the word detention as that is used in SSH to refer to the first type of
    questioning.

21. In relation to the  Judges  treatment  of  the  Facebook  evidence  her
    starting point was his support of the  KDPI  he  was  not  genuine  and
    therefore he could be expected to delete  the  account  and  she  quite
    properly distinguished his case with RT where the political support was
    genuine.  Mr. Greer attempted to argue that even if he were  to  accept
    that in those circumstances the Appellant could and should  delete  his
    account given that he had used photographs from the  KDPI  website,  an
    account that the Iranian authorities might be expected to monitor  even
    if they did not have the capability to monitor the Facebook accounts of
    every Iranian in the UK, this would put him at risk.  Having  read  the
    decision and the ROP I note that this  was  not  an  argument  advanced
    before the Judge and Mr  Greer  conceded  that  no  evidence  that  the
    photographs had been taken from that website  was  adduced  before  the
    Judge.

22. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
    whole set out findings that were  sustainable  and  well  detailed  and
    based on cogent reasoning applying the caselaw and background  material
    that was applicable at the time of the decision. It  may  be  that  the
    application of HB would have resulted in a different  outcome  but  the
    decision had not been promulgated. The Appellant has another remedy.

CONCLUSION

23. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

24. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 5.4.2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell


