
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA092332016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14th July, 2017                         |On 20th July 2017                |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     PS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Lingajothy, a Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   PS is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on [ ] 1957.

2.   The appellant claims to have left Sri Lanka on 18th December  2015,  by
    plane and then travelled the rest of the journey by car.  He arrived in
    the United Kingdom on 20th December 2015, and claimed asylum.

3.   The appellant explained that he was forcibly  taken  by  the  LTTE  and
    became a Sea Tiger.  He worked as such until May 2009,  when  his  unit
    surrendered themselves to the Sri Lankan Army.  He claims to have  been
    detained until November 2015.

4.   During his asylum interview  the  appellant  claimed  that  he  escaped
    using the intervention of his uncle, who bribed  a  CID  officer.   The
    respondent refused the appellant's application, but he appealed to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and First-tier Tribunal Judge G R  J  Robson  heard
    his appeal in Bradford on 3 February 2017.  For completeness I set  out
    below paragraphs 8 to 15 inclusive of the judge's  determination  since
    they set out the basis for the appellant's claim:-

         "8.  I summarise the appellant's case based on  the  screening  and
             asylum  interviews  and   other   documents   prior   to   the
             respondent's decision to refuse.


         9.   I set out the immigration history of the appellant above.   He
             explained that  he  was  born  in  Mulliathivu,  that  he  had
             received education in the same school until year 11  and  that
             his father was a fisherman whom he helped on occasions.


         10.  He was married and had his mother's younger brother,  or  that
             is to say his uncle, in the United Kingdom.  His wife and  son
             lived in Sri Lanka.


         11.  He joined the LTTE on 5th September 2006 when  six  men  armed
             with guns came to his home  and  seized  him.   He  was  taken
             because the LTTE had a shortage.  Ultimately he was  taken  to
             Anpu Camp at Vaddakachi where he was given a name, Nilavan,  a
             name tag and number, and  a  uniform.   He  had  a  period  of
             training lasting for some six months and became a  Sea  Tiger,
             which involved a further two months' training at sea.  He  was
             under the leader Chelian.


         12.  He worked as a Sea Tiger from 2006 until  17th  May  2009  and
             said that he was involved in two fights, one in Somani in 2007
             and one in Salai in 2008.  He was captured on 17th May 2009 at
             Mulliwaikal and he was released on 11th January 2012 (question
             63) through the intervention of an  uncle  who  bribed  a  CID
             officer.  That date of release was corrected by the  appellant
             in a letter received by the respondent on 2nd  June  2016,  to
             the 1st November 2015.


         13.  His brother had been a special member of the  Charles  Anthony
             Fighting Unit and was killed in fighting in 2008.


         14.  He explained that on his surrender he was detained in a  camp,
             Baswer, and thereafter the building in Colombo to  the  fourth
             floor.  He explained that he  had  been  tortured  during  his
             period of detention.


         15.  He left Sri Lanka on 18th December 2015 with the assistance of
             his uncle who had found an agent."

5.   The respondent conceded that the appellant had been involved in  active
    service.

6.   During the course of hearing  submissions,  the  appellant's  solicitor
    sought to give further evidence to the First Tier Tribunal  Judge.   He
    referred to what the appellant had said about his detention  and  being
    taken  to  Colombo.   The  appellant's   solicitor,   in   making   his
    submissions, said that the  fourth  floor  could  be  "any  floor"  and
    basically meant the CID headquarters, a place  where  things  happened.
    The judge pointed out to the appellant's solicitor that he was  seeking
    to give evidence himself.  I make reference to  this  in  view  of  the
    appellant's representative's attempt to rely on fresh evidence  at  the
    hearing before me.

7.   In making his findings the judge carefully examined a detailed  medical
    report.  He explains that the expert considered that  the  majority  of
    the scars displayed  by  the  appellant  were  highly  consistent  with
    injuries caused by torture as described by the  appellant,  and  whilst
    the author of the medical report considered the  possibility  that  the
    injuries might have been caused by self-infliction by proxy,  he  found
    no evidence to support it.  The judge placed considerable weight on the
    expert evidence and found, despite a negative finding  in  relation  to
    the location of the  appellant's  detention,  that  the  appellant  did
    suffer torture and abuse during detention.

8.   The judge also considered a consultant  psychiatrist's  report  wherein
    the psychiatrist concluded  that  the  appellant  suffered  from  post-
    traumatic stress disorder.  The judge found that the appellant not only
    suffered physical injuries  during  his  claimed  detention,  but  also
    suffered psychologically.  At paragraphs 68 to 75 inclusive  the  judge
    makes various specific findings in respect of  the  appellant's  claim.
    For completeness I set them out below:-

         "68. I have considered the evidence both oral  and  in  writing  in
             coming to my conclusion in this matter.


         69.  It has been accepted by the respondent that the appellant  had
             been involved with the LTTE and therefore it must follow  that
             he was involved in war zones as claimed.


         70.  The appellant claimed that he had sustained physical  injuries
             during his period of detention.


         71.  The detention, he was adamant, took place on the fourth  floor
             of a building.  The  appellant's  representative  told  me  in
             submissions that in fact  the  fourth  floor  could  mean  any
             floor.   Further,  euphemistically,  it  could  mean  the  CID
             headquarters.  I do not accept without any objective  evidence
             that the fourth floor can mean any  floor,  nor  can  it  mean
             necessarily that it could mean the CID headquarters.  Further,
             if people like the appellant were  to  be  kept  in  a  secret
             place, then I find it is hardly likely that he would  be  kept
             in the CID headquarters, a building which I am sure  would  be
             known to many Colombons, let alone other Sri Lankans.


         72.  The explanation by the appellant about how he   knew  that  he
             was on the fourth floor was that he was told  by  his  captors
             that it was the fourth floor and the building was in Colombo.


         73.  I also do not find the method of his escape credible.   If  he
             was wanted and of  serious  interest  to  the  authorities,  I
             cannot believe that the appellant could have been  taken  down
             four floors of a  building  without  being  challenged  and  I
             cannot find that there is any plausible explanation to justify
             the method of escape.


         74.  The appellant also said in his  supplementary  statement  that
             after a month of acute torture in  captivity  he  admitted  to
             tendering ships engines and loading rifles,  and,  ultimately,
             he was forced to sign a confession when the torture eased  and
             he was relocated to a more secure unit 'within the camp'.


         75.  Although the torture eased, he was still interrogated  and  he
             believed, and still believes, that his captors were under  the
             impression that some senior LTTE members  might  have  escaped
             and that was why the  appellant  was  held  for  such  a  long
             period."

9.   The judge allowed the appellant's appeal, but  did  identify  the  risk
    the appellant might face on his return to Sri Lanka.

10.  The  Home  Office  challenged  the  determination  and  permission  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom, who said this:-

         "2.  The FtTJ was entitled to find the appellant had been  detained
             and tortured for the reasons he gave.  However, in  the  light
             of his finding that the appellant's account of his escape  was
             not credible, the FtTJ  arguably  fails  to  provide  adequate
             reasons for concluding that the appellant was at further  risk
             on return."

11.  Mrs Pettersen addressed me briefly and referred me to paragraph  95  of
    the determination, where the judge found it would be  likely  that  the
    appellant would be at  risk  of  persecution  based  on  his  political
    opinion.  However, the judge has not made an  assessment  of  the  risk
    this appellant faces  (if  any)  based  on  the  judge's  findings,  by
    applying GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]
    UKUT 00319 (IAC).

12.  For the appellant, Mr Lingajothy asked me to  consider  a  document  he
    had sent to me by facsimile which  he  said  gave  evidence  about  the
    'fourth floor'.  I pointed out to him  that  neither  he  had  not  the
    respondent had challenged the judge's  findings.   He  referred  me  to
    paragraphs 50, 71 and 73 of the decision.  He said  if  the  judge  had
    made an error in relation to the fourth floor then he may have made  an
    error in relation to his finding that the appellant's  escape  was  not
    credible.  I explained again to Mr Lingajorthy that  this  was  a  Home
    Office challenge to the determination and that they had not  challenged
    these findings; he had not made any  challenge  to  the  findings  even
    though it was open  to  him  to  do  so.   The  respondent  had  merely
    challenged the determination on the basis that, given  those  findings,
    the judge had allowed the appeal without considering the  risk  to  the
    appellant on his return to Sri Lanka.  Mr  Lingajorthy  said  that  any
    error on the part of the judge was not material and  could  not  affect
    the decision.

13.  Mrs Pettersen invited me to apply GJ to the  judge's  findings  and  to
    correct the determination.  I reserved my decision.

14.  I find that the judge did err by failing to consider and apply  GJ  and
    Others before allowing the  appeal.   He  should  have  considered  his
    findings and then, having applied  GJ  to  those  findings,  reached  a
    conclusion on whether or not the appellant would be at risk on  return.
    I reject the suggestion that the error was not a material one; it  very
    clearly is material.

15.  The respondent conceded that the appellant had been in  active  service
    in Sri Lanka and the judge found that he had  been  involved  with  the
    LTTE as claimed.  He found that the appellant  had  been  detained  and
    tortured.

16.  However, having heard the  appellant  give  oral  evidence,  the  judge
    found that he was unable to accept all of it as  being  credible.   The
    judge did not believe that the appellant had been  held  in  the  place
    where he claims to have been held,  and  neither  did  he  believe  the
    appellant's method of escape.  The judge believed that if the appellant
    was wanted and was of serious interest  to  the  authorities,  then  he
    could not have been taken down four floors of a building without  being
    challenged.  The judge could not find  that  there  was  any  plausible
    explanation to justify the method of escape.

17.  The  judge  having  found  that  the  appellant  was  detained  by  the
    authorities  and  seriously  tortured,  but  that  he  did  not  escape
    captivity in the way he claims, it follows that the appellant must have
    been released by the authorities as being of no further interest to the
    Sri Lankan authorities, following his detention and torture.

18.  The reason the appellant had to fabricate a story about  where  he  was
    held and how he escaped in order  to  support  his  asylum  claim,  was
    because he did not escape at all.    If he had managed to have  escaped
    lawful detention, he would have been able to give a credible account of
    his escape.

19.  MP (Sri Lanka) & Anor v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ. 829 examined the risk categories identified in GJ  and
    concluded that those with elaborate links with the  LTTE  could  be  at
    risk on return.  GJ makes it clear that  the  Sri  Lankan  Government's
    present objective is to prevent a resurgence of LTTE or  similar  Tamil
    separatist organisations, and the revival of a  civil  war  within  Sri
    Lanka.   If  the  appellant  has  been  detained  by  the  Sri   Lankan
    authorities and subsequently released (notwithstanding the fact that he
    suffered persecution and torture during his  detention),  then  he  are
    hardly likely to be of any interest to the Sri  Lankan  authorities  on
    return  to  Sri  Lanka.   There  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the
    appellant's name might appear on  a  stop  list.   The  judge  did  not
    believe that the appellant had escaped detention in the manner claimed.
     If the appellant had been detained at some other place and had escaped
    custody by other means, then there would have been no reason for him to
    have made the fabricated claims he did.

20.  If the appellant had been detained and subsequently released,  then  he
    is hardly likely to be  of  any  further  continuing  interest  to  the
    authorities who are now, of course, in control  of  the  whole  of  Sri
    Lanka.  The appellant would hardly have been released from  custody  if
    he was thought to have been a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a
    single state, or if he was thought likely to have been involved in post-
    conflict Tamil separatism.  Applying GJ to the facts as  found  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, it appears to me that there are  no  reasons
    for believing that if returned to Sri Lanka this appellant will  be  at
    risk of persecutory harm.  I dismiss the appellant's asylum appeal.   I
    dismiss the appellant's humanitarian protection appeal.  I dismiss  the
    appellant's human rights appeals based on Articles 2 and 3  since  they
    are based on the same  factual  matrix  as  the  appellant's  claim  to
    asylum.  The appellant has not raised any Article 8 claim.

Summary

21.  I find that the making of  the  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge G R J Robson did involve the making of an error  on  a  point  of
    law.   The  judge  failed  to  provide  any  or  adequate  reasons  for
    concluding that the appellant was at risk of further harm on return  to
    Sri Lanka, notwithstanding his finding  that  the  appellant  had  been
    detained and tortured for the reasons he gave,  in  the  light  of  the
    judge's finding that the appellant's account  of  his  escape  was  not
    credible.  I remake the decision myself.  For the reasons I have given,
    I dismiss the appellant's appeals.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

19th July 2017
