
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09227/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th February 2020                        |On 2nd March 2020             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                     Y I
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim, instructed by Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1989.  He appeals
against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Black dismissing his
protection claim on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights
grounds.


2.   The grounds as pleaded raise five issues. Grounds 1, 2 and 3 criticise
the judge's approach to the expert evidence, psychiatric evidence and
medical evidence.  Ground 4 challenges the judge's conclusion that
notwithstanding the Appellant's was plausible in light of the background
material it was nonetheless an incredible and dishonest account when viewed
in the round. Ground 5 challenges the judge's treatment of the Appellant's
sur place activity. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal
Judge O'Brien on all grounds on 12 December 2019.

3.   At the hearing before me, Ms Everett conceded that, having found that
the Appellant was a member of a proscribed organisation and his name had
been published in connection with such activities including on the internet
and newspapers published in Sri Lanka, the Appellant would be at risk on
return. I heard submissions from Mr Halim on the remaining grounds of
appeal but it is not necessary to go into detail on the points made in this
decision.

4.   There was no challenge to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings at
paragraph 63 and 70:

         "63.     I accept the Appellant has been involved in Tamil
             Diaspora activities in the UK since about September 2018. I
             accept also that his name has been published in connection
             with a limited number of such activities. It has been
             published in various places, including on the internet and
             newspapers published in Sri Lanka."

         "70. There is no doubt that his activities have been published and
             that they remain in the public domain.  He is identifiable by
             name and photographs to the Sri Lankan authorities. I do not
             doubt that they are aware of his participating in Tamil
             Diaspora events in the UK. He could not have come to their
             attention until about September 2018 because he did not take
             part in such activities prior to this date. Thus he has only
             been participating in such events for about a year."

5.   Given these findings, the Appellant would be at risk on return
following GJ (Sri Lanka) CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC):


         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in detention
             or otherwise, are:

             (a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
             the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,
             or are perceived to have a significant  role  in  relation  to
             post-conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora  and/or  a
             renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

(9)  The authorities maintain a computerised intelligence-led watch list. A
person whose name appears on a watch list is not reasonably likely to be
detained at the airport but will be monitored by the security services
after his or her return. If that monitoring does not indicate that such a
person is a Tamil activist working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan
state or revive the internal armed conflict, the individual in question is
not in general likely to be detained by the security forces.  That will be
a question of fact in each case, dependent on any Diaspora activities
carried out by such an individual.

6.   The judge accepted that the Appellant had met with numerous MPs and
his activities have been published on the internet and in the newspaper. He
was a member of the TGTE.  Although the judge doubted the Appellant's
motives for his sur place activities her conclusion that he would not be
perceived as a Tamil activist working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan
state or to revive the internal armed conflict was irrational, given her
findings that he was easily identifiable as a member of a proscribed
organisation, his photograph and name appeared in several newspapers and
internet sites, and the Sri Lankan authorities would be aware of his
activities here in the UK.

7.   Accordingly, I find that there is an error of law in the decision
dated 28 October 2019 and I set aside the decision to dismiss the appeal
and remake it.  The appeal is allowed on asylum and human rights grounds.


Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 14 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 14 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

