
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09425/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2020                   |On 27 January 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     K O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams, Counsel instructed by TNA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  Appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the Appellant is an asylum seeker. There is invariably a risk
in such cases that publicity could create a risk of harm to the Appellant.

2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Algeria against  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal dismissing his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
Secretary of State refusing him international protection.

3. The determination is fundamentally wrong.  The judge has disbelieved  the
Appellant.  It may be that the Appellant ought to be disbelieved but he has
been disbelieved for unlawful reasons.

4. The essential problem is that the judge, at the very least,  has  written
the decision as if she has not determined  the  credibility  issue  in  the
round after looking at all the evidence but has determined the  credibility
issue first and then looked at other strands of evidence  to  see  if  that
makes her change her mind.  If that is what she has done and it is what she
says she has done, then it is,  with  respect  about  as  wrong  as  it  is
possible to be.

5. Ms Isherwood for the Secretary of State properly and fairly  drew  to  my
attention paragraph 37 of the Decision and  Reasons.   It  begins  "I  have
already made an adverse assessment of the Appellant's  credibility".   That
is a worrying thing to read in the middle of a decision.  Of course  judges
have to start somewhere but there should, at least, be  an  assurance  that
the decision was made after considering everything as a whole.

6. It rather looks at paragraph 37 as though  that  is  precisely  what  the
judge did not do.  It gets worse.

7. At paragraph 41 the judge deals with evidence  of  the  Appellant  having
fractured his elbow.  The judge says that she did not accept that the  fall
was  caused  fleeing  from  terrorists.   Then  there   is   the   alarming
explanation: "I find this first  of  all  because  I  have  not  found  the
Appellant credible in his account". The judge ought, first of all, to  have
considered the fact  that  the  Appellant  had  produced  medical  evidence
supporting his claimed injuries before deciding whether or not  to  believe
the Appellant's explanation.

8. A similar point lurks in paragraph 42 where the judge considers  evidence
of cigarette burns, an injury allegedly from a gun.  The judge rejected the
account because the doctor had said it could have been for  other  possible
reasons and then says crucially "when I put this alongside my assessment of
his credibility ...". The assessment of credibility should have followed  a
consideration of the fact that the medical evidence gave  some  support  to
his claim to have been injured.

9. Again, in paragraph 43, there is reference to the Appellant  having  PTSD
and there is a criticism of the medical practitioner. The main  reason  for
criticising the medical practitioner is the judge's view  that  the  doctor
just accepted the account.  I would be very surprised if that is right.  It
is  not  the  nature  of  medical  practitioners  to  accept  these  things
uncritically even if not much is said about that in their  explanation  but
the concluding sentence at paragraph 43 repeats the error. The judge  said:
"I have already found the Appellant's account not credible and I find I can
attach no weight to the diagnosis of PTSD".  Again I make  the  point  that
the finding that the Appellant was not credible, if that  was  the  finding
that was going to be made, should have been made after consideration of the
diagnosis of PTSD.

10. There is a similar point lurking as well with regard to the  CPIN  which
provides some support for the Appellant's case  because,  at  the  material
time, the conduct alleged by the Appellant is the kind of conduct that  was
known to occur. The report ought to have influenced  the  judge's  decision
about whether or not to believe the Appellant, but the judge said: "I found
the whole account not credible and in general the CPIN does not support the
Appellant's account that he would be a target".   The  criticism  that  the
adverse credibility finding if flawed is not made out as clearly  here  and
in the other examples but it all tends to support Mr Lams' main  submission
which is that the whole approach to credibility was wrong.

11. Ms Isherwood had time to consider the case and offered no opposition  to
Mr Lams' argument because he is right.

12. I also agree with Mr Lams that this is such  a  fundamental  error  that
the case needs to go back to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   This  Appellant's
case has not been  determined  properly  because  inadequate  and  unlawful
reasons have been given for the adverse  credibility  finding  and  I  give
weight to the Appellant's wish  to  preserve  the  possibility  of  further
appeals by going back to the First-tier Tribunal.

13. Nothing here is tended to  indicate  that  the  Appellant  ought  to  be
believed but he is entitled to a proper decision on  his  evidence  with  a
proper explanation and for the reasons given he has not had one.

14. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  I  direct  that
the case be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

15. This appeal allowed.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and I  direct
that the appeal be determined again in the First-tier Tribunal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 15 January 2021                |



