
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09429/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5th June 2019                     |On 13 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     M R
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty, of Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born in 2003, and is now 15  years
       old. He arrived in the UK in February 2017 with his  brother  SR  and
       claimed asylum the next day. He was refused asylum in a  decision  of
       the respondent dated 8th September 2017. His appeal, and that of  his
       separately  represented  brother  SR,  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart in a  determination  promulgated  on  the
       16th February 2018.

    2. An appeal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  only
       been brought on behalf of the appellant who is represented by Paragon
       Law. Permission to appeal was granted to the appellant  by  the  Vice
       President of the Upper Tribunal on  2nd  November  2018  following  a
       grant of permission in a judicial review challenge to the refusals of
       permission to appeal by  the  First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunals.  The
       matter came before me and I found that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
       erred in law for the reasons set out in my decision appended at Annex
       A of this decision, but the remaking of that decision was adjourned.

    3. The matter came back before me to remake the appeal. The remaking  is
       confined to whether the appellant  is  entitled  to  succeed  in  his
       protection appeal based on a real  risk  of  serious  harm  upon  his
       returning to Iran as a  failed  asylum  seeker  from  his  particular
       family  background  without  a  valid  passport,  having  left   Iran
       illegally and being of Kurdish ethnicity.

    4. The facts on which this remaking is based are  that  it  is  accepted
       that the appellant is an Iranian Kurd who left Iran illegally in 2017
       and travelled overland by lorry and boat. It is  preserved  from  the
       findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  appellant  and  his
       brother have not shown to the lower civil standard of proof that they
       had been politically involved with  the  KDPI  as  their  history  of
       engagement delivering leaflets was found to be  vague,  inconsistent,
       and as a result  Judge  Bart-Stewart  found  that  their  history  of
       involvement with the KDPI had  been  fabricated.  Judge  Bart-Stewart
       made no findings as to whether the appellant had a family history  of
       involvement with the KDPI but it was not found to  be  credible  that
       his uncle was currently in prison.

  Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

    5. The appellant's evidence about his family history is that his  father
       died when he was about 6 years old, when  his  father  was  about  35
       years old, and he was told he was killed because he was a  member  of
       the KDPI by his brother. His mother remarried and left the  appellant
       and his older brother, FR, to live with their paternal uncle, F,  who
       had a wife and three children. They all lived  in  Dawan  village  in
       Iran where his paternal uncle had a small holding with chickens, cows
       and an orchard. The appellant's  only  schooling  was  attending  the
       mosque on Fridays to learn the Koran. He knew his paternal uncle  was
       also involved with the KDPI, but he himself has no  understanding  of
       the politics of the KDPI.

    6. Mr Melvin submits, in summary, that the  appellant  and  his  brother
       were found  not  to  be  credible  witnesses  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and so as it is only their oral and  written  evidence  that
       they have a family history of involvement with the KDPI the appellant
       had not shown to the required lower  civil  standard  of  proof  that
       their father and paternal uncle had such involvement. There  is  also
       no evidence that the appellant suffered any harassment in Iran  as  a
       result of his father and uncle's political  membership  except  as  a
       result of the incident in September 2016 involving the leaflets which
       has not been believed.   There is no evidence of the appellant having
       any sur place political  activity  in  the  UK  or  of  any  internet
       activity. It is argued therefore  that  in  accordance  with  country
       guidance set out in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018]  UKUT  00430  the  fact
       that the appellant exited illegally, has no  valid  passport  and  is
       ethnically Kurdish does not suffice to mean that there is an  Article
       3 ECHR risk on return.

    7. Mr Melvin criticised the appellant's solicitors in  relation  to  the
       updating expert report as they have not informed Dr Kakhki  that  the
       appellant had not been  found  to  be  credible  in  his  history  of
       political  involvement  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that  the
       remaking in the Upper Tribunal preserved that finding,  and  had  not
       provided him with the decisions of the Tribunal which  were  relevant
       documents. The  report  starts,  like  the  previous  one,  from  the
       position that the history of appellant is to be believed when this is
       not the case and as such the report can only be given  little  weight
       applying AAW (expert evidence - weight) Somalia [2015] UKUT 673.

    8. Ms Easty submits, in summary, that there is no inconsistency  in  the
       evidence provided by the appellant at  interview,  in  his  brother's
       evidence at interview,  the  evidence  given  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and in the appellant's statement with respect of his  father
       having been killed when he was six years old because he was a  member
       of KDPI and his paternal uncle also having involvement with the KDPI.
       As the appellant has no contact with anyone in Iran there is  no  way
       that he could have obtained any additional evidence to support  these
       contentions. The history  about  the  political  involvement  of  the
       appellant and his brother had not been believed mainly due to  issues
       with his brother's evidence,  as  he  was  the  adult  who  could  be
       expected to  have  known  more  and  provided  a  more  detailed  and
       convincing account if it had been true. I should therefore find  that
       the appellant had this family history of involvement with  the  KDPI.
       This should then be seen as a factor which  was  likely  to  cause  a
       perception  of  involvement  with  Kurdish  political  activities  or
       support  for  Kurdish  rights  in  the  Iranian  authorities  if  the
       appellant were returned to  that  country.  It  was  clear  from  the
       evidence of the expert in his most recent report, Dr Kakhki's  report
       of May 2019, that political support was believed to run  in  families
       in Iran and he  would  be  seen  in  this  way  particularly  as  the
       appellant is still a minor, and also that the situation in  Iran  had
       worsened with respect to  issues  for  those  involved  with  Kurdish
       groups since the Upper Tribunal issued the country  guidance  on  the
       risk to failed Kurdish asylum seekers in HB (Kurds) Iran.

  Conclusions- Remaking

    9. The case of HB (Kurds) Iran provides country guidance on the issue of
       the risk on return for failed ethnically Kurdish asylum seekers  when
       sent to Iran. The evidence before the Upper  Tribunal  supported  the
       contention that Kurds suffer discrimination in Iran, but not that the
       discrimination  amounts  in  general  to  persecution  or   treatment
       contrary to Article 3 ECHR. Merely being  a  Kurd  returned  to  Iran
       without a valid passport combined with having exited  illegally  will
       not of itself create a risk of persecution.  It  is  however  a  risk
       factor which might, if combined with another risk factor or  factors,
       lead to real risk of persecution on return if the asylum  seeker  had
       exited  illegally.  Other  risk  factors  are:  residence   in   KRI;
       involvement or perceived involvement with  Kurdish  political  groups
       even at low-level of activity or if the activities are peaceful;  and
       involvement with Kurdish social welfare or  charitable  groups  which
       are perceived as political by the Iranian  authorities.  The  country
       guidance is that the  Iranian  authorities  are  "hair-trigger"  with
       respect to those who are involved with Kurdish  political  activities
       or rights, and that their threshold for  suspicion  is  low  and  the
       reaction likely to be extreme.

   10. I accept the criticism of the appellant's solicitors put  forward  by
       Mr Melvin in relation to failing to provide the expert Dr Kakhki with
       relevant documents, namely the decisions of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       and Upper Tribunal. I find that the evidence provided is from a  very
       well qualified, informed and respect expert  and  that  the  material
       within the report can properly be given weight, but not  the  opinion
       in relation to the appellant himself as this is based on  a  mistaken
       understanding  that  it  was  accepted  that  he  had  personal  KDPI
       political involvement.   The expert evidence  of  Dr  Kakhki  may  be
       summarised as follows: that illegal departure and  family  connection
       with  the  KDPI  and  an  asylum  application  abroad  will  lead  to
       additional scrutiny and background checks on return to  Iran.  It  is
       almost inevitable that a person in such a situation will be  detained
       on arrival in Iran and questioned about his reasons for leaving  Iran
       illegally and his activities  whilst  abroad.  If  a  senior  closely
       related male figure in a family has been involved with the KDPI  this
       will lead to a likelihood of ill treatment and persecution due to  an
       interest  on  the  part  of  the  Iranian  authorities  in  obtaining
       information from networks/connections and regarding the activities of
       his  family  members.   An  illiterate  or  ill-educated  person  may
       struggle to provide  convincing  responses  to  questions  which  may
       worsen their situation.  Further the situation  of  conflict  between
       the Iranian state and Kurdish groups is heightened, and  there  is  a
       belief that the Kurdish groups  are  assisted  by  sympathisers  from
       abroad. The other human rights reports submitted by  the  appellant's
       solicitors, and particularly the sections which were highlighted  for
       my attention, clearly indicate that Iran continues to  be  a  country
       which is responsible for detention,  unfair  trials  and  torture  of
       Kurdish Iranian persons who are viewed as political activists.

   11. This is an extremely finely balanced decision. I take full notice  of
       the fact that the aspect of the appellant's history relating  to  his
       own involvement with the KDPI has not been  believed,  and  that  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal did take  note  of  his  evidence
       being inconsistent about  the  number  of  times  the  leaflets  were
       distributed and the method when compared to that of his  brother.  On
       the other hand, I find that his evidence, and that in  the  interview
       of his brother SR, is entirely  consistent  on  the  killing  of  his
       father as a KDPI fighter and his uncle being involved with the  KDPI.
       Whilst the appellant's account is not detailed or well informed  this
       is consistent with his having received no proper education whilst  in
       Iran and the death of his father having taken place when he  was  six
       years old and his having left Iran when he was 13  years  old.  There
       has been  no  attempt  to  embellish  the  account;  no  inconsistent
       acquiring of a personal political profile in the  UK;  and  there  is
       nothing inherently implausible about the history he gives of a family
       involvement with the KDPI. It is the view of his  foster  parent,  Mr
       Paul Pateman in his letter of 5th January 2018, is that he  presented
       to them with attachment  issues  usual  in  a  child  separated  from
       parents at an early age which supports the history of  the  death  of
       his father  and  disappearance  of  his  mother  from  his  life.  On
       consideration of all of the evidence before me I find, to  the  lower
       civil standard of proof, that the  appellant's  father  and  paternal
       uncle were supporters of the KDPI and his father  died  fighting  for
       them.

   12. In light of that  finding,  and  the  country  of  origin  background
       evidence including that in the expert  report  of  Dr  Kakhki   I  am
       satisfied that applying the guidance in  HB (Kurds) Iran, and  noting
       particularly  that  the  threshold  for  suspicion  is  low  and  the
       appellant is unlikely to be able to give any  type  of  sophisticated
       level of response distancing himself from his family's activities due
       to his young age and lack of political understanding, that there is a
       real risk of serious harm to the appellant if he returned to Iran  on
       the basis that he is an ethnic Kurd who has left Iran illegally as he
       may be perceived as a political opponent due to his family background
       in supporting the KDPI.

    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

      3. The appeal is remade allowing the appeal on asylum  and  Article  3
         ECHR grounds.




    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  his
    protection claim.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:   11th June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

Annex A: Error of Law Decision:

                            DECISION AND REASONS

  Introduction

    1. The appellants are citizens of Iran and are brothers born in 2003 and
       1993 respectively. MR, the first appellant, is now 15 years  old  and
       SR, the second appellant, is now 25 years old. They arrived in the UK
       in February 2017 and claimed asylum the next day. They  were  refused
       asylum in a decision of the  respondent  dated  8th  September  2017.
       Their  appeal  against  the  decision  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart in a  determination  promulgated  on  the
       16th February 2018.

    2. The appeals against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal have only
       been brought on behalf of the first appellant who is  represented  by
       Paragon Law.  The second appellant has  been  separately  represented
       throughout,  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   by   Rodman   Pearce
       Solicitors, and then from November 2018 by  Woolfe  &  Co  Solicitors
       Ltd. Although the second  appellant  has  not  made  any  appeal  the
       original refusals of permission to appeal by the First-tier  Tribunal
       and Upper Tribunal were sent to his solicitors and named  him  as  an
       appellant. The grant of permission was only in the name of the  first
       appellant, but was also sent with  the  notices  of  hearing  to  the
       second appellant.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted to the first appellant only  by  the
       Vice President of the Upper Tribunal on 2nd November 2018 following a
       grant of permission in a  judicial  review  challenge  by  the  first
       appellant to the refusals of permission to appeal by  the  First-tier
       and Upper Tribunals.

    4. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

  Preliminary Issue - Appeal for the Second Appellant

    5. I find that the second appellant  has  no  appeal  before  the  Upper
       Tribunal or possibility to apply for permission to  appeal.  This  is
       because he did not at any point appeal the decision of the First-tier
       Tribunal. It was not possible to grant permission on the basis of  Mr
       Dulan's oral application for permission to appeal on the basis of the
       first appellant's grounds and because this course of action is argued
       to be in the  interests  of  justice.  This  is  because  under  Rule
       21(2)(a) & (b) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Procedure
       Rules 2008 it  is  only  possible  for  an  appellant  to  apply  for
       permission if an application has been made  to  and  refused  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal, which in the  second  appellant's  case  it  was
       accepted had not happened. The second appellant may discuss with  his
       representatives whether it is appropriate to apply out of time to the
       First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal or perhaps make a  fresh
       asylum claim, but he has no basis on which  to  apply  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal for permission to appeal at the current time. As  he  cannot
       apply for permission and was not  granted  permission  by  the  Vice-
       President I find he has no appeal to be determined by me.

  Submissions - Error of Law

    6. The grounds of appeal contend, in summary,  firstly  that  the  first
       appellant was found not to be credible but  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       did not properly assess his credibility  by  reference  to  his  age,
       which was 14 years at the date  of  hearing  and  13  years  when  he
       arrived in the UK; and secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal  failed
       to lawfully consider an expert report on the  issue  of  his  illegal
       entry.

    7. With respect to the first issue it is argued that there was a failure
       to follow the guidance of the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals,  Sir
       Ernest Ryder in AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123,  and
       given his age was accepted there was a failure to record  the  effect
       this had on assessing the evidence and a failure to consider  whether
       any of the inconsistencies in the evidence could be explained by  the
       first appellant's age. The only reference is to  having  "regard"  to
       the first appellant's age at paragraph 33, and this  did  not  fulfil
       these two duties.

    8. Ms Warren elaborated this ground further by  explained  that  it  was
       argued that that having "regard" to the first  appellant's  age  with
       respect to his  understanding  of  what  had  happened  in  Iran  and
       completely failing to consider whether the appellant's  age  affected
       his stress levels, his lack of concentration and his ability to  deal
       with interpreter problems and thus issues with his ability to clearly
       recount the history was a failure to properly apply AM.

    9. Ms Warren argued that even though the treatment of  the  evidence  of
       the second appellant, SR, who was a witness in the first  appellant's
       case as well as an appellant in his own  right,  was  not  challenged
       that any failings of the First-tier Tribunal were not  immaterial  as
       the evidence of the first appellant  combined  with  the  country  of
       origin evidence sufficed to enable him to succeed even if the  second
       appellant had given non-credible evidence.

   10. With respect to the second issue the grounds  set  out  a  contention
       that the expert report from Dr Kakhki, which deals  inter  alia  with
       the situation faced by those  who  leave  Iran  illegally  and  which
       indicates that the first appellant is at increased  risk  of  serious
       harm due to his having claimed asylum and could face persecution  for
       his exit particularly as a Kurd, was not dealt with  lawfully.  There
       was a failure to have proper regard to this evidence. It was rejected
       on the basis that it was predicated on the appellants  account  being
       true but there was no finding by the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
       appellants  were  not  asylum-seeking  Kurds  who  had  exited   Iran
       illegally, so the relevant facts were apparently seen to be true. The
       evidence from Dr Kakhki was sufficiently credible fresh  evidence  to
       mean that is should have been considered whether or not  the  country
       guidance on risk on return to Iranians who  have  illegally  departed
       from Iran should have been followed SSH & HR  (illegal  exit:  failed
       asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308, and given that it  had  not
       been found that the first appellant did not have a  political  family
       this might be an additional risk factor in light of the guidance  now
       issued in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430,  so  this  error  was
       clearly not an immaterial one given the current country guidance.

   11. Mr Clarke argued that the first ground could not succeed as the First-
       tier  Tribunal  had  sufficiently  considered  the   issue   of   the
       appellant's age, and that the joint account of  activities  involving
       posters and leaflets was very careful  considered  and  found  to  be
       vague and inconsistent mostly by reference to  the  evidence  of  the
       second, older, appellant, and that as  a result this ground could not
       succeed as even if the evidence of the first  appellant  was  treated
       with greater care on the basis of his age there was no basis on which
       the appeal could succeed.

   12. Mr Clarke argued that the second ground should  not  succeed  because
       the evidence of Dr Kakhki was the same as that set out in  SSH  &  HR
       (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG  [2016]  UKUT  00308  at
       Appendix 1, on which the Upper Tribunal had concluded that there  was
       no evidence of a real risk of serious harm simply  based  on  someone
       who exited illegally being return to Iran as a failed  asylum  seeker
       as that the examples featured all had an extra factor which explained
       the harm they had  experienced  on  return.  Mr  Clarke  did  concede
       however that the First-tier Tribunal had not made a  finding  on  the
       history of the appellants' family's political history and whether  or
       not that was believed, and that this could be relevant  if  an  error
       were found in the treatment of the evidence of Dr Kakhki.

  Conclusions- Error of Law

   13. After careful consideration of the arguments by both  representatives
       I do not find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to
       examine the evidence of the first appellant through the prism of  his
       age.

   14. At paragraph 21 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal sets out that
       the first appellant was accompanied by his foster parent, the way  in
       which the hearing was conducted and how the First-tier Tribunal Judge
       bore in mind that he was 14 years old. At paragraph 27  the  findings
       and reasons section of the decision sets out 7  paragraphs  in  which
       the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  explains  why  the  evidence  of  the
       appellants with regard to the political history which they say led to
       their flight from Iran was not found to be credible, with the reasons
       being that the account was vague; the second appellant was internally
       inconsistent; and the accounts were also  not  consistent  with  each
       other. Most of the analysis relates  to  the  second  appellant.  The
       evidence of the first appellant is only referred  to  twice  in  this
       section. The first time is at paragraph 29 when it is identified that
       he gave a different account of taping posters to  walls  rather  than
       throwing leaflets into gardens at night and gave a  different  number
       of occasions to the  two  different  accounts  given  by  the  second
       appellant. The second time reference is made to the first appellant's
       evidence is  at  paragraph  33  where  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
       specific regard to the age of the appellant at the time  events  took
       place in Iran when finding that the first  appellant  ought  to  have
       understood that the leaflets he was distributing were  for  the  KDPI
       given that he had also said that he was told he  was  doing  this  to
       follow in his father's footsteps, and as such  his  account  was  not
       credible. The same paragraph finds that the claimed issues of stress,
       lack of concentration and interpreter difficulties did not suffice to
       explain the inconsistencies and lack of detail in the history of both
       appellants.

   15. I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  considered  the  claimed
       reasons why the history was not  consistent  and  detailed  for  both
       appellants at paragraph 33 of the decision. The  First-tier  Tribunal
       has considered the issue of the young age of the first  appellant  at
       the time of the contended problems with respect to  his  not  knowing
       that  he  was  distributing  KDPI  leaflets,  but  found   that   the
       explanation given lacked coherence in the context of that  young  age
       on the basis of the first appellant's own other evidence. There is no
       complaint by the first appellant that any significant evidence of his
       was overlooked. There is no further  reliance  on  his  evidence  bar
       noting it was different from the second appellant's two  versions  at
       paragraph 29 as detailed in the paragraph above. It is clear that the
       majority of the evidence regarding the claimed political activity  of
       both appellants came from the second appellant, and the  majority  of
       the difficulties arose from his evidence. I find,  in  this  context,
       that the First-tier Tribunal had  appropriate  consideration  of  the
       first  appellant's  age  when  drawing  the  conclusions   that   his
       explanation was inadequate at paragraph 33, and that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal did not need to go further in  consideration  of  the  first
       appellant's age and its impact as the rest of the history  was  given
       primarily by the second appellant.

   16. I accept however  that  the  very  brief  treatment  of  Dr  Kakhki's
       evidence at paragraph 34 of the decision amounts to an error of  law.
       The report deals with problems for those returning to Iran  following
       illegal exit at section 3 of  the  report  and  refers  back  to  the
       evidence of ill treatment  of  those  associated  with  the  KDPI  in
       section 2 of the report. It was not disputed in the decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal that the first appellant had left Iran illegally.
       I find that the report does not contain  the  same  evidence  as  was
       before the First-tier Tribunal in SSH & HR,  as  examples  of  events
       that happened after May 2016, when that case was heard, are  included
       and there is a section at paragraph 117 which deals with SSH & HR.  I
       find therefore that there were  insufficient  reasons  given  in  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal for dismissing the appeal on  the
       basis of risk on return for the first appellant as  a  failed  asylum
       seeker Kurd who left Iran illegally in light of a report which  deals
       with this issue; was not found deficient in any  way;  and  which  is
       from a well- qualified expert who had given evidence  in  a  previous
       country guidance case and who makes an appropriate declaration as  an
       expert witness.

   17. The decision of  HB  (Kurds)  Iran  provides  guidance  that  someone
       returned to Iran as a refused Kurdish asylum seeker  who  had  exited
       illegally would be subject to additional questioning on their return,
       and any perception by the Iranian authorities of  support  for  Kurds
       rights could lead to a real risk of  Article  3  ECHR  treatment.  As
       there is no finding by the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  appellants
       had not told the truth  about  their  father  and  uncle's  political
       involvement with the KDPI, which could in turn be a  reason  why  the
       first appellant might be perceived by the Iranian  authorities  as  a
       political Kurd or a someone fighting for Kurdish rights, the  outcome
       of an appeal on this basis cannot be foreseen.

   18. In light of my conclusions I preserve the findings of the  First-tier
       Tribunal that the first appellant is not at real risk of serious harm
       on return to Iran due to his own political activities, but set  aside
       the findings that relate to risk he might face on return as a refused
       Kurdish asylum seeker who left Iran illegally. This issue alone  will
       be remade at the adjourned remaking hearing.

   19. It was necessary to adjourn that hearing in light of the Rule  15(2A)
       Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 application made prior
       to this hearing by the first appellant's solicitors to be allowed  to
       adduce updating country of origin materials and an updating statement
       from the first appellant, and the explanation that they  were  unable
       to do this work in advance of today's hearing  as  it  would  not  be
       authorised by the Legal Aid Agency in advance of a finding  that  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal erred in law. There was  also  no
       Sorani interpreter present for the first appellant  to  use  to  give
       further evidence. I find that  it  is  reasonable  to  up-  date  the
       evidence on these issues due to the lapse of time since  the  hearing
       before the First-tier Tribunal and to enable the parties to have  the
       opportunity to address  the  relevant  issues  as  identified  in  HB
       (Kurds) Iran, country guidance which was not available at the time of
       the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

      3. The remaking of the appeal is adjourned to the first available date
         after the 18th May 2019.




    Directions:

      1. The parties should serve on the other party and file with the Upper
         Tribunal a paginated bundle  including  all  updating  evidence  on
         which they wish to rely 10 days prior to the remaking hearing.




    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  his
    protection claim.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:   18th March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

