

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09554/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 November 2017                   |On 20 November 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                     D N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Uganda  who  appealed  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse her asylum  and  human  rights  claims.  Her  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    N J Bennett ("the FTTJ") in a decision promulgated on 23 March 2017.

 2. The parties agreed, before me, that the surname  of  the  appellant  in
    these proceedings should be amended to reflect the correct spelling  of
    her name, as in her passport.

 3. I maintain the anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on  20
    September 2017 in the following terms:

          "1.    It is arguable that the findings at [58] are very difficult
          to reconcile with later  findings  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge's findings on  the  appellant's  awareness  of  her  sexual
          orientation are irrational.

           2.    All grounds are arguable.'

 5. Thus the matter has come before me.

Background

 6. The appellant entered the UK from Uganda on a business visit visa.  Her
    application for a business visit visa suggested  she  and  her  husband
    were people of some financial means, with  both  parties  in  permanent
    employment. The appellant declared a child born in 2012 and  employment
    as deputy head of a kindergarten in Uganda.

 7. Before the expiry of her visit visa the applicant claimed asylum on the
    grounds of fearing persecution on return as a result of her  sexuality:
    she claimed to be a lesbian.   The appellant stated that the content of
    the visa application was false and had been submitted by an  agent  who
    was assisting her to escape from Uganda.  The appellant referred to ill-
    treatment, harassment and persecution in Uganda  during  her  childhood
    and adolescence, as a result of her sexuality.   She  claimed  to  have
    been beaten and raped when a lesbian relationship was  discovered.  She
    claimed to have been detained when she  reported  this  to  the  police
    because the police had already been informed she  was  a  lesbian.  The
    appellant claimed she was raped again by a prison officer. She was able
    to escape but the appellant had a child born in 2015 as a result of the
    rape.  The appellant claims to have hidden with her grandmother and the
    child but was recognised and forced to  escape  and  flee  the  country
    leaving her daughter behind.

Submissions

 8. Mr Chakmakjian, for the appellant, relied on the grounds of appeal  and
    made additional oral submissions. I summarise the appellant's challenge
    as follows:

      i) The  FTTJ's  failure  to  treat  the  appellant's  account  of  her
         realisation  of  her  sexuality  as  worthy  of  consideration  was
         irrational/discriminatory.  The  positive  finding  at   [58]   was
         sufficient to demonstrate the appellant's sexuality.  Yet  at  [69]
         the FTTJ made a baseless finding that the appellant's  evidence  of
         the realisation of her sexuality was similar to that which might be
         experienced  by  anyone  with  a  "strict   evangelical   Christian
         background".

     ii) The FTTJ failed to consider, or properly consider,  inconsistencies
         in the respondent's asserted case. The FTTJ failed to  have  regard
         to inconsistencies in the entry clearance (EC)  application;  these
         supported her claim that it was made by an agent on a  false  basis
         and with false documents. Nor did the  FTTJ  consider  whether  the
         respondent had any positive evidence to show its contents were true
         (as asserted by the respondent). There was no consideration  as  to
         whether  the  application  was   inherently   unlikely/implausible.
         Instead the FTTJ made a finding which was not postulated by  either
         party and which was not based on  the  evidence,  namely  that  the
         appellant was escaping an unhappy marriage. This  was  to  overlook
         the supporting evidence of the  appellant's  purported  husband  in
         support of the application.

    iii) The FTTJ failed to consider the  significance  of  the  application
         containing addresses which were not consistent  with  the  evidence
         adduced at the hearing for the kindergarten sites.

     iv) Without any indication to  the  parties  at  the  hearing  that  he
         intended to do so, the FTTJ referred to a 2011  Country  of  Origin
         report regarding the prevalence of forgeries in Uganda.  He did not
         consider that material even-handedly, namely in the context of each
         parties' case.

      v) The FTTJ failed to consider whether the applicant was a lesbian and
         therefore facing real risk irrespective of adverse findings  as  to
         the appellant's account of events in Uganda. The FTTJ  accepted  Mr
         Kiwanuke was a credible witness, the appellant had attended various
         events yet  the  FTTJ  had  failed  to  make  substantive  reasoned
         findings as to whether this was because the appellant was a lesbian
         or had deliberately deceived. The findings  were  inadequate.   The
         FTTJ had not considered the possibility that the  appellant  was  a
         dishonest witness but nonetheless a lesbian.

 9. For the respondent, Mr Clarke submitted there were no  material  errors
    of  law.  The  FTTJ  accepted  at  [58]  the  appellant's  account  was
    consistent and that Mr Kiwanuke believed the appellant to be a lesbian.
    At [59] to [68] the FTTJ sets out matters on  the  other  side  of  the
    balance, primarily at [59]-[63] which  pertained  directly  to  the  EC
    application. The FTTJ addressed the appellant's counsel's  submissions.
    At [69] the FTTJ addressed further  the  matters  identified  at  [58].
    While the FTTJ accepted the appellant had given a consistent account of
    her realisation of her sexuality, that could  be  explained  "from  the
    basis of high standards of faith" and their impact on her. It was  open
    to the FTTJ to find that such self-realisation was  not  determinative.
    As regards the second ground of appeal this was a perversity  challenge
    on three bases.  The appellant had posited a specific case of fraud  in
    connection with her EC application; it was for her to  prove  it.   The
    FTTJ identified at [59] inconsistencies between the EC application  and
    the asylum claim.  The  difficulty  for  the  appellant  was  that,  to
    demonstrate her EC application  was  false,  she  had  to  rely  on  an
    admission of dishonesty. The appellant's submissions as to plausibility
    had been  addressed.  It  was  open  to  the  FTTJ  to  find  that  the
    inconsistencies  in  the  addresses,  job   description,   professional
    activities were not sufficient for a finding of  fraud.   The  findings
    were open  to  the  FTTJ.   The  findings  with  regard  to  the  birth
    certificates were unimpeachable. The appellant had, for example,  given
    inconsistent evidence in interview regarding the date of birth  of  her
    child.  The appellant had made limited effort to repair the  damage  of
    the EC application. The application of the country of origin report was
    appropriate as was  the  weight  given  to  reliability  of  the  birth
    certificate.  The FTTJ made appropriate findings  with  regard  to  the
    evidence of Mr Kiwanuka; it was difficult to see how much further  this
    could have been taken.  The FTTJ made an express finding the  appellant
    was not a lesbian at [70].  The difficulty for the appellant was  that,
    on her own case, she had acted dishonestly. The findings were adequate.

10. In reply, Mr Chakmakjian clarified  that  it  was  not  submitted  that
    homosexuals and heterosexuals should be treated in a particular way  in
    terms of their realisation of their sexuality but it was  incumbent  on
    the decision-maker to consider the matter on a case by  case  basis  in
    the assessment of credibility.  There  was  no  objective  evidence  to
    support the FTTJ's assertion that  anyone  with  a  strict  evangelical
    upbringing would have similar experiences. There was a fundamental  and
    material insufficiency in the reasoning.  The  respondent  had  made  a
    positive assertion as regards the EC application and  the  FTTJ  should
    have addressed that rather than making an alternative finding which had
    not been raised. It was one thing to find she had not demonstrated what
    had occurred to her in Uganda; but this did not  necessarily  mean  she
    had always been a heterosexual. Sometimes  people  lied  to  bolster  a
    genuine claim. This should have been considered. The evidence  had  not
    been given anxious scrutiny. This was  particularly  important  because
    the appellant was unusually vulnerable in  discharging  the  burden  on
    her; the use of  dishonesty  through  an  agent  was  no  different  to
    entering the UK clandestinely. Discretion should have been exercised in
    favour of the appellant.

Discussion

11. I agree with Judge Plimmer that there is a discrepancy as  between  the
    content of [58] and the subsequent findings.  On the one hand, the FTTJ
    states the appellant was able to give a  "detailed  account  which  has
    largely been consistently told and that she was able to explain how she
    realised her sexuality and how she gradually reconciled herself to it";
    on  the  other,  the  FTTJ  identifies  various  discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's account (eg at [59] where he notes  a  discrepancy  in  the
    dates given for the appellant's daughter's date of birth) and finds  an
    alternative reason for the appellant's explanation of how she  realised
    her sexuality and how she came to terms with it [69].

12. Thus there are directly contradictory findings on  two  issues:  first,
    the appellant's detailed account (which covers the whole of her  claim)
    and, secondly, her realisation of her sexuality and  how  she  came  to
    terms with it.

13. As regards the former, the FTTJ  refers  at  [58]  to  the  appellant's
    "detailed account" being "largely ... consistent..."  Despite this, the
    FTTJ states further at [65] that "there are aspects of her claim  which
    lack credibility".  The FTTJ then relates the appellant's  evidence  as
    regards her relationship with Rita but does not state in  what  respect
    the account is not credible.  It appears, by inference, that  the  FTTJ
    considers the appellant's account is not plausible.  However, in making
    this adverse finding the FTTJ fails to refer to his earlier finding  as
    to the consistency of the appellant's account.

14. Indeed, this is a criticism which applies to all the subsequent adverse
    findings on the credibility of the appellant's account:  the  FTTJ  has
    not taken into account the positive finding at [58] in  his  assessment
    of discrete issues.

15. In addition, despite the positive finding at [58]  that  the  appellant
    was able to  explain  how  she  realised  her  sexuality  and  how  she
    gradually reconciled herself to it, at [69] the FTTJ then  goes  on  to
    make the following adverse credibility finding:

         "I am similarly unable to accept that the  Appellant's  account  of
         how she realised her sexuality and how she came to  terms  with  it
         establish her bona fides because it  would  be  understandable  for
         anyone coming from a strict evangelical Christian background to  be
         frightened and  worried  about  his  or  her  sexual  feelings  and
         inclinations  during  adolescence,  whatever  his  or  her   sexual
         orientation, and  how  such  feelings  and  inclinations  could  be
         reconciled with the high standard set by their faith, which  abhors
         premarital sex and homosexuality alike. It is also not  unheard  of
         for adolescents to be sexually attracted to other members of  their
         sex as they grow up and for this to change to an attraction to  the
         opposite sex. The Appellant's case is based on her  coming  from  a
         strict Christian background because she explained at her  interview
         that she learnt about Sodom and Gomorrah at church and that she was
         "preached" to about homosexuality at home, at school and at  church
         (Q+A42). She also said that she was a born again Christian and that
         she attended church regularly (Q+A49/50). Mr Kiwanuka said  in  his
         statement that she grew up in a very  religious  family,  that  she
         attended a Pentecostal born again church, that she  was  raised  on
         strong religious principles and that she was taught to  avoid  sin,
         which would distance her from God".

16. Again, the FTTJ does not refer to  the  earlier,  apparently  positive,
    finding in reaching  this  conclusion.  Nor  is  there  any  background
    material or evidence to support this adverse  finding.  It  was  not  a
    proposition put to the appellant.  The FTTJ refers to  the  appellant's
    evidence of learning about homosexuality at  home,  at  school  and  at
    church yet does not indicate whether he rejects this. Instead he  finds
    the appellant would have experienced such self-realisation in any event
    irrespective  of  her  sexuality  because  of  her  strict  evangelical
    upbringing. Even  on  the  FTTJ's  own  reasoning  it  is  based  on  a
    proposition which "is not unheard  of",  namely  that  adolescents  are
    "sexually attracted to other members of their sex as they grow  up  and
    for this to change to an attraction to the  opposite  sex".   Thus  the
    finding is based on speculation.  It  is  not  a  conclusion  which  is
    sustainable on the evidence or background  material.  It  is  based  on
    conjecture.  It is irrational and unreasonable in the Wednesbury  sense
    (R & Ors v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982).

17. The FTTJ has thus erred in two ways: in failing to  take  into  account
    earlier positive findings in reaching adverse credibility findings and,
    secondly, in basing his decision, in part, on an unsustainable  finding
    as to the appellant's realisation of her sexuality.

18. These are material errors of law: the outcome of the appeal might  have
    been different if the positive findings had been  taken  into  account,
    not least because the negative finding as regards the appellant's self-
    realisation is at the core of the appellant's claim to  be  a  lesbian.
    It may be that, were the matter to be decided again, the outcome is  no
    different but fairness dictates that a proper analysis of the  evidence
    is undertaken, in the light of the background material and authorities.
     That  requires  a  fresh  hearing  (as  was  agreed  by  the  parties'
    representatives before me).

Decision

19. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of a material error on a point of  law.   The  decision  is  set
    aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be  dealt
    with afresh, pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v),  before  any  judge
    aside from Judge N J Bennett.


Signed           A M Black                   Dated 18 November 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Direction Regarding Anonymity - R14,  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed           A M Black                   Dated 18 November 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
