
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA098142016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1st August, 2017                       |On 07 August, 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                    A I N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons of Counsel, instructed by Migrant
Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on [ ] 1982.   He  left
    Iraq some time in February  2016  using  his  own  Iraqi  passport  and
    travelled to Turkey before arriving in the United Kingdom clandestinely
    in a lorry.  He arrived on 25th February 2016 and claimed asylum.

2.   In a decision dated 25th August 2016, the Secretary  of  State  refused
    to recognise the appellant as a refugee and the appellant  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  His appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge I D Boyes at Newport on 23rd March 2017.

3.   Evidence was submitted to the judge which was intended  to  demonstrate
    that conditions that the appellant would have to satisfy  in  order  to
    remain long-term legally in the IKR  region  of  Iraq,  were  extremely
    difficult and that  he  would  find  it  almost  impossible  to  obtain
    employment and residence.  It was also  suggested  that  the  appellant
    would not be able to obtain a passport from the Iraqi  Embassy  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge found the appellant not  to  be  a  credible
    witness and dismissed  his  appeals  on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian
    protection grounds and on human rights grounds.

4.   The appellant, dissatisfied with the judge's decision, sought leave  to
    appeal and First-tier Tribunal Judge E S Martins granted leave on  21st
    April last, indicating that the grounds  disclose  arguable  errors  of
    law.

5.   At the hearing before me Mr Mills told me that it was now  accepted  on
    behalf of the respondent that the determination did contain  errors  of
    law.

6.   Given the likely delay which would occur  if  I  were  to  reserve  the
    appeal in the Upper Tribunal and hear the matter myself, I feel I  have
    no alternative but to remit the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal.
     I therefore set aside the determination and remit the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  by  a  judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boyes.  Two hours should be allowed for the  hearing  of
    the appeal and a Kurdish Sorani interpreter will be required.

Anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley                          Signed    3rd  August
2017



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

















