
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09343/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgation      |
|On 26 April 2019                     |On 10 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                         MR OMAR MOHAMMED ALI MALHOE
                          (Anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain     (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan   (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    On 8 September 2017 the Secretary  of  State  decided  to  refuse  the
claimant's application for international  protection.  He  appealed  to  the
First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal). The tribunal  heard  the  appeal  on  25
July 2018 and dismissed it. The decision of the tribunal  was  sent  to  the
parties on 30 July 2018. A grant  of  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal followed and, on 14 February 2019,  I  decided  to  set  aside  the
tribunal's decision because the making of that decision involved the  making
of errors of law. My full reasons for doing so may be found  in  my  written
decision of 14 February  2019  which  was  sent  on  that  day.  It  is  not
necessary for me to  repeat  those  reasons  here  but,  in  a  nutshell,  I
concluded that the tribunal had considered irrelevant matters when  deciding
whether the claimant's home area in Iraq  remained  a  "contested  area"  as
that term has been used in AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544
(IAC) and subsequent decisions  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  that  it  had
inadequately explained  an  alternative  finding  that  the  claimant  could
internally relocate to the southern part of Iraq.

2.         My having set aside the tribunal's decision, I directed that  the
decision be remade in the Upper Tribunal, a course of action urged  upon  me
on behalf of the claimant. But I directed a further hearing to  aid  in  the
remaking process. That hearing took place on 26 April  2019.  Representation
was as stated above. I am grateful to  each  representative.  I  heard  oral
evidence from the  claimant  but  from  no  other  witnesses.  He  gave  his
evidence in English. There was a difficulty in that I  was  told  an  Arabic
speaking  interpreter  had  been  sought  but  a   Kurdish-Sorani   speaking
interpreter had erroneously been booked. But Mr Hussain  told  me,  after  a
short adjournment so that he could  take  instructions,  that  the  claimant
spoke good English and did not require an interpreter. He indicated  he  was
content to proceed and that the claimant was content to  give  his  evidence
in English. So, that is what happened. I did not detect,  at  any  point  in
the proceedings, any difficulty on  the  part  of  the  claimant  either  in
understanding questions or answering them. Nor did anyone suggest there  was
any such difficulty.

3.    By way of background, the claimant is an Iraqi national and an  ethnic
Arab from Mosul which is the provincial capital of the  Nineveh  Governorate
in Iraq.  He is a Sunni Muslim. He was born on 30 March 1985.  He was, in
2014, asked by members or associates of the organisation sometimes  referred
to as "ISIS" to work for them as  a  translator.  He  refused  and  was  ill
treated by them as a result, such  ill  treatment  including  his  receiving
lashes and being detained for one month. Upon being released he  decided  to
flee Mosul. All of that had been accepted by the Secretary of State when  he
had  considered  the  claim  and  it  represented  my  starting  point  when
considering how I should remake the  decision.  But  to  continue  with  the
background, the claimant says he was assisted by family and by an  agent  in
leaving Iraq, a country he says he no longer felt safe in, and that he  came
to the United Kingdom (UK) having travelled through a  number  of  countries
including Greece, Austria, Germany and France. He entered the  UK  illegally
on 12 March 2017 and made his claim.

4.       In pursuing his claim and  appeal,  the  claimant  argued  that  if
returned to Mosul he would be at risk at the hands  of  those  who  had  ill
treated him previously; that Mosul is located  in  the  Ninevah  Governorate
which remains a contested area so  return  would  expose  him  to  the  risk
envisaged at Article 15c of  the  Qualification  Directive;  that  he  would
further be at risk in Mosul or indeed anywhere in  Iraq  as  a  Sunni-Muslim
(the potential persecutors being Shia individuals,  Shia  militias  or  Shia
members of the authorities); that the antipathy towards Sunni-Muslims  would
mean he could  not  internally  relocate;  and  that  he  does  not  possess
appropriate identity documentation or the  means  to  obtain  it  such  that
either he would be destitute which would bring about a breach of  Article  3
of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)  or  it  would  be  unduly
harsh to require him to relocate. As to  documentation,  the  primary  focus
was upon the question of whether the claimant has a CSID card or is able  to
get one. It was accepted that such a document is crucial  in  that,  without
one, an Iraqi national in Iraq is not able to access government services  or
take official employment.

5.         In remaking my  decision  it  has  proved  necessary  for  me  to
consider all of the above matters. In doing so I have taken account  of  the
oral evidence I have heard,  the  written  documentation  prepared  for  the
hearing before the tribunal and the hearing before me  and  the  submissions
which have been made to me.  In  considering  entitlement  to  international
protection I have reminded myself that the claimant has the burden of  proof
but that the standard of proof  is  a  low  one.  It  is  a  standard  often
referred to as "the real risk test".

6.    I ask myself, first of all, whether the claimant can safely return  to
Mosul. Mr Hussain argues that he cannot and that one of the reasons is  that
he would face a real risk of  persecution  at  the  hands  of  his  previous
persecutors or their associates.  I have resolved that argument against  the
claimant. There is dispute between the parties as to whether Mosul is in  an
area which can still be regarded as contested. But there can be  no  serious
dispute about the fact that Mosul has seen  significant  changes  in  recent
times. It was controlled by ISIS at the time the claimant  was  accepted  as
having been ill treated there. But that was in  2014.   The  Country  Policy
and Information Note: Iraq: Security  and  Humanitarian  Situation:  Version
5.0: November 2018 (the November 2018 CPIN) records at paragraph 8.1.2  that
in July 2017 the Iraqi  Prime  Minister  had  visited  Mosul  to  mark  "the
completion of major  combat  operations  there  against  the  Islamic  State
forces that had taken the city in  June  2014".   There  is,  I  appreciate,
information contained in the same document and in other  reports  before  me
which demonstrate an ongoing difficulty with ISIS or ISIS  inspired  attacks
which has been described as a "robust insurgency"  but  the  point  is  that
ISIS is no longer in operational control of  Mosul.  The  Iraqi  authorities
are, though their task in maintaining or  attempting  to  maintain  or  even
create order is not without its difficulties. But it seems to me  inevitable
that the removal of ISIS from power after an armed struggle will have  meant
many, though I accept not  all,  previous  members  or  supporters  of  that
regime will have fled, been arrested and detained or will have been  killed.
Against that background it seems to me it is no more than fanciful to  argue
that the claimant's previous assailants from as long ago as 2014 will  still
be present to harm him today.

7.    I now move on to the contested area  issue.  It  was  decided  in  AA,
cited above, that the Ninevah Governorate was a contested area at  the  time
that case was decided. So, at that time the Article 15c  risk  was  present.
AA is a Country Guidance case. That means  I  may  depart  from  it  in  the
circumstances set out in Practice Direction 12.2 and 12.4 and the  UT  (IAC)
Guidance Note 2011, no. 2, paragraphs 11 and 12 but otherwise must  not.  In
that context  I  am  really  asking  whether  there  is  fresh  evidence  of
substantial and durable change. Before me Mr Tan relies upon the content  of
the November 2018 CPIN as evidence of such a  change.  I  accept,  as  noted
above, that there is evidence of the ISIS forces  having  been  defeated  to
the extent that they no longer control territory in  Mosul.  But  that  same
document  contains  evidence  of  an  ongoing  insurgency.  It  is  said  at
paragraph 8.1.1 that security conditions have improved  since  ISIS  control
of territory was disrupted but that ISIS fighters remained  active  in  some
parts of Iraq. At paragraph 8.1.2 it is said that Iraqi security  operations
are ongoing against  ISIS  fighters  in  various  areas  of  Iraq  including
Ninevah. At paragraph 8.1.5 it is said that ISIS is now  pursuing  "its  old
hit and run targets in Iraq". I bear in mind  that  on  the  claimant's  own
evidence  his  family  had  left  Mosul  but  have  now  returned   to   it.
Nevertheless, I have concluded that given the evidence  of  ongoing  violent
attacks, whilst the conditions in Mosul have changed, I cannot be  satisfied
that the stringent test for departure from Country  Guidance  has  yet  been
met, at least not on  the  material  before  me.  So,  I  have  decided  the
claimant cannot safely return to Iraq because if  he  does  so  he  will  be
exposed to an Article 15c risk.

8.        However, the claimant has not persuaded me that  he  would  be  at
risk in Mosul solely in consequence of his status as a  Sunni-Muslim.  There
is simply no persuasive evidence of that and it is difficult  to  understand
the decision of his family, presumably Sunni-Muslims themselves,  to  choose
to return if they would be targeted on the basis of their religion. Nor  has
the assertion in the Secretary of State's decision  letter  of  8  September
2017 that  some  80%  of  the  population  of  Mosul  is  Sunni-Muslim  been
challenged before me or, so far as I can see, elsewhere. But my view  as  to
this does not matter very much since I have decided there  is  risk  to  the
claimant in Mosul, anyway.

9.         Having decided there is risk in Mosul, I must go on  to  consider
whether the claimant can  safely  relocate  within  Iraq  and,  if  he  can,
whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so. This causes  me  to
address  a  number  of  matters  but  I  shall  start  with  the  issue   of
documentation.  There is no doubt at all that when he came to the UK he  did
so in possession of at  least  one  Iraqi  identity  document.  I  say  that
because he has given it to the Secretary of State and there  are  copies  of
it in a number of bundles of documents in front of me. Mr Tan  produced  the
original for viewing at the hearing. The Secretary of  State's  position  is
that it is in fact the  claimant's  CSID  card.  The  Secretary  of  State's
previous position seems to  have  been  that  it  was  some  other  sort  of
identity document. But Mr Tan says it is obvious  it  is  a  CSID  when  one
looks at the detail of what such a document contains as set out in a  report
entitled  Iraq:  Travel  documents  and  other  identity   documents   ("the
documents report").  He has in mind, in particular, what is  said  at  pages
16 and 17 of that report. The  claimant's  position,  as  explained  in  his
witness statement of 10 April 2019 which  he  adopted  before  me,  is  that
whilst it is an identity document of some sort, he does not know  what  type
of document it is. Mr Hussain points out that the document is in Arabic  and
has not been translated nor authenticated (one  way  or  the  other)  by  an
expert.

10.    There are entries on the card which, on  the  face  of  it,  seem  to
match what one might expect from the description in  the  documents  report.
For example, there is a number on the top left-hand  side  where,  according
to the description, one would expect to find a serial number.  But  I  agree
with Mr Hussain that my attempts to match  the  card  with  the  description
cannot be decisive given the  points  he  has  made.  However,  I  find  the
claimant's assertion that he does not  know  what  the  document  is  to  be
significantly unpersuasive. As the tribunal  itself  noted,  he  has  had  a
university education and has worked as a teacher. As was stressed in AA  and
other judgments and Upper Tribunal decisions  which  followed  it,  identity
documentation is something which is of real importance  in  Iraq.  I  cannot
accept that an educated and intelligent man from  Iraq  and  who  has  lived
most of his life in Iraq  does  not  know  what  identity  documentation  he
possesses and does not know what the particular document in  the  possession
of the Secretary of State (which of course he will be able to  read  because
it is written in Arabic and he is literate and of Arad ethnicity) is. So,  I
have concluded he has sought to deliberately mislead me about that.  I  have
also concluded that he must have done so for a reason.  The  only  reason  I
can think of is that he knows it is a CSID card, he knows  that  having  one
is unhelpful to his case, and he  would  rather  it  not  be  known  by  any
immigration decision-makers, that that is what it is.

11.        As to  other  documentation,  he  says  that  he  left  some  (he
mentions a document he calls his "nationality document") back home  in  Iraq
but that any such documents have now been destroyed. In so far as it may  be
relevant I do not accept that. It seems to me that if he  had  brought  some
identity documentation with him he would have brought all of it. Further,  I
have not been able to believe him as to what he has said about documents.  I
find he is documented and that the card referred to above is  a  CSID  card.
On that basis, not only is he returnable to Iraq but  he  will  be  able  to
evidence who he is and access services in Iraq when he returns.

12.        The above though does not of  itself  mean  he  can  relocate  in
Iraq. All the finding about the CSID card does is establish  that  since  he
has one (or strictly speaking since the Secretary of State has
one) it cannot be said he cannot relocate in  consequence  of  the  lack  of
one. The Secretary of State, in his decision  letter,  lacked  a  degree  of
clarity about what might be regarded as a  safe  or  appropriate  place  for
relocation. The Secretary  of  State  clearly  thought  the  claimant  could
relocate to "the Southern Governorates" but it is less clear whether he  was
positively asserting he could also return to Baghdad or  the  Baghdad  belts
(see paragraphs 67 to 70 of the decision  letter).  Since  Mr  Tan  did  not
pursue relocation to Baghdad and since the Secretary of  State  was  unclear
about it, I have decided not to consider that  as  a  possible  destination.
That leaves the  Southern  Governorates  which  were  clearly  stated  as  a
potential place of relocation in the decision letter.

13.      The claimant says, in his witness statement of 10 April 2019,  that
he cannot so relocate because as a Sunni-Muslim he would  not  "be  welcome"
in the South of Iraq. He adds that his name "Omar" marks him  out  as  being
Sunni from Mosul. In his witness statement of 11 January 2018, he  says  the
majority of the population in the South are Shia Muslims. He  hints  at  the
risk of sectarian violence. He also relies on an expert report  prepared  by
Dr R Fatah and  which  is  dated  21  November  2017.  There  is  a  section
concerning and indeed entitled "Targeting  of  Sunni  Arabs".  At  paragraph
245, it is stated that "several men have been killed  purely  on  the  basis
that their name was indicative of their Sunni or Shia  faith".  It  is  said
that the claimant's own name is an obvious Sunni name. At paragraph 304,  it
is suggested that the claimant if relocating to the South would  not  be  at
risk of generalised (as opposed to sectarian) violence and that  such  would
be "less logistically difficult"  because  of  his  ethnicity  and  language
skills. But it is also said that "relocation to  the  South  at  a  time  of
heightened  sectarian  tension  may  result  in  him  being   subjected   to
discrimination or at even (sic) potentially violence". So, I need  to  think
about all of that.

14.      It seems to me obvious that what is described  by  Dr  Fatah  falls
short of demonstrating the claimant would be at real  risk  of  persecution,
serious harm or article 3 ECHR ill treatment in the South on  the  basis  of
his ethnicity.  After all,  the  reference  to  "several  men"  having  been
killed, whilst obviously tragic, does not suggest the risk  is  substantial.
Nor was that seriously argued before me. Nor was  I  specifically  taken  to
any other item of background material which went beyond what  Dr  Fatah  had
to say. But that does not mean, of itself,  that  it  would  not  be  unduly
harsh to expect him to relocate. But as to that,  he  is  educated,  he  has
previous work experience in Iraq as a teacher, he  is  on  the  face  of  it
healthy, he is an Arabic speaker and that is a  language  widely  spoken  in
the South of Iraq, and he has demonstrated a degree  of  resilience  through
leaving Iraq and accomplishing a lengthy and no doubt difficult  journey  to
the UK. Against that, there is nothing to suggest  he  has  any  friends  or
family in the South, he would be starting life afresh, and  there  would  be
at least some degree of risk of sectarian discrimination  or  even  violence
albeit not to the extent that, with respect to violence, there  would  be  a
real risk of it.  In balancing all of that  I  have  concluded  whilst  life
would be difficult in the South, it would not be  unduly  harsh  to  require
him to relocate there. He would be able to travel there from  Baghdad  armed
with his identity documents, he would be able to look  for  work,  Dr  Fatah
does not say it would be hard for him to find work  and  he  would,  in  due
course, be able, on the evidence before me, to rebuild his life.

15.       So, in remaking the  decision,  I  have  decided  to  dismiss  the
claimant's appeal from the Secretary of  State's  decision  of  8  September
2017.

Decision

The claimant's appeal is dismissed.
Anonymity is not directed.

Signed:
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
Dated: 7 June 2019
