
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09818/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|via Skype for Business               |On 16 September 2020                 |
|On 11 September 2020                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     MHS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Wtb, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1990 and is a male  citizen  of  Iraq.  By  a
    decision dated 30 September 2019, the Secretary of  State  refused  the
    appellant's claim for international protection. The appellant  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  21
    January 2020, dismissed the appeal. The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 11 September  2020,  Mr
    Holmes, who appeared for the appellant before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and Upper Tribunal, developed the grounds of appeal. He submitted  that
    the appellant's case had always been that when his home town of  Sinjar
    had been invaded by Isis, he and his family had  fled.  His  claim  had
    subsequently been misconstrued by the respondent, the  decision  letter
    wrongly claiming that the  appellant  had  claimed  that  he  had  been
    specifically targeted  by  Isis.  Such  a  claim  had  never  been  the
    appellant's case. That error had been picked up, in turn, by the  judge
    with the result that it had tainted her decision. Secondly,  the  judge
    had failed to deal with the submission advanced before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that it  was  reasonably  likely  that,  given  the  level  of
    destruction in the appellant's home area, the records of the government
    which the  appellant  would  need  to  access  in  order  to  obtain  a
    replacement identity card, had been  destroyed.  Thirdly,  the  judge's
    findings at  [37]  that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to  obtain  a
    replacement CSID through the Iraqi consular facilities  in  the  United
    Kingdom ignored the fact that the appellant did not have access to  his
    passport or  any  other  document  capable  of  proving  his  identity.
    Finally, at [23] the judge had written:

         "The appellant has given vague evidence which is lacking in  detail
         which he could reasonably be expected to  have  provided  regarding
         how his journey out of Syria to Europe has been funded, how he  has
         supported himself on that journey and how his family have supported
         themselves since being  displaced  from  their  home  village.  His
         evidence regarding is access to  his  volume  and  page  references
         which could be required to re-document himself was also  vague  and
         not consistent with caselaw or background evidence.  All  of  these
         aspects of the appellant's case are important to the narrative that
         he has provided and I would have expected him to have been able  to
         provide evidence that was detailed and coherent in answer to  clear
         and open questions which were put to him. I find that  his  failure
         to do so is  undermining  of  his  credibility  and  that  this  is
         particularly relevant to the issue of re-documentation."

 3. The appellant complains that the judge has not explained in  sufficient
    detail why she considered his evidence to be vague and inconsistent. In
    his asylum interview at Q124 et seq, the appellant had been asked about
    his journey from Iraq. He had given the date of his  departure  details
    of his journey by foot and by  car,  the  countries  through  which  he
    travelled and the funding  arrangements  provided  by  his  father  and
    maternal uncle. The interviewer had asked why the appellant had  failed
    to mention travelling to France and the appellant replied that  he  had
    'forgotten' [Q134]. He went on to explain how he had remained in the so-
    called 'Jungle' which I understand is in Calais.

 4. In his submissions, Mr Lindsay for the Secretary of  State,  complained
    that Mr Holmes was in no position to give evidence as to what had  been
    said at the First-tier Tribunal hearing. No witness statement had  been
    produced nor had a record of proceedings been requested from the First-
    tier Tribunal. However, Mr Lindsay subsequently acknowledged  that  the
    Secretary of State had not replied to  the  directions  issued  by  the
    Upper Tribunal (following the beginning of the  coronavirus  emergency)
    and that it had been open  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  take  the
    initiative by filing and serving her own record of the proceedings.

 5. As regards this latter point, I located the typed record of proceedings
    in the tribunal file. I read out to both  advocates  the  part  of  the
    record of proceedings which concerned  the  cross  examination  by  the
    presenting  officer  of  the  appellant.  I  gave  both   parties   the
    opportunity to comment. I find that there is no reason to suppose  that
    the judge's record is inaccurate nor does either party submit  that  it
    is. That record indicates that the appellant  gave  short  and  concise
    answers to the questions put to him. I am unable to identify any answer
    which the appellant gave in court which might reasonably  be  described
    as vague or inconsistent. As I noted above, the appellant did forget at
    the asylum interview to mention that he had  travelled  to  France  but
    this part of his journey was referred to elsewhere in his evidence  and
    also later in the same interview where he refers to having  resided  in
    the Calais area. In so far as the appellant made an error at  interview
    in his account of the countries through  which  he  travelled,  it  was
    manifestly  not  so  serious  an  error  as  to  justify  the   judge's
    description of it as vague and inconsistent.

 6. In the passage of the decision which I have  quoted  above,  the  judge
    complains that the appellant was vague in his evidence  as  regards  to
    how he funded himself on his journey and how his family have  supported
    themselves since being displaced from their home village. The appellant
    has consistently stated that he was funded by his father  and  maternal
    uncle, that he only remained for six days with his family in Syria  and
    so he did not know how they had coped financially after he had left and
    that it was 'financially hard' for his family now they have returned to
    Kurdistan. I  do  not  know  what  part  of  that  evidence  the  judge
    considered to be vague or lacking in detail. Clearly, her  findings  at
    [23]  contributed  to  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the  appellant's
    evidence could not be trusted. Moreover, I believe there is some  force
    in the appellant submission that his relatively  straightforward  claim
    has been elaborated by the Secretary of State only then to be rejected.
    I find that there is sufficient error in the judge's  analysis  of  the
    appellant's evidence such as to  justify  the  setting  aside  of  this
    decision. There will need to  be  a  new  fact-finding  exercise  at  a
    hearing de novo. In the light of that conclusion, I do not  propose  to
    deal with the other grounds in detail. I do, however, consider that the
    judge's  findings  on  the  appellant's  ability  to  obtain   identity
    documentation while  still  here  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  not  in
    accordance with  country  guidance  and  consequently  flawed  for  the
    reasons advanced by Mr Holmes.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the FTT is set aside. None  of  the  findings  of  fact
    shall stand. The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal for that
    tribunal to remake the decision at or following a hearing de novo.


Signed                                                          Date      11
September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.











































