
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09695/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 February 2018                           |On 21 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                    [a m]
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Chirico, Counsel instructed by Finsbury Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Albania  whose  claim  to  require
    international protection was refused by the Secretary of State and  his
    subsequent appeal to First-tier Tribunal Judge Easterman dismissed in a
    decision promulgated on 21st November 2017.


 2. Grounds of application were lodged.  It was said  that  the  judge  had
    required  corroboration  in  circumstances  that  were   unlawful   and
    irrational.   The  judge  did  not  find  fault  with  the  Appellant's
    evidence, which evidence had been consistent.  The  judge  had  made  a
    requirement for documentary corroboration  of  the  account  which  was
    unlawful and irrational for a number of  reasons.   In  particular  the
    judge said that one would  have  expected  there  to  have  been  press
    reports which might have been available to the Appellant.  The  grounds
    observe that even if the Appellant had produced a press report it would
    not have been given any weight.   Reference  is  made  to  the  country
    guidance case of EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012]  UKUT  00348  (IAC)
    which confirmed that the Tribunal did not consider that a press  report
    concerning a  blood  feud  would  normally  add  enough  weight  to  an
    Appellant's account for a blood feud.  The Appellant as a  child  could
    not therefore realistically be expected to  provide  corroboration  and
    the Appellant had been consistent in his evidence and  it  was  unclear
    why he would need corroboration.  Secondly,  there  was  a  failure  to
    consider objective evidence  in  relation  to  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation.  Reference was made to two country guidance cases which had
    been ignored by the judge.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis  who
    said it was arguable that given his age and the judge's  acceptance  of
    his account that an additional requirement for corroboration was unduly
    onerous given the guidance in  ST  (Corroboration  -  Kasolo)  Ethiopia
    [2004] UKIAT 00119.


 4. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.


 5.  Mr  Chirico  relied  on  his  grounds.   The  judge  had  imposed  the
    requirement for corroboration on  the  account  which  was  simply  not
    justified.  In particular the judge had referred to the  usefulness  of
    press reports which had been discounted by the Tribunal in the  country
    guidance case of EH.


 6. There was clear guidance given in country guidance cases on  the  issue
    of internal relocation which had not been dealt with by the  judge.   I
    was asked to set the decision aside and remit the appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


 7. For the Home Office Ms Everett  agreed  that  the  reference  to  press
    reports was troubling.  Nevertheless  simply  because  the  Appellant's
    account was consistent did not mean that the judge was bound to  accept
    it.


 8. I reserved my decision.


Conclusions


 9. The judge noted (paragraph 64 of the  decision)  that  the  Appellant's
    answers  taking  into  account  his  age   "do   not   give   rise   to
    inconsistencies per se", but he went on to say  that  the  case  relied
    purely on his account when one might have expected to  see  some  other
    evidence.  In paragraph 65 he said the account given by  the  Appellant
    was a very straightforward one.  In paragraph 63 the  judge  said  that
    the Appellant asserted his father killed Mr [F] after a  dispute  about
    the blocking off of water to his father's  land.   The  judge  said  "I
    cannot rule out that that occurred" but went on to say that  one  would
    have expected there to have been press reports or something of the like
    which might have been available to the Appellant.


10. The inescapable inference from reading  the  judge's  decision  in  its
    totality is that he was requiring corroboration  on  the  Appellant  to
    produce further written evidence.  The reference to expecting there  to
    have been press reports is unfortunate  because  the  country  guidance
    case of EH makes it clear that a press report would  not  normally  add
    much weight to an Appellant's account of a blood feud.   The  reasoning
    is that Albanian press reports carry limited, if  any,  weight  because
    the evidence is that  stories  can  be  freely  inserted  in  both  the
    national and local press whether or not there is any substance to them.


11. It therefore seems to me that the judge has fallen into error and erred
    in law by requiring the Appellant to produce corroboration  of  a  kind
    which may not be helpful in any event. I conclude  that  the  error  is
    material one and that the decision is not safe. It  is  true  that  the
    judge goes on to consider the issue of internal relocation but  as  was
    pointed out he does  not  refer  to  two  country  guidance  cases  and
    emphasises (paragraph 75) that he does not  accept  that  it  has  been
    shown that there is in fact a blood feud between the Appellant's family
    and the [F] family.  It seems to me that these findings  are  not  safe
    either principally because the judge's findings on whether or  not  the
    Appellant fears a blood feud  in  Albania  have  been  tainted  by  his
    findings that he does not fear such a feud.


12. Because the judgment is not safe it seems to me that it is necessary to
    set it aside and that further fact finding is  necessary.   Mr  Chirico
    accepted that he could seek no more than  a  remit  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which given that further fact finding is necessary seems to me
    to be the appropriate course.


13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal should be allowed  to
    stand.  Under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the  2007  Act  and  of  Practice
    Statement 7.2 the nature  and  extent  of  the  judicial  fact  finding
    necessary for the decision to be re-made is such that it is appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed   JG Macdonald                            Date 20th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
