
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09253/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 03 October 2018                           |On 02 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                    mr sj
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Timson, Counsel instructed by Pure Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Morris dated 20 March 2018 dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent dated 19 June 2017 refusing  his
    protection and human rights claim.

2.   The Appellant is a national of Pakistan who first  entered  the  United
    Kingdom with entry clearance valid from 4 November  2013  to  20  March
    2015 as a Tier 4 student.  His leave to enter was curtailed on 10  June
    2014 with no right of appeal.  He was encountered by the police  on  29
    October 2016 and  served  with  administrative  removal  papers  as  an
    overstayer.  He claimed asylum, the screening interview taking place on
    29 December 2016 and the full SEF interview taking  place  on  1  April
    2017.

3.   The Appellant sought protection on the grounds that in Pakistan he  had
    attended a Christian church with a friend, starting from 2009.   Having
    been born a Muslim, his family objected to his attendance at the church
    when they found out about this.  The Appellant  claimed  to  have  been
    beaten by his family, but he remained living with them until he came to
    the United Kingdom in  2013.   When  he  claimed  asylum  in  2016  the
    appellant claimed that since he had been in the United Kingdom, he  had
    actually converted to Christianity and attended a church  regularly  in
    the UK.  He feared serious harm from his family and others  because  it
    was known, or would become known, that he had  converted  his  religion
    from Islam to  Christianity,  and  this  would  be  seen  adversely  in
    Pakistan.

4.   The Respondent refused the application  for  reasons  set  out  in  the
    decision letter of 19  June  2017  which  were,  in  summary  that  his
    conversion to Christianity and the problems with his relatives  due  to
    his change of religion were not credible.

5.   The Appellant appealed, that appeal  coming  before  the  judge  on  13
    March 2018.  The appellant applied for an adjournment  of  the  hearing
    inter alia to permit a minister to attend form the  appellant's  church
    in the UK. The judge refused that request for reasons set out  at  [5]-
    [6]. The appeal proceeded and the judge made certain findings which can
    be set out, in summary, as follows:

    (i)  The Appellant had not adduced any oral evidence from  any  witness
         who  would  have  supported  his  claim  to   have   converted   to
         Christianity and had not therefore  produced  a  witness  according
         with  the  principles  set  out  in  the  case  of   Ali   Dorodian
         (01/TH/1537).


    (ii) The judge found that he had been unable to  satisfy  himself  that
         the Appellant's claim "to adhere to the Christian faith  is  not  a
         transient claim brought into existence purely for the  purposes  of
         pursuing an asylum claim" [37].


    (iii)    The Appellant showed only a limited knowledge of the Christian
         faith, and had made a mistake as to the name of the church that  he
         was said to attend [38].


    (iv) The judge found  that  there  was  confusion  in  the  Appellant's
         evidence with regard to certain key dates.  For example at [39]:


             "... the Appellant stated that he had told his family that  he
             was practising Christianity in April 2015  but  that  he  only
             began to refer to himself as a Christian  in  July  or  August
             2015.  His explanation for this  apparent  inconsistency  that
             when he had referred to practising Christianity he  had  meant
             practising in the sense of getting to know or  learning  about
             Christianity rather than being a committed Christian  was  not
             persuasive, even to the lower standard, as I do  not  find  it
             credible that if the Appellant had been at  such  an  inchoate
             stage in terms of his faith in April 2015 (as  he  maintains),
             he  would  have  told  his  family  that  he  was   practising
             Christianity in the full knowledge of the impact that  telling
             them that would have in terms of his relationships  with  them
             and Pakistani society generally."


    (v)  The judge also had regard at [40] to Section 8 of the  Asylum  and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004, noting that he
         had entered the United Kingdom in November 2013 and had not claimed
         asylum until some three years later,  and  then  only  after  being
         arrested and detained by the  police,  this  represented  behaviour
         undermining the Appellant's credibility.


    (vi) The judge held at [41]:


             "Having considered all the evidence before me in the round  in
             accordance with the decision in Karanakaran and  applying  the
             guidance  set  out  above  from  SJ  (Christian  Apostates   -
             Evidence) Iran, on the basis of the  Appellant's  evidence  he
             has failed even to the lower standard to discharge the  burden
             of proof upon him to satisfy me that he is genuinely a convert
             from Islam to Christianity."


    (vii)    Further, at [47] the judge held as follows:


             "47 In this regard, I obviously accept the general  submission
             made by the Appellant's representative regarding the  guidance
             in the CIG not least that it is recorded at  paragraph  2.3.2,
             'It would  be  difficult  for  those  known  to  be  Christian
             converts to live  freely  and  openly  in  Pakistan'  and,  at
             paragraph  2.7.1,  'Where  a  person's   fear   is   of   ill-
             treatment/persecution at the hands of the state  or  non-state
             actors on the basis that they are a  Christian  convert,  they
             will not be able to relocate to escape that risk.'


             ...


             48  Self  evidently,  however,  this  objective   information,
             particularly those sections of the CIG quoted above and  those
             relied upon by the  respondent's  representative  as  detailed
             above, are predicated upon  the  individuals  referred  to  in
             those  documents  been  Christians  (or  belonging  to   other
             minority religions) or, worse from the perspective of the CIG,
             converts to Christianity from Islam and, as indicated above, I
             find on the evidence that has been put forward before me  that
             this can't is neither. ".


    (viii)   The judge concluded at [49]:


             "In summary thus far, for the above reasons, the Appellant has
             failed to discharge the burden of proof upon him to satisfy me
             that substantial grounds have been shown for  believing  that,
             if returned to his home area of Pakistan, he would face a real
             risk of suffering serious harm.  That being  so,  neither  the
             issue of sufficiency  of  state  protection  nor  of  internal
             relocation elsewhere in Pakistan arise  for  consideration  in
             this appeal."


6.   The Appellant's appeal was consequently dismissed.

7.   In grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  dated  3  April  2018  the
    Appellant argues, in summary, as follows:

    (i)  The Appellant asserted that he had attended a Christian church  in
         Pakistan with a friend and because of that he was at risk from both
         his family and the authorities in Pakistan as someone who  will  be
         perceived to be a Christian convert.  His family had  made  threats
         to kill him and had indicated others would  kill  him  also.    The
         judge made no findings on whether the Appellant did indeed attend a
         Christian church in Pakistan with a friend, and no finding is  made
         on the likelihood of his family having made the threats he  claimed
         and the consequences of that for the Appellant.  (Grounds, para  4-
         6)


    (ii) "In the instant appeal it is submitted that the Appellant arguably
         should  have  been  given  the  benefit  of  the   doubt   on   the
         misunderstanding that the attendance of his priest  in  person  was
         necessary, ..." (Grounds, para 8)


    (iii)    "... but even if that is wrong, on the basis  of  the  Judge's
         reasons for not adjourning the  appeal,  it  is  submitted  that  a
         finding was required on whether he had indeed  attended  church  in
         Pakistan, whether his family had made the threats they had and what
         the consequence for the Appellant would be on return to  Pakistan."
         (Grounds, para 8)


8.   The grounds also argued that in light of the aforesaid alleged  errors,
    the judge's assessment as to whether there would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into Pakistan on return, as per  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) was erroneous in law.

9.   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Nightingale in a decision dated 16 April 2018 on the  basis  that  such
    alleged errors were arguable.

10.  I heard from the parties today.   Mr  Timson  adopted  the  grounds  of
    appeal and expanded upon them.  Mr Bates defended the decision  of  the
    judge arguing that there was no material error in the decision.  I also
    asked the parties to address me on whether any error on the part of the
    judge would have been material, on the basis that the Appellant appears
    to emanate from  a  particular  town,  and  the  evidence  in  the  SEF
    interview was that he did not have  any  extended  relatives  in  other
    parts of Pakistan; if, as found by the judge, the Appellant did not  to
    have a genuine belief in Christianity, I invited submissions on whether
    the Appellant could internally relocate away from his home area.

    Discussion

11.  Insofar as the appellant argues that the  judge  erred  in  failing  to
    make a finding the appellant had informed his family after being in the
    United Kingdom that he had converted to Christianity, I find that  such
    submission is not made  out.  The  judge  held  at  [39]  that  if  the
    Appellant was at an inchoate stage in terms of his faith in April 2015,
    it was not credible that he would have informed his family that he  was
    practising Christianity.  I find that  that  is  a  sufficiently  clear
    finding that the judge has rejected the appellant's proposition that he
    informed his family whilst in the United Kingdom that he had  converted
    to Christianity.

12   In further considering this appeal I find that  it  is  appropriate  to
    set out at least some of the Appellant's evidence given  in  interview.
    It is important to make a distinction, I find, between threats said  to
    have been made against him in Pakistan, and threats said to  have  been
    made against him whilst he was in the United Kingdom.  It was  apparent
    that his family had found out that he had started attending a Christian
    church before he had left Pakistan - see SEF at B8 question 40.  At  B7
    question 35 he had said:

         "Because I told you I used to start going to church with my  friend
         you know, after that my family did not speak.  The  family  stopped
         me from going with him, but I still want to go to church  and  they
         were being strict they wanted me to go to mosque  they  would  beat
         me.  After that I said I don't want to  live  here  and  I  said  I
         wanted to go".


13.  It seems  to  me  that  there  is  no  other  evidence  of  threats  or
    mistreatment of the Appellant whilst he was still  in  Pakistan,  other
    than the adverse reaction as described above.

14.  It is apparent that he continued to be in touch with  his  parents  and
    when he first came to the United Kingdom - they  continued  to  support
    him financially - see B7 question 32.

15.  The threats said to have been received in the United  Kingdom  are  set
    out at B13 question 129 onwards:

         "129.    Q:   What threats have you receive (sic)?


              A:  They said I am a sinner and they will obviously kill me.


         130. Q:  Who said that?


              A:  My own family they said I am not Muslim anymore.


         131. Q:  Have you ever actually received a threat?


              A:  When I used to talk to them.


         132. Q:  What did they actually say?


              A:  They said they will kill me and other people will kill me.


         133. Q:  How did you receive these threats?


              A:  On the phone when I used to talk to them."


    The Appellant also gave the following evidence:

         "144.    Q:   If your problems began in 2011, how did  you  managed
                    to remain in Pakistan for a further 2 years?


              A:  It wasn't that bad they thought I went for fun.


         148. Q:  But I don't  understand  why  they  would  be  comfortable
                    allowing you to attend church if you were a Muslim.  Can
                    you explain?


              A:  They thought I was going for fun with my friend.


         162. Q:  You claim that your problems began in 2011;  however  your
                    family paid for a visa to the UK  in  2013.   Why  would
                    they do this if they wanted to kill you?


              A:  They thought I was just with my  friend,  they  thought  I
                    would be ok.  But I was attracted to Christianity."


16.  Although it is clear that the judge made  a  negative  finding  on  the
    Appellant's assertion to be a genuine convert to  Christianity  in  the
    UK, it does appear that the judge did not make any discreet findings of
    fact as to whether or not:

    (i)  he attended church in Pakistan; and


    (ii) his family became aware of this and beat him.


17.  However, although it would have been desirable for the  judge  to  make
    specific findings of fact on these matters, I find that the  judge  did
    not materially err in law in  failing  to  do  so.   That  is  for  the
    following reasons:

    (i)  Given the judge's adverse  findings  on  the  credibility  of  the
         Appellant's claim to  have  genuinely  converted  to  Christianity,
         insofar as the  judge  did  not  make  findings  as  to  events  in
         Pakistan, I  find  that  he  would  inevitably  have  rejected  the
         credibility of that part of the  Appellant's  account,  if  he  had
         descended into making findings on such matters.


    (ii) However, in any event, it was not necessary for the judge to  make
         any specific finding as to whether the Appellant attended church in
         Pakistan and whether there was an adverse reaction from his  family
         as a result, because the Appellant could  not  properly  advance  a
         case that he was at real risk of serious harm solely as a result of
         those matters, in the light of the evidence I  have  quoted  above.
         Even though it may have been regrettable if the Appellant's  family
         had beaten him when they found out that he had attended  church  in
         Pakistan, even taking the Appellant's evidence at its  highest,  he
         continued to reside with his family for several further years,  and
         his family paid for him to come to the United Kingdom to study, and
         provided financial support during the course of his studies.  There
         is thus nothing whatever to any suggestion that the Appellant would
         be at real risk of serious harm  upon  return  to  Pakistan  merely
         because his family came to know that  he  had  attended  church  in
         Pakistan.


    (iii)    Further and in any event, I find that even if it was an  error
         for the judge to fail to make the findings of fact as to the events
         in Pakistan, the judge would inevitably have dismissed  the  appeal
         in any event, even if finding a real risk of harm in his  hometown.
         The Appellant had accepted at B6 question 8 that he had no extended
         family in Pakistan and at question 14 that he had no  other  family
         member in any other areas of Pakistan other than his home  area  of
         Zhob.  In the light of the judge's finding that the  Appellant  was
         not a genuine convert to Christianity, even if the Appellant  would
         have future problems with his own family in the home area of  Zhob,
         there would be nothing preventing  the  Appellant  from  internally
         relocating  to  another  area  of  Pakistan.   He  would  not,   in
         accordance with the findings made by the judge,  be  following  the
         Christian faith.  He has no other family outside of the Zhob  area,
         and Pakistan is a highly  populated  country.   There  was  nothing
         before the judge which would have supported any argument  that  the
         Appellant could not internally relocate to Pakistan.


18.  However, for reasons set out  above,  principally  the  fact  that  the
    judge rejected the Appellant's account to have told his family that  he
    had converted to Christianity (decision, paragraph [39])  I  find  that
    there is no material error of law in the judge's decision.

19.  Insofar as the appellant challenges at paragraph 8 of  the  grounds  of
    appeal the judge's decision to proceed with the hearing, rather than to
    adjourn, this point was not developed with any force before  me.  Given
    the judge's observations at [5]-[6] that the appellant had had  several
    months' notice of the hearing, was represented, and had filed  a  Reply
    Notice on  3 October 2017 indicating that no additional witnesses  were
    to be called, I find that the appellant has not made out any case  that
    the judge's decision to refuse the adjournment resulted  in  unfairness
    to him, as per Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC)

    Notice of Decision

    The making of the decision did not involve the making of  any  material
    error of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.

    I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Signed:                                 Date: 23.10.18
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

This appeal concerns a protection claim. Unless  and until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them or  any  member
of their family. This direction applies both to the appellants  and  to  the
respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 23.10.18

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                     Date: 23.10.18
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

