









UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09147/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 24 July 2017                  | On: 07 August 2017                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                   Mr A M
                          anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed, counsel, instructed by 12 Bridge
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on [ ] 1984. He  appeals
      with permission against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Callow dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent
      dated 19 August 2016 to refuse to grant  asylum  or  other  protection
      based on his imputed religious grounds -[1].


   2. Judge Callow noted that the core issue in the appeal  centred  on  the
      reliability or otherwise of the FIRs  produced  by  the  appellant  in
      support of his claim [20]. The Judge set out at  [17]  the  principles
      from Tanveer Ahmed [2006] UKIAT 00439.


   3. The respondent relied on verification checks undertaken in Pakistan in
      respect of the FIRs relied on by the appellant. They  were  considered
      to be false. The DVR in respect of the first  FIR  asserted  that  the
      Station House Officer of Shaharah -e-Faisal  police  station,  Karachi
      East, was contacted to check the FIR no.  254/11.  The  SHO  confirmed
      that the date and details of the provided FIR dated 16  February  2011
      did not match the details in  the  records  of  that  police  station.
      Accordingly, he confirmed that the FIR provided by the  applicant  was
      not genuine. The FIR no. 254/11 of that police station is not dated 16
      February 2011 as claimed and the crimes committed do not match to  the
      records.


   4. With regard to the second DVR  addressing  the  second  FIR  dated  14
      September 2015, it was again noted that the FIR no. 531/15 provided by
      the applicant was not genuine. Nor did the crimes committed fall under
      the relevant sections of the Pakistan penal code as  claimed  but  the
      only crime in record is 13/20/65 (recovery of illegal arms) under  the
      code. Accordingly, the FIR was not genuine.


   5. It was accordingly not accepted that the Moulana had made  reports  of
      blasphemy against the appellant and that the police had called at  his
      home after the first FIR was lodged [8(b)].


   6. The appellant had also relied on hospital  reports  for  his  brothers
      dated 6 July 2016 as well as photographs of their injuries  and  other
      documents. Four days prior to his departure to the UK  as  a  student,
      the appellant was accused by a Mullah of disrespecting the Prophet and
      supporting the Ahmadi faith. The appellant  departed  Pakistan  on  19
      February 2011 but only learned in November 2015 that the  Moulana  had
      filed an FIR  against  him  in  February  2011,  consequent  upon  the
      incident which occurred on 15 February 2011 and again in October  2015
      when it was believed by the Moulana that the appellant  was  about  to
      return to Pakistan. Further, it was only in November 2015[1] that  the
      appellant learned that his brothers had been assaulted at EID  prayers
      on 6 July 2016 on account of the appellant's blasphemous conduct  back
      in February 2011 [5].


   7. In addition it was asserted by the appellant that in February 2015 the
      Moulana had some pamphlets printed criticising  the  appellant.  On  6
      July 2016 he mentioned the name of the appellant's father in a  sermon
      as someone who disrespected the  Muslim  religion.  It  was  in  these
      circumstances that the appellant's brothers were attacked - [5].


   8. It was also asserted that before October 2015 the police attended  the
      appellant's house four or five times about the incident involving  his
      brothers and began to visit the house again after the incident in July
      2016. His family in Pakistan continued to  receive  threats  from  the
      Moulana and others - [5].


   9. The essential parts of the FIR relied on by the  appellant  complained
      that he was guilty of insulting the Prophet and  blasphemy  for  which
      there is no forgiveness in Islam - [6 -7].


  10. In his 'assessment of credibility and findings of fact', Judge  Callow
      referred  at  [19]  to  decisions  involving  dishonesty   under   the
      provisions of paragraph 322(1a) of the Immigration  Rules.  He  stated
      that it was necessary to make a finding of credibility concerning  the
      evidence of the appellant. He has  made  such  a  finding  only  after
      anxious consideration of all relevant and material  circumstances.  He
      stated that "in making this finding, I have taken into account all the
      available evidence, in the round, and have attached such weight  as  I
      consider properly attributable thereto" [19].


  11. He stated that [22] that the underlying facts of the 2 DVRs have  been
      established. He stated that 'in the round these  show  that  the  FIRs
      relied on by the appellant that he is wanted for blasphemy are false'.
      He stated that in arriving at this conclusion he approached the  issue
      from the standpoint that the onus rests with  the  respondent  on  the
      balance of probabilities. A careful reading  of  the  documents,  most
      importantly the two DVRs, shows that the documents relied  on  by  the
      appellant refer to incidents unrelated to the appellant. The first FIR
      did not match the police records and was not dated 16  February  2011.
      The second FIR was dated 18 August 2015, not 14 September 2015. It was
      concerned with the recovery of illegal arms. [22]


  12. The Judge found that the inescapable conclusion is  reached  that  his
      claim, belatedly made  after  service  of  notice  as  an  overstayer,
      '...has been fabricated, wherein no weight is  attached  to  the  self
      serving affidavits of the appellant's brothers.  They  may  well  have
      been assaulted but not because the appellant is wanted in Pakistan for
      blasphemy' - [24].


  13. Had there been any substance to the FIRs produced by the appellant, it
      could reasonably  have  been  expected  of  him  that  beyond  letters
      addressed to the police in Pakistan by his solicitors,  the  appellant
      would have instructed a lawyer to attend upon the police to verify the
      FIRs relied on. Such a failure in the  circumstances  of  adverse  DVR
      reports, undermine the genuineness of his claim. - [25].


The appeal to the Upper Tribunal


  14. In granting the appellant permission to appeal on 1 June 2016,  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Baker found that the appellant's grounds of appeal
      had merit. The FIRs were found to be false documents for  reasons  not
      susceptible for challenge.


  15. Judge Baker stated however that the balance of the evidence in support
      of the claim was arguably not  adequately  addressed.  He  found  that
      '...it is arguable that there was a  material  error  of  law  in  not
      assessing the main  other  elements  of  the  evidence,  (the  witness
      written evidence, the credibility of the account of the events by  the
      appellant  and  the  medical  evidence  lodged,  for  example)  before
      reaching conclusions adverse to the appellant's core account'.


  16. Mr Ahmed, who also represented the appellant at the hearing, contended
      that the Judge in fact failed to address the evidence in the round. He
      failed to have regard  to  the  "subjective"  evidence  submitted.  In
      particular he failed to consider the affidavits of the brothers  where
      they described the incident of Eid and the harassment  to  which  they
      have been subjected. There was thus no assessment of the evidence or a
      finding of fact,  save  a  conclusion  without  any  analysis  of  the
      evidence in the round.


  17. The Judge also failed  to  consider  medical  evidence  which  plainly
      confirmed that the brothers were  attacked  during  the  Eid  prayers.
      Moreover, the prints of leaflets were distributed,  referring  to  the
      appellant as being the one who had committed the offence of blasphemy.
      There was also photographic evidence and medical  evidence  confirming
      that the  appellant's  brothers  had  been  attacked  during  the  Eid
      prayers.


  18. In summary, he submitted that the totality of the evidence  which  was
      relevant had not been assessed by the Judge in the  round.   Save  for
      the FIR points, there was no real credibility issue. No real issue was
      raised by the respondent in the refusal letter or by  the  Judge:  the
      sole focus was the FIR issue.


  19. He also submitted that the Judge erred in his assessment of the  FIRs,
      as the DVRs  were  insufficient  in  detail;  the  reports  failed  to
      identify who was spoken to and the name of the  officer  in  question.
      Nor was there a transcript  of  any  conversation  provided,  nor  the
      duration given as to how long such a conversation lasted.


  20. He submitted in reliance  on  paragraph  1(d)(iii)  and  (iv)  of  the
      grounds that the DVRs must be examined in  context,  '...wherein  FIRs
      were dated 16 February  2011  and  14  September  2015,  it  would  be
      extraordinary that the information could be disclosed without  further
      inquiries being conducted'. The burden rested upon the respondent  and
      in  the  light  of  these  shortcomings  that  burden  had  not   been
      discharged.


  21. Moreover, the Judge failed to make  findings  of  fact  regarding  the
      assertions made  by  the  appellant's  brothers  in  their  affidavits
      concerning the EID incident as well as the harassment  to  which  they
      have been subjected. An important aspect of the  appellant's  evidence
      was thus left undetermined.


  22. Nor was there any evidential basis for the conclusions  at  [23].   In
      that respect Mr Ahmed referred to letters written by  the  appellant's
      solicitors to  Station  House  officers,  Shah  Faisal  Colony  Police
      Station No. 2 dated 5 January 2017 in respect of the two  FIRs.  These
      were produced in the bundle at pages 26-28, dated 20 December 2016 and
      5 January 2017. The solicitors had tried calling  the  station  to  no
      avail. They sought information as to whether the FIRs had been  issued
      by that  station  and  what  the  name  of  the  officer  is,  who  is
      investigating the matters.


  23. There had been no response to that letter and accordingly  the  second
      letter, dated 5 January 2017, was sent urging an urgent response.  The
      letters related to the station identified in the DVRs.


  24. In his oral submissions Mr Ahmed repeated his assertion that the Judge
      did not consider the evidence in the round. The DVRs were the  primary
      focus. The appellant had not relied solely on  the  FIR  reports.  The
      Judge did  not  look  at  direct  evidence  relevant  to  whether  the
      appellant was being sought by the Mullah. There was no analysis of the
      affidavits of the  brothers  where  they  described  the  incident  in
      detail.


  25. Nor was there any reference to the pamphlet translated  from  Urdu  at
      page 18 of the appellant's bundle. In that pamphlet, in respect of the
      mosque in Karachi, it was stated that the EID  prayer  will  offer  at
      7.45am and Scholar Molana Shakir-ul-Haq will be  leading  the  prayers
      and  would  also  address  the  audience  regarding  'those  who  have
      disrespected our religion and our prophet'.


  26. Nor did the Judge consider the evidence submitted by the appellant  at
      his interview set  out  in  the  first  question  at  his  substantive
      interview. There he produced documents and evidence that he wished  to
      submit. This included the  two  police  reports,  copies  of  national
      identity cards of his father and two brothers;  hospital  records  for
      his brothers; copies of two pamphlets; photograph of a priest giving a
      speech on Eid; photographs of both his brothers injured as well  as  a
      video (not supplied) of his brothers' treatment in the hospital  after
      they were beaten. There was  also  a  file  of  his  father's  medical
      reports provided.


  27. In the light of the concerns concerning  the  DVR  report,  the  Judge
      should have considered the evidence in the round "in the true sense."


  28. Nor did the Judge have regard to the FIRs lodged  by  the  appellant's
      brothers before the police station on 17 August 2016 and  6  September
      2016 regarding the incident on 6 July 2016.  There  they  stated  that
      after Eid some people attacked them and beat them badly. They believed
      that the Molana who has issued a blasphemy case against the  appellant
      was involved in the attack. They also referred  to  having  gone  many
      times to the police  station  and  have  been  told  that  this  is  a
      religious  issue  which  police  cannot  do  anything  about.  It  was
      contended in the second attempt  that  they  suspected  that  this  is
      because of the involvement of the "scholar" that they are refusing  to
      lodge their report. This was also sent to the "DSP". This produced  no
      action either.


  29. In the circumstances, the Judge was wrong to confine  himself  to  the
      DVRs.


  30. On behalf of the respondent, it was submitted  that  the  Judge  dealt
      with the letters referred to at  [25]  where  the  Judge  stated  that
      beyond  letters  addressed  to  the  police  by  his  solicitors,  the
      appellant would be expected to instruct a lawyer to attend the  police
      to  verify  the  FIRs  relied  on.  Such  a  failure  undermines   the
      genuineness of the claim.


  31. Mr Clarke submitted that the fact that corroboration is  not  required
      does not mean that an adjudicator is required to leave out of  account
      the absence of documentary evidence which might reasonably be expected
      - ST (Corroboration) Kasolo Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119. In that  case
      it was found that the Judge was entitled to comment that it would  not
      have been difficult for the appellant to produce a  death  certificate
      concerning his brother or evidence supporting the contention  that  he
      received hospital treatment.


  32. The Judge was entitled to consider that apart from the letter  written
      by the solicitors, reasonable  corroboration  was  neither  sought  or
      provided.


  33. He submitted that the Judge did state at [22] that matters  have  been
      taken in the round. At [19] he stated that it was necessary to make  a
      finding of credibility concerning the appellant's evidence. He  stated
      that he has taken into account  all  the  available  evidence  in  the
      round. The Judge found at [24] that the brothers may  well  have  been
      assaulted although this was not because the  appellant  is  wanted  in
      Pakistan for blasphemy. The Judge referred to the affidavit at [11] as
      well as at [24]. The pamphlet at page 20 does not refer  in  terms  to
      the appellant. It is therefore difficult to see how this could advance
      the appellant's case.


  34. In response, Mr Ahmed submitted  that  the  pamphlet  at  page  18  is
      important as it refers to the Mullah who would be leading the  prayers
      and addressing the issue of  disrespect  to  their  religion  and  the
      prophet. That is the same Mullah who obtained the  registration  of  a
      case of blasphemy against the appellant. This was  dated  16  February
      2011.


  35. There is a second FIR of the  registration  of  a  case  of  blasphemy
      against the appellant via the FIR. It was believed that the  appellant
      is coming back to the country soon and a request is made  that  he  be
      arrested as he is guilty of blasphemy. This again was  an  application
      by the same Mullah to register the case against the appellant.


  36. There have accordingly been no findings of fact  in  relation  to  the
      pamphlets as well as the other documents. None of  this  evidence  has
      been factored in as part of the evidence as a whole.


  37. The brothers did in fact attend and make enquiries in respect  of  the
      DVRs  but  the  police  were  not  interested  in  registering   their
      complaints. The Judge did not consider the steps  that  the  appellant
      had taken through his brothers, confining himself to  the  expectation
      that a lawyer should have been instructed  to  attend  the  police  to
      verify the FIRs relied on [25].


  38. Nor did the  Judge  avail  himself  of  the  evidence  concerning  the
      allegations in relation  to  the  6  July  2016  incident.  There  was
      affidavit as well as the pamphlet evidence in support.  There  was  no
      finding that the brothers did not attend the gathering on 6 July.


      Assessment


  39. At [22] the Judge found that the underlying facts of the two DVRs have
      been established. In the round they show that the FIRs  relied  on  by
      the appellant that he is wanted for blasphemy are false.


  40. The Judge had regard to the appellant's  criticism  of  the  DVRs.  He
      found that the evidence was of sufficient cogency. Those  DVRs  showed
      that the documents relied on by the appellant  referred  to  incidents
      unrelated to him. Nor was there any match in the police records.


  41. The Judge noted that the core issue centred on the reliability of  the
      FIRs produced by the appellant in support of his claim - [20].


  42. The Judge directed himself in accordance with Tanveer Ahmed noting  in
      particular that the decision maker should consider whether a  document
      is one on which reliance should properly be placed  after  looking  at
      all the evidence in the round.


  43. However, the Judge stated that had there been  any  substance  to  the
      FIRs produced by the appellant, it could reasonably have been expected
      of  him  to  have  instructed  a  lawyer  to  attend  the  station  to
      investigate the FIRs relied on [25].


  44. However, the appellant claimed that he  did  take  steps,  namely  the
      sending  of  two  letters  to  the  relevant  police  station  by  his
      solicitors, initially on 20 December 2016 and then again on 5  January
      2017 asking confirmation as to whether the FIRs which were  identified
      in the letter had been issued by the station and for  confirmation  of
      the name of the officer investigating the matters. No response at  all
      was received to either of those letters.


  45. In addition, the affidavits of the appellant's brothers, translated at
      page 6 and 8, identified the event on 6 July 2016. Although  as  noted
      by the Judge, these are not  translated  in  impeccable  English,  the
      sense of each affidavit is clear. The brothers who  attended  the  Eid
      service at the mosque  referred  to  the  Mullah  Shakir  Ul  Haq  who
      expressly referred to the appellant in his speech as a person who  was
      misguiding people. This aroused the anger of those  present  who  then
      attacked them and manhandled them resulting  in  injuries.  Medication
      was also provided.


  46. Apart from his brothers' own assertions, photographic evidence of such
      injuries was produced as well as medical prescriptions over a  period.
      There is also a letter from Dr Rizvi dated 21 November 2016 confirming
      the attendance of the brothers at their surgery complaining that  they
      had been beaten on 6 July 2016 on Eid after leaving  the  mosque.  One
      brother was seriously injured requiring hospital emergency  treatment,
      the other was in a state  of  unconsciousness  having  sustained  head
      injuries. The brothers have been treated by him since them.


  47. Accordingly, there was  some  medical  evidence  confirming  that  the
      brothers had been attacked during the prayers on that day.


  48. There was also the appellant's evidence that his brothers attended the
      police station themselves following the DVR but had not had any  "joy"
      in registering their complaint against the Molana. They were therefore
      forced to write to their DSP who acknowledged the  complaint  but  has
      not responded to date.


  49. Although the Judge accepted that the appellant's brothers  might  have
      been assaulted, there is no assessment or finding as to the  potential
      significance of that assault with regard to the appellant's claim that
      he is treated as a blasphemer and will be at real risk on return.


  50. Further, the DVRs themselves do not contain much detail. The  identity
      of the person spoken to and the name of the officer  in  question  are
      not  provided.  Nor  is  there  any  transcript  or  pr�cis   of   the
      conversation that occurred. Nor is there any estimate as to  how  long
      the conversation lasted. Nor is there any indication as to whether the
      information which was  disclosed  was  available  immediately,  or  as
      submitted by Mr Ahmed, whether this involved a process of  information
      gathering. That is  particularly  relevant  as  the  FIRs  were  dated
      February 2011 and September 2015. It is likely  that  the  information
      sought would only be given after further inquiries were conducted.


  51. In the circumstances I find  that  there  has  not  been  an  adequate
      assessment or findings made of the matters raised in evidence  by  the
      appellant, his brothers, as  well  as  the  medical  evidence  lodged,
      before reaching conclusions adverse to the appellant's core account.


  52. As Judge Baker noted, the balance of the evidence in  support  of  the
      claim "was arguably not adequately addressed."


  53. In the circumstances I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge involved the making of an error on a point  of  law.  I
      accordingly set it aside.


  54. The parties agreed that in that event the matter should be remitted to
      the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision.


  55. I have had regard to the President's Practice Statement regarding  the
      remitting of an appeal. I am satisfied that the effect  of  the  error
      has been to deprive the appellant of a full and proper opportunity for
      his case to be properly put and considered by the First-tier Tribunal.




      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. The decision is set aside  and  the  case  is
      remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Taylor  House)  for  a  fresh
      determination to be made by another Judge.


      Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014


      Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.














      Signed
      Date 3 August 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer









      -----------------------
[1]  That date is clearly incorrect as the incident had not yet occurred

