
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09041/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Video link via    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Skype                                      |On 08 December 2020             |
|for Business                               |                                |
|On 13 November 2020                        |                                |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     A N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Offiah, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Frantzis, promulgated on 13  November  2019,  dismissing
    his appeal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State  made  on  4
    September 2019 to refuse his asylum and protection claim.



The appellant's case

 2. The appellant's case is that he is at risk on return to Nigeria  as  he
    is a member and active supporter of IPOB which has been designated as a
    terrorist organisation  in  Nigeria  as  of  20  September  2017.   The
    appellant has attended events organised by IPOB in the  United  Kingdom
    including demonstrations in London.  One of the events was  aired  live
    in Nigeria on Al Jazeera and that as a result of his  involvement  with
    IPOB is reasonably likely to  be  known  to  the  Nigerian  authorities
    resulting in his arrest, detention and  ill-treatment.   The  appellant
    also states that the Nigerian government monitor the activities of IPOB
    in the diaspora and as such his membership and support for IPOB will be
    known to them.

 3. The appellant first claimed asylum on 12 September  2017.   That  claim
    was refused on 12 March 2018 and his appeal against that  decision  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer on 22 May 2018.   Although
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted, that appeal was
    dismissed on 19 March 2019.

 4. Subsequent to that the appellant made fresh  representations  including
    an expert report from Ms Uzo-Peters that addresses the position of IPOB
    in Nigeria. The respondent maintained the refusal in a  fresh  decision
    against which this appeal lies.

Judge Freer's findings

 5. As these were central to the respondent's decision, it is necessary  to
    set these out in some detail.

 6. The judge did not find the appellant to be credible, relying in part on
    two earlier decisions from different FtTJs in different appeals brought
    by the appellant. He found IPOB was not a terrorist organisation  [67],
    and without an expert report,  was  unable  to  determine  whether  the
    decree against prescribing IPOB in 2017 had effect [68 to 69].

 7. He concluded that the appellant was not a high-level  activist  in  any
    country [72] and was not satisfied  that  he  had  been  monitored  and
    identified in such a way that  he  would  be  at  significant  risk  of
    serious harm in Nigeria  [72].   He  also  found  that  there  were  no
    indications that typical rank and file members or  supporters  of  IPOB
    were at particular risk [74] although their  leaders  might  be,  there
    being no report suggesting the risk applied to the lower level  members
    returning from abroad apart from the IPOB leader.   Although  satisfied
    that the appellant had attended a number of recent protests  in  London
    [79] he found no evidence suggesting anything other  than  a  low-level
    activist and found [80] that the  appellant  was  not  sincere  in  his
    activism.

 8. The judge also found that there was no evidence that mere  photographic
    records have led to  any  serious  harm  in  Nigeria  or  to  returning
    activists [81] nor that the appellant's name  had  been  known  to  the
    authorities as a result of any photography during recent demonstrations
    [82]  the  appellant  not  referring  to  any  specific  social   media
    publication of photographs.  The judge did not accept  either  that  he
    would actively demonstrate in Nigeria.

 9. Judge Freer also found [89] that the Nigerian government had not  shown
    to have the ability to identify the appellant and  cross-refer  to  any
    pictures they may have of IPOB protests in London or in the alternative
    if their intelligence was very good they would be able to tell that  he
    was not a high level activist and was not likely  to  make  trouble  in
    Nigeria.  Thus, no cause was shown for putting resources into bothering
    him.

The Respondent's Case

10. The respondent was not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  credible,
    relying primarily on Judge Freer's conclusions. She considered that  Ms
    Uzo-Peters' report added little to the appellant's claim  and  did  not
    demonstrate that he would be identifiable or questioned about  his  sur
    place activities on return to Nigeria.

11. Nor was he satisfied that the photographs of the  appellant  at  events
    and weigh up the claim and failed to dislodge  the  findings  of  Judge
    Freer and the identification risks.  Although accepting that some  IPOB
    members faced risk in Nigeria, I did not accept that the  news  reports
    demonstrate that the appellant was at  risk  based  on  his  individual
    circumstances.

Judge Frantzis' findings

12. The judge heard evidence from the appellant, from  Dr  Justice  Ukachi-
    Lois, national  co-ordinator  of  IPOB  in  the  United  Kingdom.   She
    directed herself [23] that the findings of Judge Freer  must  form  the
    starting point for any decision, she  then  turned  to  Ms  Uzo-Peters'
    opinion [25].  She found [28] that the appellant had established that:-

      i) IPOB's present day umbrella organisation in  Nigeria  and  approved
         Biafra related activism and the persecution of IPOB members by  the
         Nigerian state is well recorded;

     ii)  the  suppression  of  pro-separatist  Biafran  activities  by  the
         Nigerian federal government was given judicial endorsement  and  by
         the Federal High Court of Nigeria, IPOB being proscribed under that
         court's powers;

    iii) it is an offence to be a member of a prescribed organisation,  each
         offence carries on conviction a prison term of up to twenty years;

     iv) there is evidence  of  the  immediate  application  sought  by  the
         Nigerian police particularly the special entry robbery  unit  being
         accused of human rights violations and  extrajudicial  killings  of
         IPOB members during peaceful protests;

      v)  that  the  Terrorism  Prevention  (Amendment)   Act   2013   gives
         extraterritorial effect to the Terrorism Act 2011 and as  such  the
         appellant's membership in support of IPOB  in  the  United  Kingdom
         will be subject to prosecution in Nigeria.

13. The judge  accepted  Ms  Uzo-Peter's  findings  with  one  caveat:  the
    considered that the opinion that it was  plausible  that  the  Nigerian
    authorities were aware  of  the  appellant's  bond  with  IPOB  as  the
    military recently declared that activities of pro-Biafran groups  would
    be monitored, she was not satisfied that it was reasonably likely  that
    this would occur.  She  drew  a  distinction  between  "plausible"  and
    "reasonably likely".

14. In doing so she noted that Judge Freer had found by the evidence before
    him that the Nigerian government had not been shown to have the ability
    to identify the appellant and cross refer to any pictures they may have
    of IPOB protests in London [29].  The judge considered that the  arrest
    of a journalist and online blog based in the United Kingdom  known  for
    his views as the social  media  critic  of  the  Nigerian  government's
    repression of IPOB, cited by Ms Uzo-Peters, was insufficient to  depart
    from the findings of Judge Freer that it had not been  shown  that  the
    Nigerian government had the ability to identify the  appellant  or  the
    announcement in late 2017 of social media monitoring had been  followed
    up by this if it had been carried out with  adverse  consequences,  the
    journalist in question being already known through  their  journalistic
    activities, but being considerably different from a low level  activist
    in the United Kingdom not otherwise known to the  Nigerian   state  for
    any adverse reasons.  She noted [31] that there was no evidence  before
    the Tribunal of online or other monitoring of pro-Biafra groups in  the
    diaspora leading to adverse consequences finding that it  was  "notable
    by its absence in light of the findings of Judge Freer and  Ms  Peters'
    opinion that persecution had heightened since the proscription order in
    2017".  (Note to self: this  is  not  quite  the  same  thing;  and  is
    comparing activities within the country and out of the country).

15. The judge was not satisfied  by  the  provenance  of  the  screen  shot
    evidence from the Al Jazeera broadcast [33] finding the explanation  as
    to how it had been obtained to be lacking in  credibility  noting  that
    the CD contained footage streamed by Al  Jazeera  was  not  before  her
    although it appeared to have been before  the  respondent.   The  judge
    noted that in any event the appellant was not identified by name in the
    image nor was there evidence of the Nigerian  government's  ability  to
    identify unnamed individuals and cross-refer to any pictures  they  may
    have of IPOB protests in London and as such  advanced  the  appellant's
    case no further.

16. The judge noted Dr Lois' evidence [35] there would be some  50  to  100
    participants in the demonstrations and in these  circumstances  in  the
    absence of any evidence  of  facial  recognition  technology  or  other
    evidence that the Nigerian government has the capacity to identify  low
    level  participants  are  amongst  many  others   merely   from   their
    photograph, she was not satisfied to the lower standard  of  proof  the
    appellant would be identified at the airport to return as a  pro-Biafra
    activist or supporter [35].

17. Directing herself in line with  YB (Eritrea) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 360
    the judge considered that there is no evidence before the Tribunal over
    the two years since the proscription  order  in  2017  that  low  level
    members of IPOB in the diaspora  who  are  merely  attending  to  swell
    numbers (as Judge Freer had found) were of sufficient  interest  to  be
    identified were placed on a list and arrested on return to Nigeria.  He
    accepted that the situation for those present in  Nigeria  was  plainly
    different there being no evidence of an  inclination  to  identify  and
    arrest protestors.

18. The judge did not accept that the appellant had a  real  commitment  to
    the Biafran  cause  nor  was  she  satisfied  that  he  would  actually
    demonstrate in Nigeria [39] nor was she satisfied that there would,  be
    a risk of identification, following BA (demonstrators in Britain - risk
    on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 [40] nor was  there  evidence  as  to
    whether returnees would be screened and if  so  asked  questions  about
    their activities in the United Kingdom  [41]  and  thus  there  was  no
    question about the appellant having to tell the truth in questioning on
    return.  In reaching that conclusion she did note the reference in  the
    EASO report  to  the  probing  of  deportees  by  Nigerian  immigration
    officials as opposed to the standard treatment of  questioning  of  all
    returnees.

19. The judge went on to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

20. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:-

      i) in making significant errors of fact, in particular referring to Ms
         Uzo-Peters as Dr Uzo-Peters at various points and referring to  the
         Movement for Actualisation of Sovereign State of Biafra (MASSOB) as
         MOSSAB; and, applying to Devaseelan wrongly in that  Judge  Freer's
         position was that all  the  objective  material  including  Amnesty
         International required corroboration thus rendering  Judge  Freer's
         findings of fact unsustainable in light of the expert report;

     ii) in misdirecting herself in law in that she had failed  to  consider
         that the appellant's claim may have succeeded even if he had  acted
         in bad faith or was not a good  witness  nor  was  there  objective
         evidence in support of the findings that only high profile  members
         of IPOB were at risk the judge having little  regard  to  the  Home
         Office Country of Origin Information nor did she give  reasons  for
         the heavy reliance and the previous  findings  of  the  Immigration
         Judge;

    iii) in failing to give sufficient reasons for believing the appellant's
         claim and the evidence and findings of fact  having  little  or  no
         relevance to the evidence of regular  meetings  and  attendance  or
         that he had taken oath [requiring him to remain absolutely loyal to
         the IPOB, the judge failing to make  findings  in  respect  of  the
         undertaking];

     iv) in criticising Ms Uzo-Peters' report as vague and that she unfairly
         failed to disclose her concerns such that submissions could be made
         on that and the judge unfairly discounting the evidence of  the  Al
         Jazeera printout, there being no credible evidence in support of an
         allegation of forgery;

      v) in failing to consider Articles 2, 3 or  8  the  judge  failing  to
         consider  whether   the   appellant's   accepted   membership   and
         association with IPOB  would  put  him  at  risk  of  ill-treatment
         contrary to Article 3 or would be an obstacle to  reintegration  as
         per paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), the  judge  erroneously  assuming  the
         claim stood or fell with the asylum claim.

21. On 11 February 2020, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Owens  granted  permission
    stating:-

         "It is arguable that the judge erred in finding that  the  Nigerian
         authorities would  not  be  aware  of  the  appellant's  (accepted)
         membership of the IPOB (a prescribed organisation)  and  activities
         in the UK in light of the expert's opinion that  it  is  "plausible
         that  the  Nigerian  authorities  are  aware  of  the   appellant's
         involvement with  the  IPOB"  and  the  witness'  evidence  of  the
         Nigerian  authorities  taking  photographs  of  protestors.    This
         finding is arguably material to the assessment of the risk  to  the
         appellant on return to Nigeria.

         All the grounds may be argued."

22. I heard submissions from both representatives.

23. I turn to the grounds individually although as the arguments  developed
    in the hearing, the core issue in this case is whether there is a  risk
    of the appellant's membership of IPOB coming to the  attention  of  the
    Nigerian authorities and whether the judge properly assessed that.

Ground 1

24. Part 1 of this ground is without merit.  The submission that  what  are
    clearly "slips" in referring to Ms Uzo-Peters as Dr Uzo-Peters  and  to
    MASSOB as MOSSAB could in no  way  be  said  to  call  into  doubt  the
    findings of facts.  There is simply no basis  to  that  submission  and
    neither the grounds nor the submissions fail to show how even if  these
    had been errors, they were material.  To inflate what are clearly minor
    errors into casting doubt on the entirety of an expert's evidence  when
    the judge in fact accepted that the expert was an expert  and  accepted
    her opinions subject to one caveat is wholly inappropriate.

25. There is some basis for the submission that the judge had erred in  her
    approach to Judge Freer's findings about IPOB.  Judge Frantzis,  unlike
    Judge Freer, accepted the IPOB was prescribed and  that  membership  if
    that  organisation  was  a  criminal  offence,  that   offence   having
    extraterritorial effect and that there were risks to members in Nigeria
    and she made no  findings  that  this  was  restricted  to  high  level
    activists.  That is a significantly different picture of the risk  from
    that found by Judge Freer at paragraphs 74 and 75 of his decision.

Ground 2

26. There is no basis for the submission that the appellant had misdirected
    herself that the appellant could succeed even if he had  acted  in  bad
    faith.  Although she did not direct  herself  expressly  in  line  with
    Danian v SSHD [1999] EWCA Civ 3000 or other case  law,  it  is  evident
    from her decision that she considered the issue of the appellant's good
    faith only as to whether he intended  to  demonstrate  on  return.  She
    also, fairly, considered that this involvement with  IPOB  as  limited.
    That is in line with YB (Eritrea). The judge was not required  to  cite
    Danian or the other cases cited in the grounds; it  is  sufficient  for
    her to show, which she  did,  that  she  had  followed  the  principles
    established by the case law.

27. It is evident from her determination that the judge  did  consider  the
    position of those who were at  risk  in  Nigeria  was  different.   She
    accepted the evidence of the expert to the effect that a  large  number
    of activists were detained and it cannot be said that the  judge  erred
    in distinguishing the case of a journalist with  a  significant  online
    presence and who was arrested at his home is in  a  different  position
    from somebody who is returning without having any online presence.   It
    cannot be argued that the fact that the appellant is  shown  on  an  Al
    Jazeera broadcast is an "online presence".

28. It cannot be argued either that the judge erred in relying on the facts
    as found by the previous judge who  in  fact  relied  on  two  previous
    determinations in which the appellant  had  been  found  not  to  be  a
    credible witness.  The decision of Judge Freer was relevant given  that
    the claim was to all intents and purposes  the  same,  albeit  on  this
    occasion supported by the report of Ms Uzo-Peters and  other  material.
    This is not a case in which new evidence has  come  to  light,  casting
    doubt on earlier findings of fact about specific incidents.  Here,  the
    evidence relates to risk on return.

29. As is evident, the judge did diverge from Judge Freer's  findings  with
    respect to the IPOB.  There is insufficient material to show  that  the
    oath taking was a matter put to the judge or that she was  expected  to
    make a finding.  And the reference to oath taking in context of  voodoo
    and witchcraft is with respect irrelevant.  The  judge  was  manifestly
    entitled and gave good reasons for concluding that  the  appellant  was
    not a committed activist who would not continue his activities for IPOB
    on return to Nigeria.  The reference to SA (Afghanistan) v SSHD  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 53 is not relevant on the facts of this case.

30. There is no ground 3 in the renewed grounds.

Ground 4

31. The judge's criticism of Ms Uzo-Peters' report is not, contrary to what
    is averred, flawed. The judge undertook a detailed consideration of the
    matter and accepted her as an expert.  There is only  one  matter  with
    which she disagreed and that was the difference between whether a  risk
    being plausible and reasonable.  There is no basis in which it could be
    said that the judge  erred  in  not  raising  that  concern  given  the
    concerns about Ms Peters' report were raised  in  submissions.   It  is
    also self-evident that there is a difference  between  something  being
    plausible and there being a realistic chance of it happening.  This  is
    not an attack on the report; it is merely a  finding  that  the  report
    does not go as far as the appellant would like it to go.

32. The submissions with regard to the judge's findings as regards  the  Al
    Jazeera CD fail to identify any material error.  As the  judge  pointed
    out in her decision, it did not advance the case any  further  to  show
    that the appellant had been shown  on  Al  Jazeera.   That  is  in  the
    context of the evidence of Dr Lois' evidence that there was  monitoring
    from inside the embassy.  As matter of common  sense,  it  is  unlikely
    that the Nigerian authorities would need to have regard to a news  feed
    from Al Jazeera to identify protestors  to  whom  they  would  need  to
    attribute a name rather than, for example, relying on photographs taken
    from inside the embassy or using CCTV.  I am at a  loss  to  understand
    how the FTTJ's reasoning is an "insult to  the  commonwealth  heads  of
    government that attended and  the  head  of  the  commonwealth".   Such
    submissions have no place in grounds of appeal.

33. Further, at no stage did the judge consider that the issue was  whether
    the document was forged; she properly approached the issue  as  one  of
    reliability and so the references to RP (forgery) Nigeria [2006]  UKAIT
    00686 are irrelevant.

Ground 5

34. The submission that the judge failed to consider Article  3  separately
    makes little sense on a proper analysis.  As Mr  Offiah  accepted,  the
    reason that the appellant would face difficulty on return  was  because
    of his activities on behalf of IPOB either inside or  outside  Nigeria.
    The factual matrix is the same as would be considered under  Article  3
    there being no suggestion that Article 3 was invoked in any  other  way
    such as, for example, a health claim.

35. Those entitled to humanitarian protection include those who have a well-
    founded fear of persecution but not for a convention reason, and  those
    who meet the criteria set out in Article 15 (c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  It is not suggested that this is a case  in  which  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive is engaged which would be the only
    other basis on which it would be necessary to  consider  the  issue  of
    humanitarian protection separately; and, in any event, an Article 15(c)
    consideration is different from an Article  3  consideration.  To  that
    extent, SA (Afghanistan) can be distinguished.  Similarly, the  grounds
    fail to show how paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) is engaged from  the  findings
    of fact as made by the  judge.   All  that  is  said  in  the  skeleton
    argument is that

         "The Tribunal is respectively invited to consider Article 8 as  per
         276ADE(vi) and outside the Immigration Rules accordingly.  No basis
         for any further  submission  to  that  effect  is  given.   In  the
         circumstances it cannot be argued  that  the  judge  erred  in  not
         addressing Article 8 or paragraph 276ADE in any detail".

36. That said, this appeal does cause me some concern.  I bear in mind that
    the judge found the appellant is a member of an organisation which  has
    been proscribed as a terrorist organisation in Nigeria.  She also found
    that  the  Act  under  which  that  would  be   an   offence   has   an
    extraterritorial effect, that is, that membership of  the  organisation
    outside Nigeria would also be an offence were he returned there.  I  am
    also mindful that members of the  organisation  have  been  subject  to
    persecution in Nigeria and that the authorities actively seek them out.



37. I turn to what became the core  issue:  the  risk  of  the  appellant's
    membership of IPOB coming to the attention of the Nigerian authorities.
     It is important to bear in mind that such a risk must  reach  the  low
    threshold applicable in  asylum  appeals;  that   it  is  plausible  or
    possible is not enough. The judge recognised that, and that  forms  the
    basis for her noting that Ms Uzo-Peter's view  that  it  was  plausible
    that the authorities would know of  him  was  not  enough.  That  is  a
    sustainable distinction.

38. It is sensible at this point to consider what was said by Sedley LJ  in
    YB Eritrea at [18]:

         "18.     As has been seen (�7 above), the tribunal, while accepting
             that the appellant's political activity in  this  country  was
             genuine, were  not  prepared  to  accept  in  the  absence  of
             positive evidence that the Eritrean authorities had "the means
             and  the  inclination"  to  monitor  such  activities   as   a
             demonstration outside their embassy, or  that  they  would  be
             able  to  identify  the  appellant  from  photographs  of  the
             demonstration. In my judgment, and without disrespect to  what
             is a specialist tribunal, this is a finding which risks losing
             contact  with  reality.  Where,  as  here,  the  tribunal  has
             objective evidence  which  "paints  a  bleak  picture  of  the
             suppression of political opponents" by a named government,  it
             requires little or no evidence or speculation to arrive  at  a
             strong possibility - and  perhaps  more  -  that  its  foreign
             legations not only film  or  photograph  their  nationals  who
             demonstrate in public against the regime  but  have  informers
             among expatriate oppositionist organisations who can name  the
             people who are filmed or photographed. Similarly it  does  not
             require affirmative evidence to establish a  probability  that
             the intelligence services of such states monitor the  internet
             for information about oppositionist groups. The real  question
             in  most  cases  will  be  what  follows  for  the  individual
             claimant.  If,  for  example,  any  information  reaching  the
             embassy is likely to be that  the  claimant  identified  in  a
             photograph is a hanger-on  with  no  real  commitment  to  the
             oppositionist cause,  that  will  go  directly  to  the  issue
             flagged up by art 4(3)(d) of the Directive."

39. The judge did address that in her decision at paragraph 36.  It  is  in
    the circumstances reasonable to assume that  where,  as  here  IPOB  is
    suppressed in Nigeria that little or no evidence is needed to arrive at
    the strong possibility that  the  Nigerian  High  Commission  films  or
    photograph their nationals who  demonstrate.   It  would  also  not  be
    surprising that they have informers amongst organisation groups who can
    name the people who are filmed or photographed.  The judge said this:

         "Whilst I do not discount the possibility that the Nigerian Embassy
         (sic) may have informers within the IPOB in the United  Kingdom,  I
         do not accept that given the appellant's low-level interaction with
         the organisation he has is a profile or a name that  the  informers
         would be interested in.  Whilst the proscription order of 2017  has
         extraterritorial effect and the  Nigerian  military  has  indicated
         monitor social media there  is  no  evidence  before  the  Tribunal
         (notably from Dr Peters) over two years later that most  low  level
         members of IPOB in the diaspora who are as Judge Freer found in the
         appellant's case merely attend to swell numbers of sufficient is to
         be identified placed on a  list  and  arrested  on  return  at  the
         airport in Nigeria.  Ms Peters refers  only  to  "plausibility"  in
         this regard.  And I have in mind in particular paragraph 36 of  her
         report.  The situation for those  present  in  Nigeria  is  plainly
         different and they come into direct contact with the Nigerian state
         who appear in the evidence to have an inclination to  identify  and
         arrest protestors: this is where the balance of Ms Peters' evidence
         lies."

40. There is a obvious difficulty in deriving any evidence directly  as  to
    what occurs within any intelligence organisation.  It may  be  possible
    to surmise how they process information and  whether  they  attempt  to
    link names to faces from external evidence.  For example, in Iran it is
    known that the authorities have on occasion put photographs  of  people
    they  wish  to  identify  on  the  internet  offering  a  cash  reward.
    Similarly, in the case of Myanmar evidence came to light to  show  that
    there was a sophisticated intelligence operation going  on  within  the
    embassy in London  whereby  attempts  were  made  to  identify  people.
    Equally,  there  may  be  evidence  that  returned  asylum-seekers  are
    questioned on arrival in  a  particular  state  and  evidence  of  such
    questioning may indicate from the questions put or their being detained
    that the authorities of that country have been monitoring evidence have
    taken account of what has happened in for example the  United  Kingdom.
    There is no such evidence of nature in respect of Nigeria.

41. Here,  it  is  evident,  as  the  judge  accepted,  that  the  Nigerian
    authorities go to considerable lengths to identify  those  involved  in
    IPOB who are active within Nigeria but that there  is  little  evidence
    regarding what happens to its supporters on return  to  Nigeria.   That
    could be for a number of reasons: it could be  that  they  are  few  in
    number, that view return or it may be  that  the  authorities  are  not
    interested, despite their actions within the country, in what occurs in
    the United Kingdom.

42. What concerns me is the extent to which, as the grounds aver at  2(iii)
    is the extent to which is that the judge appears not to have taken into
    account in assessing the risk to the appellant of  just  how  seriously
    IPOB is treated by the Nigerian authorities.  It is seen as a threat to
    the state security and to the unity of the state.  Second, there  is  a
    difference in participating in the demonstrations as a  supporter,  for
    example demonstrating in favour of Biafran  independence  and  being  a
    member of an organisation which is proscribed.

43. But again, the difficulty here is the lack of evidence to show how  the
    Nigerian authorities would deal with  information  gathered  about  the
    appellant. Given their evident interest in IPOB it would be  surprising
    if they did not attempt to infiltrate or at  least  obtain  information
    from within the organisation, not  least  as  the  organisation  is  in
    effect run outside Nigeria from the United Kingdom.  To go  further  is
    speculative.  It may be possible that they are able to place names, put
    names to photographs particularly if an individual is seen at more than
    one demonstration or is seen at smaller meetings at local  level.   But
    what is not clear is what is then done with that information.   It  is,
    to a significant degree, conjecture to conclude  that  the  information
    will then be passed to the Nigerian authorities in Nigeria or that they
    would then  make  that  information  available  at  the  point  of  the
    appellant's return.

44. There was no information before the judge as there is in  the  case  of
    some other countries on any specific process undertaken by the  country
    of return to  document  an  individual  or  that  questions  are  asked
    routinely on return  or  what  those  questions  are.   There  is  some
    evidence from the EASO report referred to by the judge where she  draws
    a distinction between deportees and returnees.   But  there  is  little
    detail in that report  even  considering  that  the  use  of  the  word
    "deportee" and "returnee" were not adopted as  terms  of  art  as  they
    would be in English law.

45. As against that, I  am  concerned  also  that  much  of  Judge  Freer's
    findings with respect to IPOB were based on views about whether it  was
    prescribed or not, findings which are no  longer  accepted.   But  that
    said, and while at [30] the judge considers  that  the  arrested  of  a
    journalist is not a sound basis to depart from Judge Freer's  findings,
    that is in the context of considering whether the  Nigerian  government
    have the ability to identify the  appellant,  and  cross-refer  him  to
    photographs. The judge did not expressly take into account how IPOB are
    treated in Nigeria but it is evident elsewhere in her decision that she
    did so.

46. The judge correctly noted [31] that there was no  evidence  of  adverse
    consequences for members or supporters on  return  to  Nigeria,  having
    distinguished for sustainable reasons, the  examples  of  a  well-known
    journalist and a man who wore a provocative t-shirt.  She then went  on
    to consider that there was no evidence of any heightened persecution of
    Biafra supporters since the Proscription Order of late 2017.

47. The difficulty with this part of  the  decision  (paragraphs  [30[]  to
    [31[) is that it is to an extent  almost  a  review  of  Judge  Freer's
    decision despite the fact that she had reached a number of  conclusions
    about IPOB very different from those he had made.

48. In that context, it is of note that in her  report  at  [40],  Ms  Uzo-
    Peters  nots  that  after  the  proscription  order  in  2017,  it  was
    immediately acted on by  the  Nigerian  police.  Also,  at  [46]ff  she
    documents increased repression of Biafra agitation and  persecution  of
    members of the movement including the arrest of  59  IPOB  members  who
    face trial as terrorists [49] and also at [55],  she  opines  that  the
    political environment for high or low profile members is not conducive.



49. But even taking that into account, as the judge noted, there is  little
    evidence of adverse consequences on return [31].

50. I bear in mind that the Upper Tribunal should not seek  to  overturn  a
    decision or findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  simply  because  they
    disagree with them or may have come to a different finding. I  conclude
    that it cannot be argued that the judge misdirected herself in  law  as
    to the relevant test or failed erred in what evidence she  did  or  did
    not take into account. The challenge is really as to weight, which  was
    a matter for her,  and  to  her  assessment,  looking  at  all  of  the
    evidence, of the risk on return.  She  found  that  the  risk  was  not
    sufficient such that the appellant had proved  his  case.  That  was  a
    decision she was entitled to reach and for which, for the  reasons  set
    out above, she gave adequate and sustainable reasons.  It was  judgment
    that was open to her it is a finding of fact.  As such, it is  not  one
    which should easily be overturned and whilst it is a decision to  which
    I might not of myself  have  come,  it  is  nonetheless  one  which  is
    sustainable and accordingly, for such  reasons,  I  consider  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not make an error of law and  I
    uphold it.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date   1 December 2020

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul








