

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber                    Appeal Numbers:
PA/09483/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                 |         Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 25 April 2017                   |         On 19 June 2017                |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                 Mr. I E R N
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Chauduery, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mrs M.Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer.

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

     1. The appellant has permission to appeal the decision of First-tier
        Judge Froom who, following a hearing in October 2016, dismissed the
        appeal.


     2. The appellant claimed protection on the basis he was a police
        officer in El Salvador and was at risk from gangs operating there.
        He said he was involved in an undercover police operation in 2015
        when money was handed over to a gang. As a result of the operation
        one of the gang members was killed and others were arrested. The
        appellant became fearful that members of the gang had identified
        him and so he started to vary his schedule and told his employer of
        his fears.

     3. In February 2016 his daughter had an altercation at school with
        another pupil. That pupil's mother was involved with a gang and she
        learned of the appellant's occupation.

     4. In June 2016 the appellant was at home when he noticed three men
        with guns trying to gain entry. He contacted the police. One of the
        men almost immediately received a telephone call and signalled to
        the others and they left. The appellant believed they had a
        lookout. The police arrived after 10 minutes. The appellant took
        his wife and their 9-year-old daughter to his father's house some
        20 minutes away. Two days later he told his supervisor of his
        fears. He was allowed to take a leave of absence.

     5.  On 7 July 2016 he resigned from the police. He returned to his
        home  afterwards to collect belongings. He saw children whom he
        believed had been planted to observe goings-on.

     6. He flew to the United Kingdom on the 30th July 2016.He was
        interviewed by immigration officials and was refused entry. He was
        detained overnight with the respondent intending to return him the
        following day. He then made a claim to protection and was released.

The refusal

     7. In refusing his claim the respondent accepted that he was a police
        officer from El Salvador. The claim did not engage the Refugee
        Convention. In any event the respondent did not believe his account
        and concluded it lacked credibility. It was not accepted he had
        been targeted by any gang members. The respondent also said that
        there was sufficiency of protection for the appellant in his home
        country.


     8.  In refusing his claim the respondent referred, amongst other
        things, to his account of three men attempting to break into his
        house. The respondent questioned how the intruders could have known
        immediately that the police had been contacted given that on his
        account it took them a further 10 minutes to arrive. He had
        submitted a document said to relate to the incident which is dated
        4 June 2016.


     9. If the claim were true there was sufficiency of protection.
        Furthermore, he appellant could relocate. On his own account, his
        family had been able to live at his father's without incident.

The First tier Tribunal

    10. Both parties were represented before First-tier judge Froom. The
        judge heard from the appellant and had the appeal documents,
        including an expert report on country conditions. The judge
        commented on the country information at paragraphs 18 through to
        29. At paragraphs 30 to 33 the judge sets out the burden and
        standard of proof applicable.


    11.  In a section headed `Discussion, findings and reasons' the judge
        sets out the factors favouring the appellant. The judge referred to
        the acceptance he was a police officer and the background evidence
        indicating a police officer could find themselves a target of gang
        members. The judge refers to the appellant giving a detailed and
        largely consistent account.


    12. The respondent had rejected the claim of the appellant being wanted
        by gangs. In considering this the judge focused upon the account he
        gave of three men coming to his home. The respondent had questioned
        the timeframe. The judge refers to the clarification sent following
        interview by his representative as well as the appellant's
        statement on this. However, the judge found the appellant appeared
        to be changing his account by extending the time frame to make it
        look more plausible. Related to this, the judge questioned how a
        lookout would know that the departure of a police car had anything
        to do with the appellant.

    13. The judge also referred to documents submitted by the appellant in
        relation to the incident and the report to his superiors. The judge
        said on the face of it they corroborated the claim but the fact he
        had made a complaint did not necessarily mean the claim was true.
        The judge referred to the absence of evidence from the police
        officers directly involved. The judge referred to seeing the
        originals at the hearing.

    14. The judge then commented on the appellant's subsequent return to
        his home on three occasions to collect belongings. The judge
        question why, if he was in such danger, he would go back. The
        appellant said he was accompanied by other men but the judge was
        not convinced pointing out that the gangs would have no scruples in
        attacking in that situation. The judge also commented on his wife
        leaving his father's house on several occasions to collect
        information to support the claim. The judge was sceptical as to why
        she would go out if in such fear.

    15. The judge also questioned why the family had not moved after the
        claimed altercation in February 2016 involving his daughter with a
        gang member's daughter if they were in fear as claimed.

    16. The judge concluded that looking at the totality of the evidence
        they were not satisfied, on the low standard of proof applicable,
        that the claim was true. The judge concluded by stating that the
        generic risk to police officers was not enough to entitle him to
        protection.


The Upper Tribunal

The application for permission

    17. The application for permission to appeal contended the judge had
        applied too high a standard of proof to the evidence presented.


    18. It was suggested the judge should have put to the appellant his
        concerns about the time frame of the three men being warned.

    19. In questioning the likelihood of lookouts knowing about the
        dispatch of police following a call the judge failed to have regard
        to the expert report on such occurrences.

    20.  In the reasons for refusal letter the respondent had referred to
        his report of the incident. It was said that the document referred
        to him being subjected to `threats with aggravation' and later
        refers to the `reasons being unknown'. The respondent commented
        that the `reasons unknown' was not consistent with his claim he was
        being threatened by gang members because of his work and his
        daughters altercation. The judge at paragraph 40 accepted there was
        an error in translation and that it should read `threats by persons
        unknown' as opposed to `unknown reasons'. The judge said he
        therefore regarded the respondent's point as neutral. The grounds
        contended that rather than being neutral the document submitted
        supported the appellant's claim.

    21. The judge commented on evidence sent by the appellant's wife
        pointing out from the envelope she had given her home address
        rather than that of the appellant's father. The judge also noted
        that the appellant was described as working in the complaints
        department rather than a squad tackling extortion and gangs as he
        claimed. The judge commented that there was no opportunity to put
        these matters to the appellant as they were only noticed by the
        judge afterwards. These points were not raised in the refusal
        letter. It was suggested in the grounds the judge should have given
        the appellant an opportunity to comment, either by reconvening the
        hearing or inviting written responses.

    22.  The expert report referred to the risk of harm to former and
        current police officers .The judge's comment that the generic risk
        for policeman was not enough, did not adequately address this.


At hearing

    23. At hearing, Mrs Chaudhery repeated that the judge materially erred
        in applying too high standard of proof; that the judge failed to
        put adverse matters to the appellant; that the decision was at odds
        with the expert report.

    24. Regarding the standard of proof she submitted that the volume of
        evidence and its quality, including the expert report, should have
        led to a successful outcome.

    25. Regarding the observations made by the judge after the hearing, she
        pointed out that at paragraph 43 of the decision the judge did not
        state he was not taking these into account.

    26. She submitted there was a failure by the judge to properly consider
        the expert report. This was reflected at paragraph 53 where the
        judge commented that the appellant faced nothing greater than the
        generic risk faced by all ex-police officers. The expert indicated
        police officers were at specific risk.

    27. In response, the presenting officer relied on the rule 24 response
        and highlighted the reasons given in the original refusal of leave
        by Upper Tribunal Judge Deans. She submitted that the judge
        directed himself appropriately. Regarding putting matters to the
        appellant, the judge had commented at paragraph 43 what he had
        noticed after the hearing but no specific findings were made. She
        submitted in the circumstances there was no error of law by the
        judge not recalling the parties and putting these matters to the
        appellant.

    28. She also submitted there was no material error of law the reference
        to the generic risk to police officers. The expert report had not
        commented on a specific risk to all police officers.

    29. Both representatives where in agreement that if I found a material
        error of law the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
        Tribunal.

 Consideration

    30. I cannot see anything from the decision that indicates the judge
        did not appreciate the low standard of proof applicable. At
        paragraph 30 the judge correctly self-directed himself as to the
        relevant burden and standard of proof. The judge also refers to the
        decision of Karanakaran on the assessment of credibility. There is
        reference at paragraph 34 where the judge makes allowance for
        innocent mistakes which can occur and the dangers inherent in views
        as to plausibility absent from the background. Reference is made to
        the case law in relation to documentation and the correct burden of
        proof.


    31. There had been an issue about the document of complaint submitted
        by the appellant. It was accepted there had been an error in
        translation and so an apparent inconsistency raised in the Refusal
        did not exist. The comment by the judge that he was therefore
        treating this as a neutral point did not mean the judge was
        disregarding the evidence. The judge indicated the complaint could
        be authentic but it did not mean it was true. What the judge was
        indicating is that the adverse credibility point raised in the
        refusal letter had been resolved. The same point arises in respect
        of paragraph 52.This was not been raised by the parties but
        illustrates what the judge is conveying. The judge has commented
        that the appellant only sought protection when he was about to be
        removed. The judge points out the respondent have not raised this
        and the precise details of his interview were not available. The
        judge therefore said he was treats this as a neutral point, meaning
        no adverse inference is being drawn.

    32. It can happen when a judge reviews the evidence in preparing the
        decision that additional points are noted. If those points will
        make a material difference and have not been put there is a
        requirement in fairness to give the parties an opportunity to
        respond. However, I find the judge's comments at paragraph 43 are
        by way of observations. There is nothing to indicate these were
        such central issues that further comment was required. There is
        nothing in the decision to indicate any adverse inference was drawn
        on these matters.

    33. I find the judge has properly balanced the evidence. The judge
        refers to favourable credibility points at paragraph 35.The judge
        comments on the background information and that police officers
        could be a target for gang members .The judge refers to considering
        the claim against the background evidence provided and refers to
        the increasing reach and violence of organised criminal gangs. The
        judge referred to gangs being assisted by family members and young
        children from the neighbourhood who are not members but who act as
        lookouts. Those that crossed a gang were subjected to swift and
        brutal retaliation which extended to their family members. The
        judge referred to specific police units being a priority for
        targeting by gangs. It is clear from the judge's comments there was
        an appreciation of the background evidence of gangland violence.
        The judge quotes from the background information dealing with
        former members of the police force and that lower ranking officials
        living in the same neighbourhoods as gang members are vulnerable.

    34. The judge recorded the UNHCR view that members of the police force
        could be considered a particular social group. The judge did not
        find anything about the appellant's situation as a police officer
        which placed him at particular risk beyond the norm because of his
        job. There is nothing to suggest that former police officers from
        El Salvador qualify for protection simply because of the former
        occupation. I can see no fault in the comment made.


    35. The judge sets out details from the expert report and accepted she
        was qualified to comment on the claim being made. Based upon her
        knowledge of El Salvador the account given was entirely plausible
        and consistent with what is known about the country. She
        acknowledges that gang members could be alerted to the arrival of
        police either by other members of the gang being on the lookout
        outside the police station or corrupt officials. She also addresses
        the question of sufficiency of protection and relocation. Her
        comments are set out in the in the judge's decision. However, it
        was for the judge to sift through the facts of the case and any
        specific claim. I do not find a material error of law demonstrated
        by any of the points raised and it is my conclusion they amount to
        no more than a disagreement with the judge's findings .The decision
        indicates it was carefully prepared with the judge appreciated the
        issues arising and looking at all the evidence. The judge dealt
        with the appeal appropriately, focusing on the credibility issues
        central to the claim.

Decision.

No material error of law has been shown in the decision of First tier Judge
Froom.Consequently, that decision, dismissing the appeal shall stand.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

19th June 2017







