
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/09139/2017
                                                PA/08999/2017, PA/09097/2017
                                                PA/09095/2017, PA/09092/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 April 2019                     |On 23 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   QW (1)
                                   YT (2)
                                   EY (3)
                                   EW (4)
                                   ZW (5)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mathews, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr K McGuire, instructed by Latta & Co Solicitors
(for QW)
                    Mr Byrne, instructed by Latta & Co (for YT)
                    Miss L Irvine, instructed by Latta & Co (for EY, EW and
                    ZW)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

I make an order pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure of any  matter  or  material
that might lead to the identification of these appellants.   Any  breach  of
this order may result in contempt proceedings.



 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and QW, YT,  EY,
    EW and ZW as "the appellants". I also make an order under Rule 5 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 for these appeals to  be
    heard together.

 2. The appellants who comprise a family  unit  (husband,  wife  and  their
    children) are citizens of China.  Their appeals against  the  Secretary
    of State's refusal of their protection claims were  allowed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kempton following a hearing on 17 July  2018.   Her
    reasons are set out in two decisions promulgated 21  August  2018;  the
    judge made a separate determination in respect of the second  appellant
    in the light of the particular issues relating to her case.

 3. The first appellant who was born in 1972 came to the United Kingdom  in
    2006 and claimed asylum on 9 August 2007 following  his  conviction  of
    possession and control of false  identity  documents  (he  had  used  a
    Japanese passport on 2 August that year).

 4. The judge's decision  in  relation  to  the  first,  third  and  fourth
    appellants (the first decision)  refers  to  the  conviction  (and  the
    asylum  claim)  having  taken  place  in  2017  which  is   clearly   a
    typographical error.

 5. The Criminal Court had recommended the  first  appellant's  deportation
    and he was served with a notice to  make  a  deportation  order  on  13
    September 2007.  He unsuccessfully appealed that decision to  the  AIT.
    Immigration Judge Suchak gave reasons for his decision to  dismiss  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules  and  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds in a decision dated 18 January 2008.  A deportation  order  was
    made against the first appellant on 3 March 2008.

 6. The first appellant lodged further representations with  the  Secretary
    of State on two occasions in 2011.  The first was rejected for  reasons
    in a letter dated 4 February 2011.  The Secretary of  State  considered
    that no evidence had  been  produced  to  demonstrate  that  the  first
    appellant was Christian as claimed in those representations nor was  it
    accepted that the first appellant had family life in the United Kingdom
    or that  he  was  in  a  subsisting  relationship.   Removal  would  be
    proportionate to his established  private  life.   The  second  set  of
    representations led to a further refusal dated 7 September  2011.   The
    claim had been that the first appellant had been regularly attending St
    Aloysius Church in Glasgow and had wanted to become  more  involved  in
    proselytising.  He claimed to have been involved  in  the  Hu  Han  Pai
    religion  in  China.   The  appellant  had  produced  a  copy  of   his
    certificate of marriage to the second appellant on 26  July  2011.   He
    had also produced a birth certificate of the third appellant  dated  13
    May 2011.  The respondent did not  accept  the  evidence  of  the  risk
    claimed by the first appellant  that  he  would  face  because  of  his
    religion and it would not be disproportionate for him together with the
    second and third appellants to return to China.

 7.  Time  passed.   On  5  August  2014  and  22  November  2015   further
    representations were made on behalf  of  the  first  appellant  seeking
    revocation of the deportation order on the  basis  of  his  family  and
    private life, the difficulties the children would face  on  return  and
    the risk the first appellant would face as a  Mormon  and  his  imputed
    political  opinion.   His  fear  also  included  a   risk   of   forced
    sterilisation.  By then the third and fourth appellants had been  born.
    For reasons given in a detailed  decision  dated  31  August  2017  the
    Secretary of State refused the protection and human rights claim  which
    he nevertheless  considered  had  amounted  to  a  fresh  claim  within
    paragraph 353 and thus giving rise to the  right  of  appeal  to  Judge
    Kempton.

 8. The second appellant came to the United Kingdom on 18 April  2005  when
    she entered with a false passport.  She too has a  lengthy  history  of
    dealings with the Secretary of State which included the claim to asylum
    made on 27 May 2005 against which she had appealed unsuccessfully.  Her
    most recent representations  following  two  sets  made  in  April  and
    December 2015 were on 27 April 2017.  Her fear of return was  based  on
    her Mongolian ethnicity, breach of the Chinese Family Planning  Policy,
    membership of the Church of Jesus  Christ  of  Latter  Day  Saints  and
    medical problems encountered by the fourth appellant.  In addition, the
    second appellant claimed a fear of persecution based  on  her  father's
    political opinion and the protest she had organised in relation to  his
    arrest which had been considered in the appeal in 2005.

 9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidge granted permission to  the  Secretary
    of State to appeal Judge Kempton's decisions for reasons given  in  her
    grant dated 2 October 2018 as follows:

         "         ...

         2.    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kempton  (Ft  TJ)  allowed   the
             husband's appeal,  brought  to  prevent  his  deportation,  on
             asylum grounds, finding that  because  he  would  be  returned
             without a passport he is at  a  risk  of  being  detained  and
             questioned until officials have determined how  he  should  be
             treated in the context of being a failed asylum seeker with  a
             UK criminal conviction [29,31,32], and additionally  he  might
             be subject to forced sterilisation.  The human  rights  appeal
             was allowed on the basis that it would be disproportionate  to
             deport in light of the length of residence and integration  of
             the children, the eldest of whom is seven,  who  might  resent
             their parents for failing to prevent their removal, as well as
             the difficulties the mother would face in  looking  after  the
             children if her husband were to be detained [36].  The  wife's
             asylum grounds on  ethnicity  and  religion  were  also  found
             established, and her and the  children's  family  life  rights
             similarly infringed.

         3.    There  is  merit  in  the  grounds  concerning  international
             protection when they point out the paucity of reasoning in the
             context  of  the  decision  running  counter  to  the  country
             guidance cases, which are not referred to,  and  the  previous
             judicial decisions.  The grounds also  have  merit  when  they
             argue the Article 8 assessment is incomplete  and  flawed  for
             failing  to  consider  all  relevant  permutations  and  being
             without reference to the relevant tests, including that of 117
             of the 2002 Act.

         4.   The grounds reveal arguable errors of law."

10. The application for permission to appeal  in  relation  to  the  first,
    third, fourth and fifth appellants was in the following terms:

         "The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal (FTT)  has  made  a  material
         error of law in the Determination.

         1.   The Appellant is subject to deportation action  and  seeks  to
             avoid deportation on protection and human rights grounds,  the
             Appellants  three  children  are   also   included   in   this
             determination  whilst   the   FTTJ   has   made   a   separate
             determination (PA/08999/2017) in  relation  to  his  wife  see
             paragraph  20  of  the   determination.    Although   separate
             determinations it may be prudent  that  the  grounds  in  both
             appeals are considered by the same FTTJ.

         2.   It would appear from the determination  that  the  FTTJ  finds
             that the Appellant is in need of International  protection  on
             the  basis  of  double  jeopardy  and   a   risk   of   forced
             sterilisation if deported to China.

         3.   If the FTTJ is correct regarding the risk of  double  jeopardy
             it would in effect mean that  any  foreign  national  offender
             from China could not be deported and as such this  finding  is
             irrational.

         4.   It is also of note that the  FTTJ  has  failed  to  take  into
             account  paragraphs  40-42  of  the  decision   letter   dated
             31/08/2017  that  specifically  deals  with  this  issue  with
             reference to the Country Guidance case of  JC  China  CG  2008
             UKIAT 00036.  Failure to address the rational of the aforesaid
             country guidance case is a material error of law.

         5.   In a similar way it is asserted that the FTTJ  has  failed  to
             address the findings in the Country guidance case of AX  China
             CG 2008 00097 (IAC)  as  relied  on  by  the  respond  in  the
             decision  letter  at  paragraphs  26-38,  again  this  failure
             represents a material error of law.

         6.   With regards to the children  and  family  life  there  is  no
             indication in the determination that the FTTJ  has  considered
             the mandatory requirements of section 117, and has only  found
             that it would be  disproportionate  for  the  children  to  be
             removed (paragraph 37 of the determination), failure to  apply
             the higher threshold of unduly harsh consequences as  this  is
             an appeal against deportation is a further material  error  in
             law.

         7.   It is of note that the FTTJ has not considered the possibility
             of the children remaining with  the  Appellants  wife  if  her
             separate determination is upheld by the  tribunal.   The  FTTJ
             has made no findings  of  would  there  be  any  unduly  harsh
             consequences if the Appellant was deported  and  the  children
             were to remain in the United Kingdom.

         Permission to appeal is respectfully sought.

         An oral hearing is requested."

11. In respect of the second appellant,  the  grounds  of  challenge,  from
    which I quote the relevant extracts:

         "Ethnicity/past persecution

         2.   It is respectfully submitted that in coming to the  conclusion
             the Appellant has been persecuted due to  her  ethnicity,  the
             FTTJ has failed to address paragraphs  46-48  of  the  refusal
             letter  dated  31/08/2017.   The  Appellant  may  indeed  face
             discrimination upon return to China but there is no  objective
             evidence to suggest that she would be persecuted on account of
             her bring an ethnic Mongolian.

         3.   The FTTJ has relied on the medical report of  Dr  Moultrie  to
             depart from the  previous  credibility  findings  made  by  IJ
             Grimes in 2005.  Dr Moultrie  has  relied  on  the  Appellants
             account that she was sexually assaulted and is as a result  is
             experiencing mental health  issues.   Although  Dr  Moultrie's
             expertise is not in  doubt  there  is  no  indication  in  the
             determination that other causes were considered in  particular
             the stress and anxiety  connected  with  the  appeals  process
             culminating in a hearing.  With reliance placed on the starred
             authority of AE & Anor Sri  Lanka  [2002]  UKIAT  05237,  with
             particular reference to paragraph 8.

         4.   It is therefore  respectfully  submitted  that  the  FTTJ  has
             failed to give clear reasons as  to  why  the  finding  of  IJ
             Grimes should not be followed or the starting point  for  this
             determination.  It is note that the report of Dr  Moultrie  is
             dated 2011, there is no suggestion that IJ  Grimes  failed  to
             conduct a balanced  impartial  assessment  of  the  Appellants
             claim in 2005 even if  the  Appellant  was  suffering  from  a
             mental health condition at that time would have been  able  to
             make detailed findings  on  the  Appellants  credibility  that
             would not be a matter for Dr Moultrie to consider.

         5.   Even if the FTTJ has found that the Appellant was  subject  to
             past persecution in paragraph 51 of  the  determination,  past
             persecution is not an indicator  of  future  persecution  with
             reliance placed on I v Sweden - 61204/09  -  Chamber  Judgment
             [2013] ECHR 813 (05 September 2013).  The FTTJ is required  to
             give clear reasons as to  why  at  the  date  of  hearing  the
             Appellant would be at risk.

         Religion

         6.   It is of note that in the husbands determination at  paragraph
             30 this FTTJ finds that appellants conversion more  likely  to
             be convince rather than genuine but in the alternative  finds,
             it appears to be the position that the Mormon  Church  advises
             its adherents to obey the laws of the country where  they  may
             be practising the faith and so would include not proselytising
             anything to arouse the anger of the Chines authorities  if  he
             is a genuine Mormon and if wishes to  practise  the  faith  in
             China.  It follows that the same finding should apply to  this
             Appellant any other approach would be irrational.

         Family planning

         7.   It is also of note that the  FTTJ  has  failed  to  take  into
             account  paragraphs  49-61  of  the  decision   letter   dated
             31/08/2017  that  specifically  deals  with  this  issue  with
             reference to the Country Guidance case of  AX  China  CG  2012
             UKUT 00097 (IAC) this failure represents a material  error  of
             law.

         Children

         8.   At paragraph 52 of the determination the FTTJ observes that it
             would be unreasonable for the children to  go  to  China  with
             their father and without their mother.  The current  situation
             is that all the family are to be removed  to  China,  if  only
             this Appellant was successful in their appeal the  SSHD  would
             revisit the situation regarding the position of  the  children
             and consider the question of splitting the  family  and  would
             there be any unduly harsh consequences as a result."

12.  Judge  Kempton's  first  decision  refers  to  the  first  appellant's
    acceptance that he had used a false identity in the United Kingdom  for
    a number of years.  He is in fact XG.  The judge was not satisfied that
    the first appellant was ever a Christian in China and in respect of his
    fear  based  on  a  crime  of  assault  that  was  of  prosecution  not
    persecution.  The judge did also not accept that  the  first  appellant
    was a "genuine adherent of  the  Mormon  faith".   In  respect  of  the
    incident of assault which had happened prior  to  the  first  appellant
    leaving China (using a fish knife in the living room where a  religious
    gathering was taking place which was used  on  a  police  officer)  the
    judge considered that as "an admitted felon  in  China,  the  appellant
    cannot claim he should not be  returned  to  his  country  of  origin".
    Based however on a report by Dr Dhillon on the risk  of  re-prosecution
    for the offence for which the first appellant  had  been  convicted  in
    2007, the judge accepted the expert's view and found  a  real  risk  of
    detention of the first appellant and questioning of him on  return  and
    "a real risk of detention without trial without trial for years".

13. The judge also referred to a report by Dr Sheehan.  A Country  Guidance
    Note on China dated March 2018 was also considered  by  the  judge  who
    explained at [32] and [33]:

         "32. ... The guidance note also makes reference to persons who have
             committed crimes which would bring them within  the  ambit  of
             Article 1F of the Refugee Convention thus excluding them  from
             protection.  That was not a matter argued before me.  However,
             if it is the case that the  appellant  did  assault  a  police
             officer,  then  he  would  be  excluded   from   the   Refugee
             convention.  Dr Sheehan does not seem to have been asked about
             that matter.

         33.  On the basis that Dr Sheehan's report is dated 10  April  2018
             and so is dated after the country guidance note, I assume that
             he has taken that note into account  in  his  report  and  his
             expert opinion  is  based  upon  his  assessment  of  all  the
             evidence given to him."

14. In respect of the risk of sterilization, the judge explained at [34]:

         "34. In relation to the three children of the  marriage,  it  would
             appear that there is a  real  risk  of  sterilisation  of  the
             appellant's wife on account of  her  background  and  lack  of
             hukou for herself.  The appellant too, may face a real risk of
             sterilisation on return, given that he will be regarded  as  a
             felon who has assaulted a police officer.  They are  a  family
             likely to come to the attention of the authorities on  account
             of their background  and  also  on  account  of  having  three
             children, which will certainly make them stand out in China."

15. In respect of the children  the  judge  noted  the  evidence  of  their
    development in the United Kingdom and concluded at [36] and [37]:

         "36. It is clear that the children will be  very  much  at  sea  if
             uprooted  from  where  they  have   grown   up   in   familiar
             surroundings and taken to an alien country  and  culture  with
             very different ways of looking after the population.  There is
             also the risk that they would be separated from their  parents
             on arrival as their father could be  detained  and  questioned
             and their mother would then have  to  find  accommodation  and
             work to maintain the children  on  her  own  while  trying  to
             obtain  a  hukou  for  them  all.   Clearly,  there  would  be
             significant practical difficulties for the  family  on  return
             and for the children  this  could  lead  to  a  real  risk  of
             impacting negatively upon their psychological health.

         37.  Clearly in all the  circumstances,  removal  of  the  children
             would be a breach of their rights to family and  private  life
             as they need to be together as a family  with  their  parents.
             The siblings also need to be together as a family unit.  It is
             not just the eldest child  of  7  who  can  be  looked  at  in
             isolation.  It would be completely disproportionate to society
             for the children to be removed and in  particular  the  eldest
             child.  The family must remain as a family group.  Section  55
             makes it clear that the respondent has a clear  duty  to  have
             due regard to the welfare of the children. The only  means  of
             doing so on the particular facts of this case is to allow  the
             appeal."

16. In relation to the second appellant, the judge observed in  her  second
    decision  that  YT  had  unsuccessfully  appealed  in  2005  which  was
    dismissed by  Immigration  Judge  Grimes  which  she  regarded  as  her
    starting point.  She also considered evidence from Dr Patricia Moultrie
    from the Medical Foundation who had seen the second appellant in  2011,
    a psychological report from Dr Asghar dated 17  December  2017  and  an
    expert report from Dr Elena Consiglio who had addressed issues relating
    to family planning, freedom of  religion  and  the  second  appellant's
    ethnicity.

17. Having reviewed all the evidence the judge concluded that it was  clear
    the second appellant had been ill-treated on account of  her  political
    opinion and  ethnicity  in  China.   She  considered  there  was  added
    complication by virtue of the second appellant's religion as  a  Mormon
    and continued in respect of the risk the second appellant would face by
    three children having been born in "out of plan" at [50]:

         "50. Added to the above factors is the issue of three children born
             out of plan.  The appellant  herself  did  not  have  a  Hukou
             apparently, although she did attend school.  The lack of Hukou
             on return is, however, likely to be the least of her  problems
             as her mental health is likely to deteriorate if she is to  be
             returned.   Given  her  profile  and  ethnic   and   political
             background, I would have thought that  having  three  children
             will not assist her safety and so if anyone  is  going  to  be
             targeted for forced sterilisation, there is a very  real  risk
             that the appellant would be such a person."

18. Returning to the issue of persecution the judge explained at [51]:

         "51. The appellant runs a real risk of persecution  on  account  of
             her political opinion mixed with her ethnicity as a person  of
             Mongolian ethnicity.  Past  persecution  is  an  indicator  of
             future persecution.  She has suffered serious  persecution  in
             the past and this is likely to be repeated on return given her
             illegal escape from detention and departure from the country."

19. Finally, in respect of the children the judge reasoned at [52]:

         "52. In relation to Article 8, the appellant has  her  husband  and
             three children in the UK.  The eldest child is now aged  seven
             years.  The three children were born in the UK and have  never
             left the country.  It would be unreasonable to expect them  to
             go to China with their father and without their  mother.   The
             children are entitled to have family life with both parents in
             the UK.  In addition, the eldest child has built up a  private
             life in the UK and it would be disproportionate for the eldest
             child to be expected to leave behind the friends made and life
             in the UK.  The welfare of the children in terms of section 55
             would not be served by removing them from  the  UK  with  only
             their father."

 1. In respect of appellants QW  and  the  children,  EY,  EW  and  ZW,  Mr
    Matthews indicated at the outset of his submissions that he  maintained
    the  Secretary  of  State's  challenge  to  the  judge's  decision   on
    protection grounds but acknowledged  difficulties  in  respect  of  the
    challenge to the Article 8 grounds.  The decision letter in  error  had
    considered QW's case based on the regime in Part 13 of the  Immigration
    Rules in particular paragraphs A39 et seq.   The  first  appellant  had
    been sentenced to three months'  imprisonment  and  the  only  possible
    application in Part 13 would be  paragraph  398(c).   It  was  not  the
    Secretary of State's case that his offending had caused serious harm or
    that he was a persistent offender who showed a particular disregard for
    the law.  The judge  had  therefore  correctly  applied  a  traditional
    Article 8 approach by not treating the appellant as a foreign criminal.
     This has left Mr Mathews with  "nowhere  to  go"  as  to  the  judge's
    Article 8 conclusion.  Similarly,  in  respect  of  the  children,  the
    acknowledged difficulty  for  the  Secretary  of  State  was  that  the
    challenge had been brought on  a  misconceived  basis  and  Mr  Mathews
    considered that he was  unable  to  challenge  the  judge's  Article  8
    decision in relation to the children based on  the  opinions  from  the
    experts.

 2. As a result, Mr Mathews sought permission to withdraw the Secretary  of
    State's case insofar as it  related  to  the  challenge  on  Article  8
    grounds.  If granted this would resolve the appeals for the children in
    their entirety and for QW as to his human rights  claim.   Miss  Irvine
    had nothing to add and accordingly pursuant to Rule 17 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I consented to the withdrawal  of
    the part of the Secretary of State's  case  in  respect  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention identified by Mr Matthews.

 3. In respect of the challenge to the decision on protection  grounds,  Mr
    McGuire obtained instructions in the course of the morning  which  were
    in terms not to  resist  the  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  on
    protection grounds.  He sought to withdraw QW's case in that regard and
    I gave permission for him to do so.  Accordingly,  the  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State on the protection grounds decision by the First-tier
    Tribunal is allowed.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    protection grounds in relation  to  QW  is  set  aside.  I  remake  the
    decision on protection grounds and dismiss the appeal on those grounds.
    The decision by the First-tier Tribunal  on  human  rights  grounds  in
    relation to the appellants QW, EY, EW and ZW allowing  the  appeals  on
    human grounds stands.

 4. In respect of YT, Mr Matthews took a near similar approach  in  respect
    of YT's appeal.  He sought permission  to  withdraw  the  Secretary  of
    State not only on Article 8 grounds but in respect  of  the  protection
    claim.  That claim had initially  been  based  on  YT's  ethnicity  and
    imputed political opinion.  Although the evidence  of  the  letter  had
    been rejected by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grimes,  new  evidence  was
    provided before Judge Kempton.  Mr Mathews accepted that the judge  had
    considered the case properly and gave acceptable  reasons  for  finding
    the account reliable.  She had accepted that it was highly likely  that
    YT would come to the attention of the authorities.  Although Mr Mathews
    had reservations in relation to the limb of the asylum  claim  relating
    to YT's religion, he considered that this was no longer material in the
    light of his acceptance of the other limbs  to  the  protection  claim.
    Accordingly, he sought permission to withdraw the Secretary of  State's
    case in its entirety and  as  a  consequence  the  appeal  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton allowing YT's  appeal  on
    protection and human  rights  grounds.   Understandably  this  was  not
    resisted by Mr Byrne.  Accordingly, the  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in the Upper Tribunal is withdrawn and the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kempton in respect of YT's appeal stands.


Signed                                           Date 19 April 2019.


         UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

