
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09273/2017 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 16 July 2020                     |On: 30 July 2020                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                CHATERAM [P]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Waheed, instructed by Lambeth Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business.  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision of  30
August 2017 refusing his protection and human rights  claim,  further  to  a
deportation order issued against him on 14 August 2014.

The appellant is a citizen of Guyana, born on 26 November 1988.  He  arrived
in the UK on 20 July 2005, aged 16, with entry clearance  as  the  dependant
of his mother who held a work permit visa. He was granted further  leave  on
the same basis, followed by indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  his  mother's
dependant, on 10 September 2009.

On 17 January 2014 the appellant was convicted of three  counts  of  assault
and was sentenced to a total of 15 months' imprisonment. On  11  March  2014
he was served with a notice of liability to automatic deportation and on  14
August 2014 a deportation order was signed. A  decision  was  also  made  to
refuse his human rights claim and to certify the claim under section 94B  of
the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  The  appellant  made
written representations on several occasions, on  medical  grounds,  between
2014 and 2016, all  of  which  were  refused  under  paragraph  353  of  the
immigration rules.  He  also  made  various  unsuccessful  applications  for
judicial review to challenge the refusal  decisions.  On  23  May  2017  the
appellant claimed asylum. Following the judgment in Kiarie and  Byndloss,  R
(on the applications of) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
[2017] UKSC 42 the section 94B certified decision of 14 August 2014 and  the
refusal decisions made under paragraph 353 were withdrawn.

The respondent then made a new decision  on  30  August  2017  refusing  the
appellant's protection and human rights claim. The appellant's asylum  claim
was  treated  as  implicitly  withdrawn,  under  paragraph   333C   of   the
immigration rules, owing to the lack of information and  evidence  provided.
As for the appellant's human rights claim, the  respondent  considered  that
the exceptions to deportation in paragraph 399 and 399A did not  apply.  The
respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
relationship with a British partner but did not consider that  it  would  be
unduly harsh for his partner to live with him in Guyana or to  live  without
him in the UK. With regard to private life, the respondent  noted  that  the
appellant had not spent more than half his  life  in  the  UK  and  did  not
accept that he was socially and culturally integrated  in  the  UK  or  that
there were very significant obstacles to  his  integration  in  Guyana.  The
respondent did not accept that there were any very compelling  circumstances
outweighing the public interest in the appellant's deportation,  noting  his
conviction  in  January  2014  on  three  counts  of  assault,  a   previous
conviction on 12 December 2012 for using threatening and abusive  words  for
which he received a one year community order, and  a  subsequent  conviction
on 17 October 2016 for sending a  communication/  article  of  an  indecent/
offensive nature, for which he was sentenced to a one year community  order.
The respondent concluded that the appellant's deportation would  not  breach
Article 8. In regard to Article 3, the respondent noted that  the  appellant
suffered from mental health issues and that the  medical  evidence  referred
to him having tried to hurt himself with a rope/ hanging and to continue  to
have suicidal thoughts. The respondent did not accept that  the  appellant's
mental health problems reached the Article 3 threshold and  did  not  accept
that he could succeed on  Article  3  grounds  in  relation  to  a  risk  of
suicide.

The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision and his appeal  was
heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 28 March  2019  by  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Devittie. The evidence before the judge was  that  the  appellant  was
living with his mother and his partner,  both  of  whom  provided  him  with
emotional and financial support. The appellant's mother was a nurse in full-
time employment and his partner was a teacher. The appellant stated that  he
had no ties to Guyana and would not be able to find work  there  because  of
his mental health condition. His partner  would  not  be  able  to  move  to
Guyana with him due to her ties to the UK. The judge also had before  him  a
witness statement from the appellant's friend as well as evidence  from  the
appellant's GP which referred to his depression, thoughts of  self-harm  and
increased alcohol consumption.

Judge Devittie noted that the appellant had arrived in the UK  aged  16  and
was currently 31 and observed that there was a sense in which  it  could  be
said that he had spent most of his life in the UK. He also  found  that  the
appellant was fully integrated in the UK. However he concluded that,  whilst
there were significant obstacles to the appellant's  integration  in  Guyana
owing to his mental health condition, he did not consider such obstacles  to
be very significant. The judge accepted that the appellant was in a  genuine
relationship with his partner and that they  intended  to  get  married.  He
accepted that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's partner  to  move
to Guyana. However, whilst he accepted that the appellant's separation  from
his partner would effectively destroy their relationship, he  did  not  find
that the appellant's removal from the  UK  would  be  unduly  harsh  on  his
partner  and  he  did  not  consider  that  there   were   very   compelling
circumstances  outweighing  the  public  interest  in  his  deportation.  He
accordingly dismissed the appeal.

The appellant sought permission to appeal Judge Devittie's decision  to  the
Upper Tribunal on the grounds that he had failed to  follow  the  guidelines
in Razgar [2004] 2 AC 368 and had failed to take into account the rights  of
the appellant's partner in accordance with the  guidance  in  Beoku-Betts  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 39;  that  the  judge
had overstepped his powers by assuming the role of doctor in  assessing  the
appellant's ability to manage in  Guyana  in  light  of  his  mental  health
concerns; and that the judge's findings were inconsistent with  guidance  in
Huang v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007]  UKHL  11  and  JD
(Congo) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  &  Anor  [2012]
EWCA Civ 327.

Permission to appeal was refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and,  on  a
renewed application, by the Upper Tribunal. However, in a  "Cart"  challenge
to the Administrative Court, the appellant sought to judicially  review  the
refusal to grant permission and permission was granted by the Honourable  Mr
Justice Griffiths on the following basis:

    "The FTT decision considered the application of section 117C and  found
    that Exception 1(a) and (b) applied (claimant lawfully resident in  the
    UK for most of his life, socially and culturally integrated in the UK).
    In relation to (c) ...the FTT decision identified many relevant factors
    but concludes that "whilst it is  fair  to  say  that  there  would  be
    significant obstacles to his integration, I am not able  to  reach  the
    conclusion that such obstacles would be very significant." The basis on
    which the FTT drew this distinction was arguably wrong in law. Much  of
    its reasoning was to the  effect  that  the  significant  obstacles  in
    question might have been worse but the test is "very  significant"  not
    "most significant" or "significant in the extreme". The claimant  would
    have succeeded if he had been within Exception 1.

    The FTT decision also considered Exception 2 and accepted that C "has a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner".  As  to
    whether "the effect of C's deportation on the partner...would be unduly
    harsh"  the  FTT  decided  that  the  relationship  had  been  one   of
    cohabitation since 2013 and that they intended to  marry  and  start  a
    life together and that "considerable emotional distress will be  caused
    to his partner by a separation from him"  and  that  deportation  would
    mean the end of the  relationship  altogether...The  FTT  decided  that
    there would be  "harsh  consequences"...but  that  they  would  not  be
    "unduly harsh". The basis upon which this  distinction  was  drawn  was
    arguably wrong in law, since (a) it was based on the partner's  health,
    employment, and family and friends, rather than on the  effect  of  the
    deportation and end of the relationship, and (b) it was  based  on  the
    fact that the consequences would be mitigated, rather than  considering
    whether they were in themselves unduly harsh. The claimant  would  have
    succeeded if he had been within Exception 2.

    The FTT considered only the  section  117C  factors  and  conducted  no
    assessment by reference to Article 8 itself or the guidance in R(Huang)
    v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11.

    The UT decision was arguably wrong in law in failing  to  identify  and
    address these points and in refusing permission to appeal."

In the absence of any request for a substantive hearing following the  grant
of permission, the Administrative Court quashed the decision  of  the  Upper
Tribunal refusing permission and  permission  was  subsequently  granted  by
Vice-President Ockelton in the Upper Tribunal on 3 January 2020.

The matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 20 February  2020,  but
was adjourned in order for the appellant to clarify and  amend  his  grounds
in light of the decision of the Administrative Court and for the  respondent
to then serve a rule 24 response in reply.  UTJ  Finch  made  directions  to
that effect. The appellant served his amended grounds on 9  March  2020  and
the respondent served a rule 24 response on 19  March  2020.  Following  the
issuing of further directions, the matter was listed for  a  remote  hearing
on 16 July 2020 and  both  parties  submitted  skeleton  arguments  for  the
hearing. The matter came before me.

Both parties raised preliminary issues. Mr Jarvis objected  to  the  amended
grounds on the basis that, whilst they reflected the  order  of  Mr  Justice
Griffiths in the Administrative Court,  they  were  significantly  different
from the original grounds which led to the  refusal  of  permission  in  the
Upper Tribunal. Mr Jarvis relied upon the  case  of  Shah  ('Cart'  judicial
review: nature and consequences) [2018] UKUT 51 and  the  guidance  therein,
that a 'Cart' challenge was not an opportunity to raise new grounds  against
the First-tier Tribunal's decision and he submitted that permission had  not
yet been given to argue these new grounds. Mr Jarvis submitted further  that
if the amended grounds were admitted, the Secretary of  State  ought  to  be
able to challenge the finding that the appellant had spent  more  than  half
his life in the UK, as he had not done so. That was raised in  the  rule  24
response. Mr Jarvis acknowledged that the rule 24 response was  filed  three
days out of time, but he asked me to extend time and admit it. He  submitted
that  the  respondent  could  not  have  raised  this  ground  of  challenge
previously, as she had succeeded in the appeal in all respects. He  referred
to the cases of Smith (appealable decisions;  PTA  requirements;  anonymity)
[2019] UKUT 216 and The Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Devani
[2020] EWCA Civ 612 (paragraph 27) in that respect.

Mr Waheed, in response, submitted that the argument based  on  the  guidance
in Shah had been fully ventilated by UTJ Finch on 20 February 2020  and  she
had granted permission to amend the  grounds.  He  asked  that  the  amended
grounds therefore be relied upon. However he asked that the rule 24  not  be
admitted as it was filed out  of  time,  and  that  the  respondent  not  be
permitted to challenge the finding that the appellant had spent most of  his
life in the UK.

Having heard from both  parties  I  accepted  Mr  Waheed's  submission  that
permission had been granted to amend the grounds. In any  event  I  did  not
consider the grounds to be as significantly different  to  those  originally
pleaded as Mr Jarvis was suggesting, albeit  that  they  were  expressed  in
different terms to the original, rather vague grounds. I also considered  it
to be in the interests of justice to extend time for the rule  24  response,
given the short period of delay and the current  circumstances  relating  to
coronavirus. Furthermore, I  admitted  the  respondent's  challenge  to  the
appellant having spent most of his life in the  UK,  given  that  the  judge
appeared to have made an  observation  rather  than  a  clear  and  specific
finding in that regard and that, in any event, it was manifestly  wrong  and
factually incorrect to conclude that the appellant had spent more than  half
his life in the UK.

The appeal then proceeded on the basis of the  amended  grounds.  Mr  Waheed
expanded upon those grounds in his submissions. He submitted that the  judge
had  applied  a  higher  test  than  "very   significant   obstacles"   when
considering the exception in section 117C(4) of the NIAA  2002  Act,  as  it
was not necessary for the appellant to show an absence of any mental  health
services in Guyana. It  was  sufficient,  for  the  correct  test  of  "very
significant obstacles", for the appellant to show  that  the  mental  health
services in Guyana were inadequate, which is what the judge found  at  [17].
In view of the appellant's mental health condition  of  moderate  to  severe
clinical depression, as confirmed in the medical evidence produced of  which
the most recent  was  a  letter  from  his  GP  dated  18  March  2019,  and
considering his previous suicide attempt and the lack of  adequate  services
in Guyana, there was  sufficient  to  meet  the  test  of  very  significant
obstacles. The judge relied on the appellant's mother's  ability  to  assist
him financially in mitigating against the obstacles to integration  but  did
not explain how financial assistance would  resolve  the  lack  of  adequate
mental health services in Guyana, a country which had  the  highest  suicide
rate. As for the exception in section 117C(5), Mr Waheed submitted that  the
judge again applied too high a test for 'unduly harsh' and wrongly  focussed
on the mitigation of the appellant's partner's loss rather than on the  fact
that deportation would end the relationship.  The  judge  relied  on  "glib"
factors and failed to consider the effect upon the  appellant's  partner  of
the man she loved returning to a country  with  no  adequate  mental  health
support. Mr Waheed submitted further that the judge, when considering  'very
compelling circumstances' failed to analyse matters  through  the  prism  of
Article 8 and proportionality.

Mr Jarvis, in response,  submitted  that  Mr  Waheed  had  focussed  on  the
inadequacy of the mental  health  services  in  Guyana  but  had  failed  to
consider that the appellant had made no case  on  his  own  evidence  of  an
absence of relevant support and had failed to show any evidence of  how  the
appellant functioned on a daily basis. The judge did not find the  appellant
to be a suicide risk and did not accept the claim that  his  mother  had  to
watch over him. The evidence did not show that the appellant was in need  of
substantial intervention  from  the  mental  health  services.  The  judge's
approach was therefore perfectly permissible. In regard to the  question  of
deportation being 'unduly harsh'. Mr Jarvis relied on the  case  of  LE  (St
Vincent  And  the  Grenadines)  v  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2020] EWCA Civ 505 in submitting that the  'unduly  harsh'  test
was a high one and that the normal impact of  separation  on  a  partner  or
child was not sufficient  to  reach  that  threshold.  Likewise,  the  'very
compelling circumstances' test was very high and it could not be  said  that
that high test was met on the findings made by the judge.

In reply, Mr Waheed reiterated the points previously made in regard  to  the
appellant's mental health concerns and the lack of support in Guyana.

Discussion

Whether rightly or wrongly raised at the stage that it  was,  the  fact  was
that the appellant could not meet the exception to  deportation  in  section
117C(4), irrespective of the question  of  'very  significant  obstacles  to
integration', as he  had  not  spent  most  of  his  life  in  the  UK.  The
conclusion that Exception 1 did not apply was accordingly the  correct  one,
irrespective of any decision on the other limbs of section 117C(4).

In any event, the judge was fully and properly entitled  to  find  that  the
requirements of section 117C(4) could not  be  met  with  respect  to  'very
significant obstacles' to integration in Guyana. I  find  no  error  in  the
judge's approach to that matter and do not agree with  the  suggestion  that
he applied a higher test, nor that he required  there  to  be  obstacles  to
integration which were "most significant" or "significant in  the  extreme".
The judge was fully and properly aware of  the  correct  test,  he  directed
himself appropriately in that regard, he  fully  engaged  with  the  medical
evidence and he correctly applied the test to the evidence  and  the  facts.
It is not the case, as Mr Waheed suggested, that the  judge  required  there
to be an absence of mental health services in Guyana in order for  the  test
of 'very significant obstacles' to be  met.  As  Mr  Jarvis  submitted,  the
judge found that the evidence showed there to be some mental health  support
in Guyana, albeit limited, and that the appellant had not  made  a  case  of
his own to show that he would not be able to access any support or  to  show
the effect on him of such limited services being available. I disagree  with
Mr  Waheed,  that  the  availability  of  financial  assistance   from   the
appellant's mother was irrelevant  to  the  question  of  access  to  mental
health services in Guyana. Clearly, having access to funds would assist.

Furthermore, it is relevant to have regard to  the  medical  evidence  which
had been produced by the  appellant  which,  as  Mr  Jarvis  submitted,  was
limited and did not provide any information as to how  he  functioned  on  a
daily basis. Having considered the medical  evidence  myself,  it  is  clear
that it contained very limited  information  about  the  appellant's  mental
health condition and little about his support needs,  that  it  included  no
evidence in the form of psychiatric or psychological reports  despite  there
being letters of appointments following  referrals  made  to  mental  health
services, and that the most recent evidence  was  simply  a  short  and  not
particularly informative letter from the  appellant's  GP,  dated  18  March
2019. In addition to the limited medical evidence  the  judge,  at  [16(4)],
rejected the claim that the appellant had to be watched by  his  mother  and
needed looking after and clearly was of the  view  that  the  appellant  had
overstated his limitations as a result of his mental health.  Accordingly  I
agree with Mr Jarvis that it is difficult to see how the  judge  could  have
concluded, on the evidence before him, that the appellant had met  the  test
of showing 'very significant obstacles' to integration on the basis  of  his
mental health condition, even if  considered  cumulatively  with  the  other
factors at [16].

Likewise, I do not agree that  the  judge  erred  in  his  approach  to  the
'unduly harsh' question or applied a more stringent test than  was  lawfully
required. The appellant's grounds suggest that  the  fact  that  deportation
would effectively put an end  to  his  relationship  with  his  partner  was
sufficient to meet the unduly harsh test, but that it  is  clearly  not  the
case. As Mr Jarvis  submitted,  with  reference  to  the  case  of  LE,  the
reality of deportation was that families would be separated and there  would
be an adverse impact on partners and children, but that  did  not  meet  the
high threshold of showing that it was 'unduly harsh'. It  is  not  the  case
that the judge focussed only  on  factors  mitigating  the  consequences  of
deportation for the appellant's partner rather than considering  whether  it
would  be  'unduly  harsh'.  Clearly,  the  impact  of  deportation  on  the
appellant's  partner  was  a  relevant  consideration  and  the  judge   was
perfectly entitled, and indeed was required, to consider  her  circumstances
and how she would be affected by his  deportation.  The  judge  clearly  had
regard to the evidence from  the  appellant's  partner  and  considered  all
relevant circumstances and, as Mr Jarvis submitted, it is difficult to  see,
on the evidence before the judge, how a finding could have  been  made  that
the impact of deportation on the appellant's partner was 'unduly harsh'.

As regards the third ground of appeal, namely a  failure  by  the  judge  to
undertake an Article 8 analysis outside the immigration rules, I agree  with
Mr Jarvis' submission that it is simply wrong in law to  require  a  further
assessment outside section 117C of the NIAA 2002. Mr Jarvis' submissions  at
[16] refer to the relevant caselaw in that  regard.  The  correct  test  was
whether there were very compelling circumstances, over and  above  those  in
the exceptions 1 and 2, outweighing the public interest in deportation,  and
the judge properly found, for the  reasons  cogently  given  at  [20],  that
there were none. On the evidence before  the  judge,  and  for  the  reasons
given above in regard to the questions of 'very significant  obstacles'  and
'unduly harsh', that was a conclusion fully and properly open to him.

For all of these reasons I find no errors of law in the judge's approach  to
the relevant statutory provisions in section 117C of the NIAA 2002,  in  his
application of the relevant tests to the evidence, and  in  the  conclusions
that he reached.



DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed:   S Kebede                      Dated:        17 July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
