
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09548/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2021                            |On 3 March 2021               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                    HAHG
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Islam of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born in  January  1983,  who  entered
   the UK and claimed asylum in November 2016. He claims to (a) be  at  risk
   of persecution in Iraq because he converted to  Zoroastrianism;  and  (b)
   face a real risk on return to Iraq that he will  encounter  treatment  or
   conditions which are contrary to Article 3 ECHR because he does not  have
   a civil status identity document ("CSID").

2. The appellant is appealing against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier
   Tribunal Thapar ("the judge") promulgated on 29 January  2020  dismissing
   his appeal against the respondent's refusal of his protection claim on 18
   September 2019.

3. This is the  second  asylum  appeal  by  the  appellant.  In  a  previous
   decision (promulgated in June 2017, by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
   Garbett) the appellant's account was found to be  inconsistent  and  lack
   credibility. Amongst other things, Judge Garbett found that the appellant
   had deliberately tried to dispose of his passport down a toilet in  order
   to withhold or damage information or to mislead an immigration officer.

4. In the decision now being  appealed,  the  judge  found  the  appellant's
   account lacked credibility and did not accept that he  had  converted  to
   Zoroastrianism or that his family disowned him as a consequence.

5. With respect to the appellant's claim to lack a  CSID,  the  judge  found
   that the appellant could obtain a replacement in the UK, with information
   obtained from family in Iraq. The judge  found  that  the  appellant  has
   support, and can receive assistance from, family in Iraq (which  includes
   his parents and three brothers).

6. The grounds of appeal make two arguments. The first  is  that  the  judge
   erred by making unclear findings, and failing to give  adequate  reasons,
   in respect of his conclusion about the appellant not being at risk due to
   his conversion to Zoroastrianism. The second argument in the  grounds  of
   appeal is that the judge failed to assess consistently with SMO, KSP & IM
   (Article 15(c); identity documents) CG Iraq [2019]  UKUT  400  (IAC)  the
   risk the appellant would face due to lacking a CSID and the  difficulties
   he would encounter obtaining a replacement.

7. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal solely in  respect
   of the ground of appeal concerning lack of a CSID.

8. Mr Islam submitted that I should consider  the  first  ground  of  appeal
   notwithstanding the absence of permission. He supported  this  contention
   with arguments about the merits of the ground.

9. The court of appeal has made clear that this Tribunal should,  generally,
   not permit grounds to be advanced if permission has not been  granted  to
   raise them. See, for example, Talpada, R (On the Application  of)  v  The
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 841. Mr  Islam
   was unable to point to any basis (other than to reiterate  and  elaborate
   upon the substance of the ground) as to why argument should be  heard  on
   the ground where permission was not granted. I will therefore limit  this
   appeal to the single ground in respect of which permission was granted.

10. With respect to that ground, Mr  Islam  noted  that  SMO  was  published
   during the period  between  the  hearing  and  the  promulgation  of  the
   decision. He argued that the judge erred by not  giving  the  parties  an
   opportunity to make submissions in the light of SMO.

11. He also submitted that the judge  failed  to  adequately  consider,  and
   make clear findings on, practical difficulties the appellant  would  face
   in obtaining a CSID, in  particular  because  his  family  in  Iraq  have
   disowned him. He criticised the  judge's assessment of the CSID issue for
   being extremely brief and lacking clear findings.

12. Mr Lindsay submitted in response that the appellant has had an  adequate
   opportunity to make  submissions  about  SMO  in  these  proceedings  and
   nothing raised in the grounds (or in Mr Islam's  submissions)  undermines
   the judge's assessment. He argued that  the  assessment  of  whether  the
   appellant could obtain a replacement  CSID  must  be  considered  in  the
   context of the judge's unchallenged finding that the appellant would have
   support from his family (and friend who is a policeman: see paragraph  22
   of the decision) in Iraq and that the appellant  lacked  credibility  and
   intentionally tried to destroy his passport. Mr Lindsay argued  that  the
   findings in paragraph 27 of the decision,  considered  in  this  context,
   clearly establish that the appellant could obtain a replacement CSID.

13. SMO, read together with AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq  CG
   UKUT 00212 (IAC) and AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC)
   explains the circumstances in which an Iraqi in the UK will  be  able  to
   obtain a replacement CSID in the UK.

14. Paragraph 11 of the headnote to SMO states:

           Notwithstanding the phased transition to the INID  within  Iraq,
           replacement  CSIDs  remain  available  through  Iraqi   Consular
           facilities.  Whether an individual will  be  able  to  obtain  a
           replacement CSID whilst in  the  UK  depends  on  the  documents
           available and, critically, the availability of  the  volume  and
           page reference of the entry in the Family Book  in  Iraq,  which
           system continues to underpin the Civil Status Identity  process.
           Given the importance of that information,  most  Iraqi  citizens
           will recall it. That  information  may  also  be  obtained  from
           family members, although it is  necessary  to  consider  whether
           such relatives are on the father's or the mother's side  because
           the registration system is patrilineal.

15. Paragraph 383 of SMO states:

           We have not been asked to revisit the extant country guidance on
           the way in which an individual might obtain a  replacement  CSID
           from within the UK, for which see [173]-[177] of AA  (Iraq)  and
           [26] of AAH (Iraq).  We  add  only  this:  whilst  the  INID  is
           clearly replacing the CSID in Iraq, consulates do not  have  the
           electronic terminals necessary to issue the INID and continue to
           issue the CSID instead, as confirmed in a  Canadian  Immigration
           and Refugee Board  report  which  is  quoted  at  5.6.9  of  the
           respondent's   CPIN   entitled   Internal   Relocation,    civil
           documentation  and  returns,  dated  February  2019.   An  Iraqi
           national in the UK would be able to apply for a CSID in the  way
           explained in AA (Iraq) and, if one was successfully obtained, we
           find that it would be acceptable evidence  of  the  individual's
           identity throughout Iraq.

16. Paragraphs 173 - 177 of AA state:

           Obtaining a CSID whilst in the UK


           173.  As regards those who have an expired or current Iraqi
           passport but no CSID - Dr Fatah identifies in his first report
           that a CSID may be obtained through the "Consular section of the
           Iraqi Embassy in London", which will send a request for a
           replacement or renewed CSID to the General Directorate for
           Travel and Nationality - Directorate of Civil Status. A request
           for a replacement CSID must be accompanied, inter alia, by "any
           form of official document in support of the applicant's
           identity" and the application form must be signed by "the head
           of the family, or the legal guardian or representative to verify
           the truth of its contents." He also added that an applicant must
           also authorise a person in Iraq to act as his representative in
           order for that person to "follow up on the progress of the
           application.


           174.  However, Dr Fatah continued by explaining that if an
           individual has lost his CSID and does not know the relevant page
           and book number for it,  then the Iraq Embassy in London will
           not be able to obtain one on his behalf. Instead, he or she will
           have to attend the appropriate local office of family
           registration in Iraq or give a relative, friend or lawyer power
           of attorney to obtain his or her CSID. The process of a giving
           power of attorney to a lawyer in Iraq to act "as a proxy" is
           commonplace and Dr Fatah had done this himself. He also
           explained that the power of attorney could be obtained through
           the Iraq Embassy.


           175.  Dr Fatah gave further evidence to the effect that having a
           marriage certificate may be useful as it would contain data
           found in the family records. It is, however, not possible to use
           a "health card" in order to obtain a CSID because there is no
           primary health care or GP system in Iraq, but instead patients
           attended hospital when they needed to do so and no central
           records are held.


           176.  There is a consensus between Dr Fatah's evidence and the
           following more general evidence provided by UNHCR-Iraq in April
           2015 on the issue of obtaining CSID's from abroad.


           "In principle, a failed asylum seeker, or indeed any Iraqi
           citizen abroad, can acquire Iraqi documents through Iraqi
           embassies and consulates. There is a special authorization
           granted to these bodies to provide documents for Iraqi abroad on
           the condition that the beneficiaries should have any available
           documents in order to prove their nationality."


           177.  In summary, we conclude that it is possible for  an  Iraqi
           national living in the UK to obtain a CSID through the  consular
           section of the Iraqi Embassy in London, if such a person is able
           to produce a current or expired passport  and/or  the  book  and
           page number for their family registration details.  For  persons
           without such a passport,  or  who  are  unable  to  produce  the
           relevant family registration details, a power of attorney can be
           provided to someone in Iraq who  can  thereafter  undertake  the
           process of obtaining the CSID for such  person  from  the  Civil
           Status Affairs Office in their  home  governorate.  For  reasons
           identified in the section that follows  below,  at  the  present
           time the process of obtaining a CSID from Iraq is likely  to  be
           severely hampered if the person wishing to obtain  the  CSID  is
           from an area where Article 15(c) serious harm is occurring.

17. Paragraph 26 of AAH states:


          If applying through  a  consulate  abroad  the  requirements  are
          different. Having contacted the consulate in London, and  checked
          on the website of the Iraqi embassy in Sweden,  Dr  Fatah  states
          that the authorities will require the applicant to first  make  a
          statement explaining why he needs a CSID and attach this  to  his
          application form, which must countersigned by  the  head  of  the
          applicant's family and stamped by the consulate  or  embassy;  he
          must then produce his Iraqi passport and proof of status  in  the
          country where he  is  applying,  the  name  of  a  representative
          (proxy) in Iraq, an additional form completed by the head of  the
          applicant's family verifying that the contents of his application
          form were true, four colour copies of  his  INC,  and  10  colour
          photographs.    Crucially the applicant must be able  to  produce
          something which  can  establish  the  location  of  his  family's
          details in the civil register. This should be a CSID, an  INC  or
          birth  certificate.  If  none  of  these  are  available  to  the
          applicant he must supply the identity documents of  his  parents.
          This evidence again accords with that of Landinfo (December 2017)
          who conclude that it can be difficult to  obtain  replacement  ID
          documents from an embassy abroad for the individual who is unable
          to verify his or her identity.

18. In paragraph 26 of the  decision  the  judge  referred  to  SMO  and  at
   paragraph 27 the judge stated that the appellant would be able to  obtain
   "relevant information from his family  in  Iraq."  Although  the  judge's
   reasoning is very brief, it is plain  from  the  reference  to  "relevant
   information" that the judge had in mind the volume and page reference  of
   the entry in the Family Book in Iraq.

19. It was entirely consistent with SMO (and the analysis in AA and AAH
   referred to therein) to find that the appellant would be able to provide
   the Iraqi embassy in the UK with the information needed to obtain a
   replacement CSID for the following two reasons:

           a) Firstly, if the appellant does not remember the relevant
              volume and page reference of the entry in the Family Book in
              Iraq he can obtain that information from his family in Iraq.
              The evidence before the judge showed, and the unchallenged
              finding of the judge was, that the appellant has contact
              with, and can receive support from, family in Iraq including
              his father and brothers. It follows, therefore, that the
              appellant could obtain the necessary information regarding
              his entry in the Family Book.


           b) Secondly, the appellant is plainly in a position to provide
              further information to identify himself to the Iraqi embassy
              in the UK. If he no longer has his passport (which he used to
              enter the UK, as noted in paragraph 27 of the decision) he
              could obtain identification from his parents to confirm his
              identity, as explained in paragraph 26 of AAH.

20. The judge also did not fall into error by not giving the appellant an
   opportunity to make submissions in respect of SMO for the simple reason
   that SMO did not depart from AAH and AA on the issue of obtaining a
   replacement CSID from within the UK. Therefore, any submissions made by
   the appellant in the light of SMO would have had to cover the same
   ground, and deal with the same issues, as submissions made in the light
   of AAH and AA. In any event, on any legitimate view, the country guidance
   in SMO, AAH and AA does not support the appellant's claim to be unable to
   obtain a replacement CSID from within the UK.

Notice of decision

21. The grounds of appeal do not identify an error of law.

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

|                                   |                                   |
|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|D. Sheridan                        |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |                                   |
|                                   |Dated: 12 February 2021            |




