
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
pa/09979/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 15th September 2017                |           On 21st November 2017      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                    J M K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Clarke (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against a  decision  to  refuse  his  protection
    claim was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  R  Oliver  ("the
    judge") in a decision promulgated on 27th  February  2017.   The  judge
    found the appellant to be an unreliable witness and his claim  to  lack
    credibility.  He found that the appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  on
    return to Uganda and doubted the extent of ill-health claimed.  In  any
    event, he would have access to treatment on return.  So far as  Article
    8 of the Human Rights Convention is concerned, the judge found that the
    appellant has no family life in the United Kingdom and that although he
    may have established a private life here, the decision  to  refuse  his
    claim amounted to a proportionate response.

2.   In the grounds, it is contended,  first,  that  the  judge  gave  undue
    weight to an  apparent  delay  in  claiming  asylum,  without  properly
    considering the absence of any  encounter  between  the  appellant  and
    Immigration Officers or  the  appellant's  attempt  to  regularise  his
    position by seeking help from a solicitor.  In the second ground, it is
    contended that the judge failed to properly consider  medical  evidence
    and erred in taking into account  the  modest  duration  of  a  medical
    examination as a weighty factor in this context.   The  medical  expert
    instructed on  the  appellant's  behalf  gave  a  detailed  account  of
    physical and psychological problems and the judge erred in finding that
    two reports relied heavily on the appellant's own account.  The medical
    expert was clear in finding that his diagnosis  was  based  on  careful
    observation of behaviour,  speech  and  demeanour  and  not  merely  on
    symptoms described by the appellant.   Moreover,  the  evidence  showed
    that the appellant currently  receives  cognitive  behavioural  therapy
    ("CBT"), contrary to the judge's finding that there was nothing to show
    that he had taken up an offer of such treatment.  In the third  ground,
    it is contended that the judge overlooked a witness statement  made  by
    the appellant's wife and failed to properly assess country evidence.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on
    18th  July  2017.   The  medical  reports  identified  a  scar  on  the
    appellant's body as highly consistent with his account of ill-treatment
    and, taking into account also the claimed error regarding  therapy,  it
    was arguable that the judge had erred.

4.   In a Rule 24 response prepared on 10th  August  2017,  the  appeal  was
    opposed by the Secretary of State on the basis that  all  the  evidence
    before the Tribunal was properly  considered.   Cogent  and  sufficient
    reasons were given for  the  finding  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    credible witness.  The judge's overall conclusion was open to him.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Ms Clarke handed up a skeleton argument.  She said that the  judge  had
    not taken into account all of the medical evidence.   It  was  accepted
    that the appellant had been ill-treated in the past.   The  judge  also
    accepted, at paragraph 30 of the decision that he had been rounded  up.
    This was the core of the appellant's claim.  He was an activist and was
    detained with other anti-government supporters.  He had a witness,  who
    said in evidence that she knew the appellant  in  Uganda  when  he  was
    politically active.  Her evidence was not challenged in  the  decision.
    The judge dismissed the appellant's wife's statement  because  she  had
    not mentioned his  political  writing.   However,  a  letter  from  her
    clearly stated that he was active in politics and  that  this  was  the
    reason why their marriage broke down.

6.   The first ground concerned delay in  claiming  asylum.   The  appellant
    had a legal representative but things clearly went wrong and his  claim
    was not made promptly.  However, the judge found that the  account  was
    broadly  consistent  and  that  the  core  claim  concerned   political
    activities in Uganda.

7.   The medical expert, Dr Arnold, saw the appellant for a  limited  period
    of time, as noted by the judge in paragraph 26 of the  decision.   This
    could not be determinative of the claim to have suffered ill-treatment.
     Dr Arnold's assessment was based on the appellant's demeanour and  not
    merely his account or his  symptoms.   Dr  Arnold  considered  clinical
    plausibility at paragraph 66 of his report, which  was  very  detailed.
    The judge gave this rather  cursory  consideration.   Again,  the  oral
    evidence before the judge concerned events in 2001 in  Uganda  and  was
    not challenged.  Overall, the judge came to  an  erroneous  conclusion,
    without regard to all the evidence.  Undue  weight  was  given  to  the
    delay in making the asylum claim.

8.   Mr Duffy replied that the judge's  analysis  was  clear.   He  did  not
    disbelieve the claim that the appellant was ill-treated or that he  was
    rounded up.  However, because of the delay and the  several  iterations
    of the case, he  concluded  that  the  appellant  was  not  a  credible
    witness.  This finding was open to him.  If  the  appellant  was  badly
    advised by his solicitor at an earlier stage, the representative should
    have been given an opportunity  to  comment.   The  decision  contained
    findings open to the judge on the evidence and there  was  no  material
    error.

9.   Ms Clarke said in a brief response that paragraph 32  of  the  decision
    contained no assessment of the oral evidence supporting the appellant's
    claims regarding events in 2001.  It was not apparent that his witness,
    Ms M had given evidence.  There was also little showing  an  assessment
    of the country evidence.  The judge seemed to have based  his  findings
    only on the appellant's evidence.

Findings and Conclusions on Error of Law

10.  I conclude that the findings made by the judge were open to him on  the
    evidence before the Tribunal and that no material error of law has been
    shown in his decision.

11.  Dealing with the first ground,  the  judge  is  criticised  for  giving
    apparently undue weight to the long  delay  in  making  the  protection
    claim.  The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2003 and claimed
    asylum only in 2011.  He engaged the services of a  solicitor  but  the
    wrong application was made.  Criticism is made in  the  grounds  of  an
    apparent failure on the judge's part to consider that the appellant was
    not encountered by immigration  officers  in  the  years  in  which  he
    overstayed his visit visa.

12.  A careful reading of the decision shows that  the  judge  did  not,  in
    fact, give undue weight to delay in making the asylum  claim.   He  had
    the relevant chronology clearly in mind.  His precise  adverse  finding
    was in relation to the period of eight years preceding the  application
    made in 2011, when the appellant remained in the United Kingdom  as  an
    overstayer but took no steps to approach the  authorities.   The  judge
    was entitled to give adverse weight to that substantial period of delay
    and to disbelieve the claim that the appellant  was  unaware  in  those
    years that he might claim asylum. The judge was also entitled  to  take
    into account that, notwithstanding the  claim  in  2011  to  fear  ill-
    treatment  on  return,  there  was  no  mention  in   the   appellant's
    application that year of the rape of his wife, although he subsequently
    claimed that this was the final straw in his decision to leave  Uganda.
    His finding in this context appears at paragraph 28 of the decision.

13.  In the second ground, criticism is made of the  judge's  assessment  of
    the medical evidence.  I find that the judge did not  fall  into  error
    here.  It is true that in  paragraph  31  of  the  decision  the  judge
    observed that two medical reports relied heavily on the  account  given
    by the appellant.  Ms Clarke drew attention  to  Dr  Arnold's  detailed
    report, which made clear that the diagnostic conclusion  drew  also  on
    clinical  observations  of  the  appellant's  behaviour,   speech   and
    demeanour, but Dr Arnold's conclusion does not  displace  or  undermine
    the judge's overall assessment of risk.  Paragraph 30 of  the  decision
    shows that he proceeded on the basis that the appellant may  have  been
    rounded up and ill-treated.  However, he was released after a week, not
    forced to sign a confession and not charged.

14.  There is a mistake in paragraph 31 of the  decision,  where  the  judge
    finds it "notable" that for some twelve years the appellant  sought  no
    medical help.  He mentions a report of an offer of sessions of CBT  but
    finds that there is no evidence that the offer has been taken  up.   As
    is clear from the document at page 51 of  Part  A  of  the  appellant's
    bundle that is not correct.  A therapist wrote on 7th September 2017 to
    confirm that the appellant received CBT from 11th October 2016 to  22nd
    March 2017.  The CBT sessions  commenced  some  five  weeks  after  the
    Secretary of State's decision letter, dated  6th  September  2016,  and
    concluded five and a half  months  later,  the  author  of  the  report
    recording significant progress in terms of improved mood and  decreased
    anxiety.  The factual error on the judge's part is not material, taking
    into account the extent and duration of  the  therapy  made  available.
    The judge made no material error  of  law  in  his  assessment  of  the
    medical evidence.

15.  In the third ground, the judge's overall consideration of the  case  is
    criticised.  There is no merit  here.   The  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant had given a broadly consistent account of  his  ill-treatment
    but gave sustainable reasons for concluding that he is not at  risk  on
    return to Uganda.    The written grounds draw attention to paragraph 19
    of the decision, but this is no more and no less than a summary of  the
    appellant's case.  It is asserted that the judge "ignored" a  statement
    made by the appellant's wife.   This  is  not  so,  as  is  clear  from
    paragraph 29 of the decision.  He described the document at page 26  of
    Part B of the appellant's bundle as a letter rather than  a  statement,
    but that  is  the  form  it  takes  in  the  bundle.   The  judge  gave
    sustainable  reasons  for  placing  no  weight  on  this  item,  having
    considered the development of  the  appellant's  case  since  it  first
    emerged in 2011, eight years after his arrival in the  United  Kingdom.
    The judge was also entitled to find that the appellant has no political
    profile that would place him at risk, in  the  light  of  the  evidence
    given by
    Ms M, summarised at paragraph 24 of the decision.

16.  The judge's overall assessment was open to him.   He had  in  mind  the
    broadly consistent account of ill-treatment, but found such elaboration
    of the case over time as to show that the appellant was not a  credible
    or reliable witness and was not of adverse interest to the  authorities
    in Uganda or to anyone else.  I conclude that the judge was entitled to
    make the adverse findings he did and  that  the  decision  contains  no
    material error of law.  It  follows  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand.


DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing  no  material  error  of
law, shall stand.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



ANONYMITY

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of
their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge RC Campbell





