
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09612/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2019                              |On 25 March 2019              |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                     AA
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza of Counsel instructed by JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow of the Specialist Appeals Team


                             Anonymity Direction
Unless and until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, both the Appellant and the Respondent.   Failure
to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a Bangladeshi born in 1988. On 1 May 2012  he  arrived
    with leave as a student, expiring on  16  May  2013.  He  made  several
    subsequent applications for leave to remain, all of which were  refused
    and in respect of which his appeal rights are  long  exhausted.  On  19
    December 2017 he sought subsidiary  protection  on  the  basis  of  his
    sexual orientation.

The SSHD's decision

 2. On 14 July 2018, the Respondent  (the  SSHD)  refused  the  Applicant's
    application for subsidiary protection.  The SSHD accepted the Appellant
    is a gay man from Bangladesh  and  considered  that  as  he  had  lived
    discreetly as a gay in Bangladesh and in the United Kingdom,  it  would
    be reasonable for him to relocate within Bangladesh. His claim based on
    his private life in the United Kingdom protected by Article  8  of  the
    European Convention was also rejected.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The Applicant appealed and by a decision  promulgated  on  19  December
    2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Harrington discounted the country
    expert report by  Dr  Inge  Amundsen  (the  expert  report)  which  the
    Appellant had  filed  and  found  that  on  return  to  Bangladesh  the
    Appellant might experience discrimination  and  some  harassment  which
    would not amount to  persecution.  She  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  on  the  basis  that  having
    accepted his sexual orientation, the Judge had erred in her  assessment
    of the expert report and the background information  about  the  LGBTQ+
    community in Bangladesh and had failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  to
    reject the evidence of the Appellant and his witnesses. On  24  January
    2019 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Gibb  granted  permission  to
    appeal.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

5.   The Appellant attended the hearing. I  explained  the  purpose  of  and
    procedure followed at an error of law hearing. Other  than  to  confirm
    his current address, he took no active part in the proceedings.

6.   The Appellant had filed and served a copy of the decision of the  Upper
    Tribunal in MSA, PA/07096/2017 an unreported decision of Lord  Matthews
    and Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson promulgated  on  8  February  2019  in
    which Mr Reza had appeared. I referred Mr  Tarlow,  in  particular,  to
    paragraphs 71 and 72 of MSA in which the Upper Tribunal  had  found  Dr
    Amundsen "is entitled to be regarded as an expert on  human  rights  in
    Bangladesh, albeit with no specific expertise  or  background  in  LGBT
    issues".

7.   I indicated that this alone was sufficient to justify finding that  the
    Judge had made a material error of law in her decision. Mr Tarlow quite
    properly pointed out that in addition the Judge had failed to adopt the
    structured  approach  to  the  ascertainment  and  assessment  of  risk
    recommended in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2000] UKSC

8.   I informed Mr Reza for the Appellant that I did not need to  hear  from
    him and proposed to find the Judge's decision contained material  error
    of law such that it should be set aside. I enquired if  there  was  any
    objection to me re-making the decision, particularly in  the  light  of
    the Respondent's acceptance of the Appellant's sexual orientation. Both
    representatives confirmed there was none. I announced that the  Judge's
    decision should be set aside because it contained a material  error  of
    law and that the appeal is allowed for the reasons which  would  follow
    in this decision.

9.   The reasons are  that  the  Respondent  has  accepted  the  Appellant's
    claimed sexual orientation and that he is openly gay: see paragraph  30
    of the Judge's decision. Having regard to the Upper  Tribunal  decision
    in MSA, I place reliance on the expert opinion  of  Dr.  Amundsen.  The
    evidence before the Judge  was  that  the  Appellant,  if  returned  to
    Bangladesh,  would  not  voluntarily  be  discreet  as  to  his  sexual
    orientation. Homosexual acts are illegal in Bangladesh where  they  are
    widely viewed to be in violation of the national  culture.  The  expert
    report indicates  that  while  the  authorities  may  not  often  bring
    prosecutions against gay men, there is a  widespread  unwillingness  on
    their  part  to  provide  a  sufficiency  of  protection  against   the
    discrimination and violence frequently practised against openly gay men
    in Bangladesh.

10.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  contains  an  anonymity  direction
    although it gives no reason why it is proportionate  to  the  need  for
    transparency in the Tribunal's administration of justice.   This  is  a
    subsidiary protection appeal and on that basis and because  the  matter
    was not addressed at the hearing before me I propose  to  continue  the
    anonymity direction.

SUMMARY OF DECISION


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.

    The appeal of the Appellant is allowed on asylum grounds.

    Anonymity direction continued.



Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   21.
iii. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and so have  considered  whether  to  make  a  fee
award. The foundation for the successful appeal was the expert report  which
was not served or filed
until 29 August 2018 some five days before the First-tier Tribunal  hearing.
In these circumstances, it is not appropriate to make a fee award.


Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   21.
iii. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
