
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09445/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 20th September 2019                            |On 15th November 2019          |
|                                                  |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     AK
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Short, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  AK.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings




         1. The appellant in these proceedings is vulnerable. It was agreed
            with the parties that the decision of the Upper Tribunal  would
            be served upon the solicitors, not to the appellant,  and  that
            such service would constitute good service.


         2. For the reasons given in a decision  promulgated  on  14th  May
            2019,  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Widdup   dismissed   the
            appellant's appeal on all grounds.

         3. Permission to appeal that decision  was  initially  refused  by
            First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on 14th June 2019. On  renewal
            to the Upper Tribunal, permission was granted on all grounds on
            7th July 2019. A hearing on 14th August 20219 was adjourned and
            directions made by UTJ Gill for  disclosure  of  extracts  from
            Counsel's notebook.

         4. Grounds of appeal:

            a) Ground 1
               The appellant submits that,  as  a  vulnerable  witness,  the
               First-tier  Tribunal  judge  failed  to   apply   the   Joint
               Presidential  Guidance  Note  2  of  2010  in  reaching   his
               conclusions  on  the  evidence  before  him  and   that   the
               appellant's deeply traumatic experiences would have  impacted
               upon his ability to give clear and  coherent  answers  during
               his interviews with the SSHD; and
            b) The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  made  inadequately  reasoned
               adverse credibility findings; in particular the judge  failed
               to give adequate reasoned findings for his rejection of  what
               were unchallenged newspaper  reports,;  that  concerns  about
               the  applicant's  title  or  role  were  not  raised  in  the
               hearing; that his references to the evidence of Mr Raja  were
               inconsistent; the rejection of  the  appellant's  explanation
               for issues referred to in the rfrl were not engaged  with  to
               the  extent  that  reasons  for   such   rejection   of   his
               explanation were not given; the judge was incorrect to  state
               that there was no medical evidence  to  provide  reasons  for
               inconsistencies.


            Background


         5. The appellant, born in September 1977, is a Pakistani  national
            who first came to the UK in January 2012 and claims he returned
            to Pakistan in October 2013; he was an overstayer at that time,
            his visa having expired in March 2012. He then claims  to  have
            arrived clandestinely in the UK in January  2018,  having  left
            Pakistan in August 2017. He was arrested in the UK and  claimed
            asylum in February 2018. His asylum claim was refused  in  July
            2018.


         6. The appellant claimed that he  joined  Jammu  Kashmir  National
            Student Federation (JKNSF) in  1995  whilst  at  Dadyal  Degree
            College. He remained a member  of  JKNSF  until  2011  when  he
            joined Jammu Kashmir National Awami Party (JKNAP).  He  claimed
            he was arrested in early August 2017 after a meeting  at  which
            plans were made to hand out leaflets on 14th August. He  claims
            he was detained for 48 hours threatened and  tortured  and  was
            released when he told his captors that he would give the  names
            of those from whom JKNAP received funds.

         7. The respondent accepted the appellant  had  been  a  member  of
            JKNAP but did not accept he had returned to  Pakistan  in  2013
            (or at all) and concluded that he  would  not  be  at  risk  on
            return for what the  respondent  considered  to  be  low  level
            involvement.


      Consideration and findings


            Ground 1


         8. In  so  far  as  vulnerability  is  concerned,  the  First-tier
            Tribunal judge said the following:


                  13.   At  the  start  of  the  hearing  Mr  Moriarty  [the
                  appellant's representative] referred me to the  report  of
                  Dr Balasubramaniam which replaced an earlier report  which
                  was unclear in  certain  respects.  At  paragraph  3.5  Dr
                  Balasubramaniam had advised that the Appellant  was  unfit
                  to give evidence and in those  circumstances  Mr  Moriarty
                  could not call him.  I  said  that  I  accepted  that  the
                  Appellant was vulnerable  and  I  could  draw  no  adverse
                  inferences because he was not giving evidence.
                  ....
                  33.  [Mr Moriarty] said that at the start  of  the  asylum
                  interview the Respondent would not  have  known  that  the
                  Appellant was suffering from mental health issues stemming
                  from his torture.  At  the  start  of  the  interview  the
                  Appellant disclosed that  he  had  not  been  truthful  in
                  interview and that he had left the UK in October 2013.
                  ...
                  36.   [Mr  Moriarty  submitted]   the   evidence   of   Dr
                  Balasubramaniam was consistent with  the  Appellant  being
                  tortured.
                  ...
                  45.  [The Presenting Officer had no submissions to make on
                  the suggestion that the medical report described  symptoms
                  which were consistent with ill treatment]
                  ...
                  48.  I have considered the Appellant's  witness  statement
                  and his answers in the asylum interview together with  the
                  background    evidence    and    the    report    of    Dr
                  Balasubramaniam...
                  ...
                  57.  in the light of Dr Balasubramaniam's evidence I  draw
                  no adverse inferences from the lack of oral evidence  from
                  the Appellant and in assessing his answers in interview  I
                  will take into account the possibility that he was  unable
                  to provide a clear or consistent account of details of his
                  history.
                  ...
                  59.  [The appellant] said that his main  problem  occurred
                  on 5 August 2017 when ISI came to his house  and  arrested
                  him forcibly. He was then detained  for  two  days  during
                  which time he was tortured. He was released when  he  said
                  that he would tell them who was sending funds  to  support
                  the party.
                  ....
                  62.  Dr Balasubramaniam   saw the Appellant  on  17  April
                  2019. He said that this mood appeared to be depressed  and
                  tearful. He said that he was preoccupied with his  torture
                  and this  was  evidenced  by  him  becoming  tearful  when
                  discussing the trauma. He diagnosed that the Appellant was
                  suffering from  PTSD  and  he  described  the  cluster  of
                  symptoms upon which his diagnosis was based.
                  63.   Dr  Balasubramaniam  also  made   a   diagnosis   of
                  depression. He assessed this as being a severe  depressive
                  episode and said that the main causes were the torture  he
                  had experienced, his separation from his  family  and  his
                  financial difficulties.
                  64.  He said that the Appellant had started receiving anti
                  depressant medication in January 2019.
                  65.   I  have  contrasted  that  evidence  with  what  the
                  Appellant himself said about his health.
                  66.  At 2.1 of the screening interview  when  asked  about
                  medical conditions he said that he had pins and needles in
                  his legs and at 2.3 he said that  he  suffered  nightmares
                  about what happened to him.
                  67.  In the AI in answer to questions 20 and  21  he  said
                  that the doctor was investigating his  condition.  He  had
                  had ECG and blood samples had been taken. He  referred  to
                  anxiety and stress and  said  that  he  had  no  medically
                  diagnosed conditions. He had  been  prescribed  medication
                  which involved a 10 week course of  tablets.  He  did  not
                  know the condition the tablets were prescribed for and  he
                  referred  to  the  doctor  saying  that  there  was   some
                  deficiency in him after a check-up.
                  68.  I infer that this deficiency was diagnosed after  the
                  blood tests  and  relates  to  some  physical  symptom  as
                  opposed  to  one  related  to  his   mental   health.   Dr
                  Balasubramaniam did not provide a full medical history  of
                  the Appellant but AB1  contains  the  appellant's  medical
                  notes  for  April  2018  and  these  appear  to  refer  to
                  abnormalities in his Vitamin D level and in his  urea  and
                  electrolytes.
                  69.  It follows that no mental health condition  has  been
                  diagnosed or complained of in April 2018 and he  was  only
                  prescribed anti depressants in 2019.
                  70.  The Appellant's witness statement was signed on  15th
                  August 2018. It makes one brief reference to  his  medical
                  condition. At paragraph 21  the  Appellant  said  that  he
                  suffers from nightmares about someone wanting to kill him.
                  At paragraph 22  he  said  that  he  had  been  prescribed
                  sleeping tablets  which  were  not  working.  The  medical
                  records that have been disclosed are incomplete  and  only
                  refer to a consultation on 19/4/18 and these do not  refer
                  to a prescription of sleeping tablets.
                  71.  It is unclear to me whether  Dr  Balasubramaniam  was
                  aware that h Appellant had not referred  to  any  symptoms
                  such  as  sleeplessness  or  flashbacks  in   his   asylum
                  interview or that he had been able to  refer  to  his  ill
                  treatment in a witness statement and had answered detailed
                  questions about his torture when he was interviewed. If Dr
                  Balasubramaniam was aware that the symptoms had manifested
                  themselves more than a year after the ill treatment he had
                  not made any comment on whether this is unusual or whether
                  it is  inconsistent  with  the  events  described  by  the
                  Appellant.
                  72.  subject to these  concerns  I  accept  that,  if  the
                  Appellant does have  PTSD  and  depression,  those  mental
                  health conditions are consistent with him having  suffered
                  torture but  there  would  appear  to  be  other  possible
                  causes, or contributory causes of the  Appellant's  mental
                  health condition such as his separation  from  his  family
                  and his financial difficulties.
                  ...
                  116. I do not accept that anxieties the Appellant may have
                  had  in  2018  can  explain  the  vague  nature   of   his
                  description of his political role. In this context I  note
                  that the Appellant's mental condition at the date  of  the
                  Asylum interview did not prevent him being able to  answer
                  a long series of questions about his arrest, detention and
                  torture (AI 141-173).
                  ...
                  131. I also find that he diagnosis of  Dr  Balasubramaniam
                  fails to explain or address the Appellant's  own  evidence
                  about his health before January 2019 and is  therefore  of
                  less weight as a result. In addition  the  fact  that  the
                  Appellant  was  able  to  answer  detailed  questions   in
                  interview and provided a witness statement is at odds with
                  his present inability to give evidence.


         9. The First-tier Tribunal judge makes clear that he has not  held
            adverse to the appellant the fact that he  did  not  give  oral
            evidence.  He   also   makes   clear   that   he   accepts   Dr
            Balasubramaniam's  report  in  so  far  as  it  refers  to  the
            appellant's mental health at the time of  the  report.  It  was
            open to the judge to consider the appellant's evidence prior to
            the production of Dr Balasubramaniam's report in the context of
            the disclosed medical evidence and the lack of  comment  by  Dr
            Balasubramaniam on the  potential  impact  of  the  applicant's
            mental  state  on  information  he  provided  when   previously
            interviewed.


        10.  Although  the  judge  did  not  specifically  refer   to   the
            "Vulnerable's  Guidance"  the  judge  has  complied  with   the
            actuality of the guidance  -  he  considered  all  the  medical
            evidence holistically as well as the lack  of  comment  in  the
            medical   evidence   on   any    obvious    discrepancies    or
            inconsistencies.


        11. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not err in law as set out  in
            ground 1 of the grounds of appeal.


            Ground 2

        12. The First-tier Tribunal judge addresses each  newspaper  report
            in  the  context  of  the  appellant's  written  evidence   and
            interview records and that of Mr Raja. The judge  was  entitled
            to reach conclusions on the veracity of the  content  of  those
            reports when viewed in the context of the appellant's  evidence
            and that of Mr Raja as to his own claims of activity. That  the
            specific discrepancy as to his activity and role was not put to
            the appellant by the judge is not relevant. It was plain on the
            face of the reports that the  reports  claimed  a  much  higher
            level of activity by  the  appellant  than  the  appellant  was
            claiming. It is for the appellant to provide an explanation for
            a matter that was plainly going to be in issue. The  fact  that
            the appellant was receiving some treatment for depression  does
            not translate into an explanation for  claimed  inconsistencies
            or discrepancies given  that  the  specialist  expert  did  not
            comment on that aspect of the appellant's mental health - again
            a matter that if  it  were  worthy  of  note  could  have  been
            reasonably expected to have been considered.


        13. The judge was entitled to find that some elements of Mr  Raja's
            evidence  were  accepted,  and  some  were  not,  when   viewed
            holistically. The judge is not obliged to  take  everything  an
            honest witness says to be true to the lower standard.

        14. In this instance the judge viewed the  whole  of  the  evidence
            holistically. He made plain he accepted the appellant could not
            give oral evidence and that he would not take an  adverse  view
            of that, but  the  judge  was  entitled,  particularly  in  the
            absence  of  any  explanation  from   the   specialist   expert
            instructed by his solicitors, to place weight  on  the  earlier
            evidence give by the appellant in his various interviews.

        15. The findings reached  by  the  judge  in  the  context  of  the
            evidence as a whole were findings that were open to him.  There
            is no perversity  or  lack  of  reasoning  for  reaching  those
            findings.



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision.

      The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  stands;  the  appeal  is
dismissed

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).







                                    Date 13th November 2019
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
