
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Pa/09000/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 27 February 2019                 |On: 15 March 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                 NIZANTH [B]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms A Patyna of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born on 10 May 1987, a citizen of  Sri  Lanka,  appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 5 July 2018,  refusing  to
    grant him asylum and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn dismissed the appellant's appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 28 December  2018.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge G Wilson who  stated  that  it  is
    arguable that the judge failed to adequately consider  the  appellant's
    credibility in relation to the appellant's exit and entry to Sri  Lanka
    in the context of the country guidance case of GJ and  others  (post  -
    civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 at paragraphs  85,
    113, 138, 262, 275 and 356 and further failed to give consideration  to
    the expert report of Dr Xavier.

 3. At the hearing it was agreed by the  parties  that  there  has  been  a
    material error of law in the decision for  the  reasons  given  by  the
    permission Judge and that the appeal be sent  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a rehearing.

 4. I have considered the decision and agree that there has been a material
    error of law in the decision  as  the  Judge  did  not  considered  the
    country guidance case and the expert report  of  Dr  Xavier  which  was
    material evidence. Therefore, as it stands the decision is not safe and
    findings of fact need to  be  made  on  the  evidence  in  the  country
    guidance case of GJ and others.

 5. In the circumstances, I direct that the appeal  be  placed  before  any
    First-tier Tribunal Judge apart from First--tier Tribunal  Judge  Quinn
    for the appeal to be heard de novo.



Decision

Appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
..........................................

Ms S Chana  Dated 12th day of March 2019

