
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09776/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2017                           |On 27 January 2017            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     MDQ
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Masood, instructed by Aden & Co Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, MDQ, date of birth 30.3.82, is a citizen of Somalia.

 2. This is his appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Blake promulgated  30.11.16,  dismissing  on  all  grounds  his  appeal
    against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  30.8.16,  to
    refuse his protection claim.

 3. The Judge heard the appeal on 19.10.16.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Osborne  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    22.12.16.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on 20.1.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 6. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge Blake should be set aside.

 7. The grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate
    weight to the evidence in relation to the appellant's contact and level
    of involvement and family life with his daughter. It is  asserted  that
    the judge took irrelevant matters into account between [142] and  [147]
    of the decision. It is asserted that the judge failed to make clear and
    adequate findings on the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  based  on
    the appellant's relationship with his daughter. It is asserted that she
    failed to make conclusions on family life and failed  to  consider  the
    exceptional circumstances and relevant case law in relation to  article
    8 outside the Rules.

 8. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Osbourne considered it arguable
    that in an otherwise  careful  and  detailed  decision  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in fact and law when at  [160]  she  accepted  the
    that appellant and his daughter had some contact but considered that it
    could be maintained through modern communication.  "Having  found  that
    the appellant and his daughter  exercised  direct  contact,  the  judge
    arguably failed to explain how such contact could be maintained through
    modern communication. In that respect the judge arguably erred  in  law
    and therefore arguably erred in the assessment of what was in the  best
    interests of the child."

 9. The Rule 24 response, dated 9.1.17, submits that it  was  open  to  the
    judge to conclude  that  the  very  limited  relationship  and  contact
    between the appellant and his  daughter  could  be  maintained  through
    modern means of communication. It was also noted that  the  appellant's
    wife had previously returned to Somalia, so it was open to the  parties
    to arrange some form of occasional face to face contact.

10. It is submitted that on the particular facts found in this case, it was
    open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  there  were   no   compelling
    circumstances to warrant consideration of article 8 outside the  Rules.
    In reaching this conclusion, the judge took section 55  best  interests
    of the child into account, and bore in mind that the child  lived  with
    her mother and had done so  since  birth.  It  is  submitted  that  the
    findings were open to the judge on the evidence and no  material  error
    of law has been demonstrated.

11. It is clear from the decision  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a
    series of more than adequately reasoned  adverse  credibility  findings
    against the appellant in respect of the core of his  asylum  claim.  He
    was clearly untruthful.

12. The appellant was no longer in any relationship with the mother of  his
    daughter, or any other partner.

13. It is also clear  from  [146],  [158]  and  [159]  that  there  was  no
    significant contact between the appellant and  his  daughter  prior  to
    2014. Thereafter, his contact was limited and at the  highest  amounted
    to taking her out occasionally and took her to the  mosque.  The  judge
    found the partner's evidence not entirely credible. It follows that  on
    the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  contact  between  the
    appellant and his daughter was very limited.

14. At [160] the judge concluded that there was no family life between  the
    appellant and his daughter and at [163] did not  find  any  exceptional
    circumstances to warrant consideration of article 8 outside the Rules.

15.  The  judge  referenced  the  Rules  and  the  Secretary   of   State's
    consideration at [163]. For the reasons set out below, I find  she  was
    not in error in not  specifically  considering  article  8  family  and
    private life under the Immigration Rules, pursuant to Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE.

16. Mr Masood argued that the appellant could meet the requirements of  EX1
    under Appendix FM. However, the appellant does  not  meet  E-LTRPT  2.4
    which requires the appellant to prove that he is taking  and  intending
    to continue to take an active role in the child's  upbringing.  On  the
    facts as found by the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant was taking  no
    role in the child's upbringing. Without meeting this  requirement,  EX1
    does not apply. Mr Masood appeared to be referring to a version of  the
    Immigration Rules not in force at  the  date  of  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal. It follows that even if there was an error in this  regard,  it
    was not material, as it is clear that the appellant could not meet  the
    requirements of the Rules.

17. However, this failure  is  highly  relevant  to  any  consideration  of
    article 8 outside the Rules that provision  is  made  for  family  life
    within the Rules; they  are  the  Secretary  of  State's  proportionate
    response to private and family life rights and  provide  for  leave  to
    remain  where  there  is  a   sufficiently   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying child.

18. It follows that the appellant was driven to make the case that  outside
    the article 8 regime of the Rules, his compelling circumstances  demand
    that the appeal be allowed on the basis that the impugned  decision  be
    allowed on the basis that  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    infringes his rights and the rights of his  daughter  under  article  8
    ECHR. That the governing test  is  compelling  circumstances  has  been
    confirmed recently by the Court of Appeal in  Rhuppiah  v  SSHD  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 803.

19.  A  decision  to  subject  any  appeal  to  the  test  of   'compelling
    circumstances' proceeds, logically, on the basis that the first four of
    the five Razgar stages have all been overcome.

20. The judge may have been in error in finding that there  was  no  family
    life at all between  the  appellant  and  his  daughter,  but  she  was
    certainly correct to take into account the very limited nature  of  the
    family contact between father and daughter.

21. It is also likely that the decision interferes with family  life,  even
    with the limited contact the appellant has with his daughter.  However,
    it is arguable as to whether on the facts of this case the interference
    with  family  life  that  would  be  occasioned  by  his  removal   was
    sufficiently grave so as to engage article 8 ECHR. Even  on  the  basis
    that article 8 is engaged, the limited nature of contact would have  to
    be put into the scales in the proportionality  balancing  exercise,  as
    well as the section 55 duty to have regard to the best interests of the
    child, which is a primary but not paramount consideration  that  trumps
    all others.

22.  The  judge  was  also  in   error   in   referring   to   'exceptional
    circumstances,'  rather   than   compelling   circumstances.   However,
    considering the evidence, I am far from satisfied that on the facts  of
    this case as found by the First-tier Tribunal that there could  be  any
    sufficiently   compelling   circumstances   that   are   insufficiently
    recognised in the Immigration Rules so as to justify  consideration  of
    allowing the appellant to remain in the UK outside  the  Rules  on  the
    basis that the decision infringes the appellant's  family  life  rights
    with his daughter under article 8 ECHR, so that otherwise the  decision
    of the Secretary of State would be unjustifiably harsh.

23. Even if the judge had gone on to  conduct  an  article  8  ECHR  Razgar
    stepped proportionality assessment outside the Rules,  I  am  satisfied
    that she would have had to conclude, for  the  same  reasons  as  given
    above, that the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  was  entirely
    proportionate and not disproportionate to the rights of  the  appellant
    and  his  daughter,  particularly  taking  into  account  the  Rule  24
    submission that there was no reason why there could not  be  visits  to
    Somalia by the daughter, or indeed occasional visits by  the  appellant
    to visit his daughter in the UK. In the modern age for work  and  other
    reasons many families live  far  apart  around  the  world,  but  still
    maintain family life with other members through occasional  visits  and
    modern means of communication. Mr Masood sought  to  rely  on  Omotunde
    (best interests Zambrano applied - Razgar) Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00247
    (IAC), but in that case there was an active parent with a  far  greater
    involvement in the life of the child than in the present  case.  It  is
    not authority for the proposition that a person with very  limited  and
    occasional contact with a child in the UK should be  granted  leave  to
    remain on that ground alone.

24. In all the circumstances, whilst there are some errors in the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal, they are not material to the outcome, which
    frankly on the facts of this case was inevitably  a  dismissal  of  the
    appeal.

Conclusions:

25. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

                    I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I continue the anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus no fee award can be made.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated
