
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09433/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|On the papers on 7 July 2020         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 21 July 2020                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     AE
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


   1. On 5 December 2019 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hoffman  dismissed  the
      appellant's appeal on protection and human rights grounds.
   2. Permission to appeal was refused by a judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      but granted on a renewed application by a judge of the Upper  Tribunal
      on 11 March 2020, the operative part of  which  is  in  the  following
      terms:

           "Permission is granted on limited grounds.


           Ground 1: the challenge to the Judge's assessment of the medical
           report is selective to the point of being misleading. The  judge
           set out at [40] to [42] cogent reasons for  attaching  a  little
           weight to the report which are not limited to an  assessment  of
           when the appellant developed PTSD. The observation made at  [42]
           that the doctor was  not  in  a  position  to  compare  how  the
           appellant presented is well made,  as  is  the  point  that  the
           doctor did not consider other factors might have contributed  to
           the diagnosis. Given in any event  the  self-direction  at  [37]
           that  it  was  only  sufficiency  of  protection  and   internal
           relocation that were in issue, it is not arguable that  such  an
           error is in any event material.


           Grounds 2 and 3: it is arguable that  the  Judge  erred  in  his
           assessment as to the availability of support for  the  appellant
           and in applying an incorrect burden  of  proof  at  [62]  as  is
           averred at [14].


           Ground 4: it is arguable that the Judge erred in his approach to
           whether the appellant is a member of a particular social group.


           Permission is therefore granted on grounds 2 to  4  but  not  on
           ground 1."

   3. In light of the Covid-19 pandemic directions were sent to the  parties
      on 21 April 2020 advising them that the Upper Tribunal had  reached  a
      provisional view that it will be appropriate to determine the question
      of whether the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of  an
      error of law and, if so, whether that decision should be set aside  on
      the papers.  Specified  time  periods  were  provided  to  enable  the
      parties to comment upon this  proposal  and  to  provide  any  further
      submissions  they  wish  to  make  in  support  of  their  case.   The
      appellant's representative filed submissions dated  14  May  2020  the
      respondent's representatives a response dated 27 May 2020. The  expiry
      date for the period in which further submissions could have been  made
      was 2 June 2020 with  no  further  submissions  having  been  received
      within that period.
   4. The Overriding Objective is contained in the Upper Tribunal  Procedure
      Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing  with  a  case  fairly  and
        justly   includes:   dealing  with    it    in    ways   that    are
      proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the  case,  the complexity  of
       the  issues,  etc;  avoiding  unnecessary   formality   and   seeking
      flexibility   in   the    proceedings;    ensuring,    so    far    as
      practicable,  that the parties are able to participate  fully  in  the
      proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
      effectively; and avoiding delay, so  far  as  compatible  with  proper
      consideration of the issues.
   5. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
      further the overriding objective; and  to  cooperate  with  the  Upper
      Tribunal generally.
   6. Rule  34  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
      provides:

        '34. -


        (1)      Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal  may
             make any decision without a hearing.


        (2)      The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view  expressed
             by a party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider
             any matter, and the form of any such hearing.


        (3)      In immigration  judicial  review  proceedings,  the  Upper
             Tribunal must hold a hearing before making  a  decision  which
             disposes of proceedings.


        (4)      Paragraph (3) does not  affect  the  power  of  the  Upper
             Tribunal to-


             (a) strike out a party's case, pursuant  to  rule  8(1)(b)  or
             8(2);


             (b) consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;


             (c) determine an application for permission to bring  judicial
                  review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or


             (d) make a consent order disposing of proceedings, pursuant to
                  rule 39, without a hearing.'

   7. The appellant's representative submits the matter is not suitable  for
      determination on the papers for the reasons set out at [2 - 3] of  the
      submissions of 14 May 2020 which are in the following terms:

           "2.   Pursuant to paragraph 5 of those directions the  Appellant
                 submits that this matter is not suitable for  determination
                 on  the  papers  as  suggested  in  paragraph  2   of   the
                 directions.


                 a. In bringing this appeal the Appellant requested an  oral
                    hearing, the Respondent has not complied with  the  Rule
                    24 procedure and their view on  the  need  for  an  oral
                    hearing is not therefore known, nor is their response to
                    the Grounds of Appeal. Without this it is  difficult  to
                    judge whether the matter can be fairly determined on the
                    papers.


                 b. The Appellant submits that a hearing is  unnecessary  if
                    the Respondent concedes  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                    determination contains a material error of law and  that
                    the decision should  be  set  aside,  and  the  Tribunal
                    agrees with those concessions. It is  further  submitted
                    that a hearing is unnecessary if the Tribunal is  minded
                    to find that there is an error of law and set aside  the
                    determination.


                 c. In any other scenario, the Appellant  maintains  that  a
                    hearing is necessary:


                   i. The Appellant notes that the  matter  was  previously
                      listed for a hearing and the  current  global  health
                      crisis does not, in itself, justify a departure  from
                      that  decision  where  facilities  are  available  to
                      facilitate a decision  without  breaching  government
                      advice on social distancing, or otherwise placing the
                      parties and the Tribunal at  risk.  It  is  submitted
                      that the issues identified at paragraph  2  could  be
                      determined by a remote hearing utilising  appropriate
                      technology.


                  ii. The Appellant is unaware of the  Tribunal's  view  in
                      respect of  the  grounds  and  of  any  concerns  the
                      Tribunal has.  Nor  is  there  provision  within  the
                      directions for these to be made known to the parties.
                      In Smith v Parole Board [2005] UKHL 1,  Lord  Bingham
                      cited a US decision of Brennan J in Goldberg v  Kelly
                      3997 US 254, 269 (1970):


                         "Moreover, written submissions do not  afford  the
                         flexibility of oral  presentations;  they  do  not
                         permit the recipient to mould his argument to  the
                         issues the decision-maker  appears  to  regard  as
                         important.  Particularly  where  credibility   and
                         veracity are at issue, [...]  written  submissions
                         are a wholly unsatisfactory  basis  for  decision.
                         [...]"


                 iii. A hearing  could  enable  the  parties  to  reach  an
                      agreement."

   8. At [3] the appellant's representative states if the Tribunal is minded
      to determine the matter on the papers further submissions are made  in
      respect of the grounds of appeal in relation to which  permission  has
      been granted.
   9. The Secretary of State's position at [2] of the response is  that  she
      does not contend that in this case it is necessary to have  a  further
      hearing to determine the question of whether the FTT erred in law.
  10. I find that on the facts of this case it is  appropriate  to  exercise
      the  discretion  conferred  by  rule  34  by  concluding  that  it  is
      appropriate in all the circumstances for the question of  whether  the
      Judge erred in law in a manner material to the decision to dismiss the
      appeal to be determined on the papers for the following reasons:

        a. In considering what procedural fairness in the  present  context
           requires it is not made out that the appellant will be denied  a
           fair hearing if the matter is determined on the papers.


        b. The  submission  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  refers  to  a
           selective quote from the judgement of the  House  of  Lord's  in
           Smith  v  Parole  Board.  The  full  paragraph  in   which   the
           abbreviated    version    appearing    in    the     appellant's
           representative's submission appears is as follows:


                 31.   While an oral hearing is most obviously necessary  to
                    achieve a just decision in a case  where  facts  are  in
                    issue which may affect  the  outcome,  there  are  other
                    cases in which an oral hearing may  well  contribute  to
                    achieving a just decision. The possibility of a detainee
                    being  heard  either  in  person  or,  where  necessary,
                    through some form of representation has been  recognised
                    by  the  European  Court  as,  in  some   instances,   a
                    fundamental   procedural   guarantee   in   matters   of
                    deprivation of liberty: De  Wilde,  Ooms  and  Versyp  v
                    Belgium (No 1) (1971) 1 EHRR 373, para 76; Winterwerp  v
                    The Netherlands (1979) 2 EHRR  387,  para  60;  Sanchez-
                    Reisse v Switzerland (1986) 9 EHRR 71, para 51; Waite  v
                    United Kingdom (Appn No  53236/99,  10  December  2002),
                    para 59. Although  ruling  in  a  very  different  legal
                    context, the Supreme Court of the United  States,  in  a
                    judgment delivered by Brennan J in Goldberg v Kelly  397
                    US 254, 269 (1970) helpfully described the value  of  an
                    oral hearing:


                         "Moreover, written submissions do not  afford  the
                         flexibility of oral  presentations;  they  do  not
                         permit the recipient to mold his argument  to  the
                         issues the  decisionmaker  appears  to  regard  as
                         important.  Particularly  where  credibility   and
                         veracity are at issue, as they  must  be  in  many
                         termination proceedings, written submissions are a
                         wholly  unsatisfactory  basis  for  decision.  The
                         second-hand presentation to the  decisionmaker  by
                         the caseworker has its own deficiencies; since the
                         caseworker usually gathers the  facts  upon  which
                         the   charge   of   ineligibility    rests,    the
                         presentation  of  the  recipient's  side  of   the
                         controversy  cannot  safely  be   left   to   him.
                         Therefore, a recipient must be  allowed  to  state
                         his  position  orally.  Informal  procedures  will
                         suffice; in this context,  due  process  does  not
                         require a particular order of  proof  or  mode  of
                         offering evidence ..."


        c. The case of Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U.S. 254, relied upon by  the
           appellant's representative is not a case in which  the  question
           being considered was whether a judge had made an  error  of  law
           material to a decision but rather a case in  which  the  Supreme
           Court of the United States ruled that the Due Process Clause  of
           the Fourteenth  Amendment  to  the  United  States  Constitution
           requires an evidentiary hearing before a  recipient  of  certain
           government welfare benefits can be deprived  of  such  benefits.
           The paragraph in which the above quote has been extracted by the
           appellant's representative appears is  much  greater,  including
           the following:


                 "The opportunity to  be  heard  must  be  tailored  to  the
                 capacities and circumstances of those who are to be  heard.
                 It is not enough that a welfare recipient may  present  his
                 position to the decisionmaker  in  writing  or  second-hand
                 through  his  caseworker.  Written   submissions   are   an
                 unrealistic  option  for  most  recipients,  who  lack  the
                 educational attainment necessary to write  effectively  and
                 who  cannot  obtain  professional   assistance.   Moreover,
                 written submissions do not afford the flexibility  of  oral
                 presentations; they do not permit the recipient to mold his
                 argument to the issues the decisionmaker appears to  regard
                 as important. Particularly where credibility  and  veracity
                 are  at  issue,  as  they  must  be  in  many   termination
                 proceedings,   written    submissions    are    a    wholly
                 unsatisfactory  basis   for   decision.   The   second-hand
                 presentation to the decisionmaker by the caseworker has its
                 own deficiencies; since the caseworker usually gathers  the
                 facts upon which the charge  of  ineligibility  rests,  the
                 presentation of the recipient's  side  of  the  controversy
                 cannot safely be left to him. Therefore, a  recipient  must
                 be  allowed  to  state  his   position   orally.   Informal
                 procedures will suffice; in this context, due process  does
                 not require a particular order of proof or mode of offering
                 evidence. Cf. HEW Handbook, pt. IV, � 6400(a).


                 In almost every setting where important decisions  turn  on
                 questions of fact, due process requires an  opportunity  to
                 confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses. E.g., ICC  v.
                 Louisville & N. R. Co., 227 U.  S.  88,  227  U.  S.  93-94
                 (1913); Willner v. Committee on Character & Fitness, 373 U.
                 S. 96, 373 U. S. 103-104 (1963). What we said in Greene  v.
                 McElroy, 360 U. S.  474,  360  U.  S.  496-497  (1959),  is
                 particularly pertinent here:


                       "Certain   principles   have   remained    relatively
                       immutable in our jurisprudence. One of these is that,
                       where  governmental  action  seriously   injures   an
                       individual, and  the  reasonableness  of  the  action
                       depends on fact findings, the evidence used to  prove
                       the  Government's  case  must  be  disclosed  to  the
                       individual so that he has an opportunity to show that
                       it is untrue. While this is important in the case  of
                       documentary evidence, it is even more important where
                       the evidence consists of the testimony of individuals
                       whose memory might be faulty or who, in  fact,  might
                       be  perjurers  or  persons   motivated   by   malice,
                       vindictiveness, intolerance, prejudice, or  jealousy.
                       We  have  formalized   these   protections   in   the
                       requirements of confrontation and  cross-examination.
                       They have ancient roots. They find expression in  the
                       Sixth Amendment. ... This Court has been  zealous  to
                       protect these rights from erosion. It has spoken  out
                       not only in criminal cases, ... but also in all types
                       of cases where administrative ... actions were  under
                       scrutiny."


                 Welfare recipients must therefore be given  an  opportunity
                 to confront and cross-examine the witnesses  relied  on  by
                 the department.


        d. This judgement, whilst from another common law jurisdictions and
           persuasive only and not binding upon a  UK  Court  or  Tribunal,
           reflects a principle of the laws of England  and  Wales  that  a
           person has a right to appear and answer any charge against  them
           unless there are good reasons why this should not be  the  case.
           It is also a decision assessing the right of individuals in what
           can  be  described  as   "normal"   circumstances   absent   the
           arrangements that have had to be put in place as a result of the
           Covid 19 pandemic. The judgement also specifically refers  to  a
           particular court user and their ability to engage in and present
           their case. The subjective element is  particularly  evident  by
           the reference to "The opportunity to be heard must  be  tailored
           to the capacities and circumstances  of  those  who  are  to  be
           heard. It is not enough that a welfare recipient may present his
           position to the decisionmaker in writing or second-hand  through
           his caseworker. Written submissions are  an  unrealistic  option
           for  most  recipients,  who  lack  the  educational   attainment
           necessary  to  write   effectively   and   who   cannot   obtain
           professional assistance." The circumstances  of  this  case,  at
           this stage of the proceedings, is that the facts have been found
           by the Judge and so it is not  a  case  of  written  submissions
           being sought to enable the Tribunal  to  ascertain  the  factual
           position as it was in the  case  before  the  Supreme  Court  in
           United States of America. It is also the case that  the  written
           submissions have not  been  produced  by  the  appellant  as  an
           individual but by an experienced legal representative,  in  this
           case Karen Reid of the 36 Group and it is not made out  that  an
           experienced professional  barrister  in  this  field  lacks  the
           necessary capacity or  academic/educational  achievement  to  be
           able to set out in submissions what she would wish to say in  an
           oral hearing. Indeed both the grounds of  appeal  together  with
           the submissions were drafted by the same person who  represented
           the appellant before the Judge.


        e. The assertion a hearing will be required to enable  the  parties
           to have the opportunity to  reach  an  agreement  is  noted  but
           nothing indicates that such an opportunity did not already exist
           by remote contact on the telephone or  other  means  before  the
           advocates outside the Tribunal in any  event.  It  also  appears
           having read the respondent's  replies  that  there  will  be  no
           prospect of an agreement even if an oral hearing occurred.


        f. Although it had been the practice to have oral hearings on error
           of law appeals this is not enshrined  in  the  Rules;  the  only
           mandatory requirement for a hearing in rule 34 is in relation to
           immigration judicial review claims where  the  Upper  Tribunal's
           decision would dispose of the proceedings. Paragraph  4  of  the
           Practice Direction contains a provision that if  a  disposal  on
           the papers did not accord with the  overriding  objective  there
           should be a hearing, indicating that in appropriate cases  where
           the facts warrant the same an oral hearing can be  arranged.  It
           has not been made out this is such a case.


        g. The fact the case may have been previously listed for a  Initial
           Hearing may be factually correct but that was not because it was
           determined that was the only medium by  which  the  question  of
           whether the Judge had made an error of law could be  determined.
           Prior to the Covid-19 pandemic that  was  the  normal  procedure
           once permission  to  appeal  had  been  granted.  At  that  time
           facilities for determining questions by other  means,  including
           on the papers, had not been explored in detail by HMCTS although
           remote hearings  were  becoming  more  common  within  different
           jurisdictions. It is also the case that case  management  powers
           enable a court or tribunal to decide upon the method of disposal
           in accordance with the exercise of the discretion  available  to
           it.


        h. Although the  appellant  expresses  a  preference  for  an  oral
           hearing  the  pleadings  failed  to  identify   any   procedural
           irregularity in considering this issue on the papers  sufficient
           to deny the appellant a fair  hearing  in  accordance  with  the
           overriding objectives if the Tribunal proceeds in this manner.


Error of law

  11. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on  20  June  1999.  Having
      considered the documentary evidence and  having  had  the  benefit  of
      seeing and hearing oral  evidence  being  given  the  Judge  sets  out
      findings of fact from [36] of the decision under challenge.
  12. At [37] the Judge writes:  "...  However,  by  agreeing  to  focus  on
      sufficiency of protection and internal relocation, it is clear that Ms
      Patel,  on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  was  willing  to  take   the
      appellant's claim to face a risk on return at its highest.  Therefore,
      in the light of the parties' joint position at the hearing, I  confine
      my consideration below to facts relevant to sufficiency of  protection
      and internal relocation. This  necessitates  a  consideration  of  the
      medical evidence."
  13. The Judge considered the evidence relied  upon  by  the  appellant  in
      connection with mental health issues between [38 - 44] before arriving
      at the following conclusion:

           "43.  Ms Patel submitted that the fact that Dr Hajioff had  only
                 met the appellant once lessened the weight I  could  attach
                 to his conclusions. In response, Ms Reid submitted that  Dr
                 Hajioff is a sufficiently qualified professional who  would
                 have been able to diagnose the  appellant  after  only  one
                 meeting. On careful  consideration,  I  find  that  in  the
                 absence of any evidence to explain why social  services  or
                 anyone else involved in the appellant's case had failed  to
                 pick up on the apparently obvious signs  of  mental  health
                 problems, I do find that the fact that Dr Hajioff has  only
                 met the appellant on  one  occasion,  very  close  to  this
                 appeal hearing, undermines the weight I can attach  to  his
                 conclusions.


           44.   I therefore accept Ms Patel's  submission  that  I  should
                 attach only little weight to Dr Hajioff's report."

  14. The appellant sought to challenge the Judge's findings in relation  to
      the medical evidence in Ground 1 but permission to appeal was  refused
      by the Upper Tribunal.
  15. The Judge considers  sufficiency  of  protection  between  [45  -  62]
      concluding between [60 - 62]:

           "60.  Therefore, it appears that there  is  support  in  Albania
                 that, in principle, the appellant may be  able  to  access.
                 But before a person can avail  themselves  of  the  support
                 programmes  they  must  be  recognised  as  a   victim   of
                 trafficking in Albania. Page 91 of the AYLOS report  quotes
                 a USSD report from 28 June 2018. That says  that  of  those
                 victims repatriated from  abroad,  "only  four  individuals
                 were identified as potential victims of trafficking in 2018
                 and none in 2017" [AB/372]. The AYLOS report does, however,
                 presented multiple conflicting accounts of how the Albanian
                 NRM operates. The overall impression is  that  there  is  a
                 desire by the Albanian authorities to tackle the problem of
                 human trafficking,  but  this  is  hampered  by  issues  of
                 funding and proper training. However, page 96 of the  AYLOS
                 report  quotes  a  joint  report  by  the   University   of
                 Bedfordshire, IOM  and  the  Institute  of  Applied  Social
                 Research which says that "the focus on women  and  children
                 has been criticised for  leaving  the  trafficking  of  men
                 poorly understood and overlooked resulting  in  a  lack  of
                 support and assistance for trafficked  men".  On  page  97,
                 there is a quote from a 2015 report by Different and Equal,
                 which says that "while trafficked  males  are  increasingly
                 being identified as such, [it  is]  still  lagging  in  the
                 formal identification procedure"; and that  the  "[f]ailure
                 to identify men as VoT's  is  linked  to  social  norms  of
                 vulnerability - that men are strong and cannot be victim".


           61.   Having given careful regard to the above,  and  apply  the
                 lower standard of proof, I find it  even  though  the  USSD
                 report shows that in recent years few men repatriated  from
                 abroad have been accepted as victims of trafficking by  the
                 Albanian NRM, it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  the
                 appellant would not be accepted. The evidence is clear that
                 an  ever  increasing  number  of  men  been  provided  with
                 financial  assistance  by  the  state   and   placed   into
                 accommodation  (albeit  not  in  a  sheltered)   and   that
                 Different in Equal provides them  with  counselling,  legal
                 advice,   medical   services,   vocational   training   and
                 assistance with  jobseeking.  I  therefore  find  that  the
                 appellant could avail himself  of  the  assistance  of  the
                 state and/or an NGO such as Different and Equal  who  could
                 help him readjust back into life in Albania and prevent him
                 from falling back into the hands of a criminal gang or  his
                 abusive father.


           62.    I  therefore  turn  to  the  second  point:  whether  the
                 appellant can seek the protection of the  Albanian  Police.
                 Here, the appellant's case  is  that  the  police  are  too
                 corrupt to help him. However, in my view, his  fears  about
                 the reach of the criminal gangs are based  on  supposition.
                 He does, however, rely on Dr Korovolis's report  where,  at
                 page 10, he writes that the Albanian police  forces  poorly
                 trained, unprofessional, and corrupt. However, even if  the
                 local police are corrupt, there is  no  evidence  that  the
                 particular criminal gang that the appellant worked  for  in
                 Klos sufficient to reach all means to bribe police  offices
                 anywhere the appellant goes in Albania. Furthermore,  while
                 the USSD report  acknowledges  that  corruption  remains  a
                 problem in the Albanian police,  it  also  says  that  "the
                 government has mechanisms to investigate and  punish  abuse
                 and corruption". For the reasons set out above, I find that
                 Dr Korovolis's  conclusion  that  the  appellant  would  be
                 unable to obtain  any  assistance  from  the  Ombudsman  is
                 unsupported by any sources. Therefore, while  the  Albanian
                 police  are  far  from  perfect,  the  objective   evidence
                 nevertheless demonstrates a sufficient level of  protection
                 that meets the test set out in the case Horvath v Secretary
                 of State for the Home Department [2001] 1 A.C. 486."

  16. Ground 2 asserts the Judge erred in law in finding that there will  be
      support available to the appellant as a male  victim  of  trafficking.
      The original Grounds of Appeal asserted:

           "4.    The  Appellant's  contention  is  that,  owing   to   his
                 particular vulnerabilities, he would  be  at  risk  of  re-
                 trafficking on return to Albania and that there  would  not
                 be sufficient protection for him. The Judge has found  that
                 the  Appellant  could  be  identified  as   a   victim   of
                 trafficking by the NRM in Albania and that consequently  he
                 would be able  to  access  support,  capable  of  providing
                 adequate protection.


           5.    The Appellants grounds  of  appeal  have  highlighted  the
                 evidence contained within the report  "Albania:  Trafficked
                 Boys and Young Men which supports the contention that there
                 is an absence of support and that the limited support  that
                 is available will be an accessible and inadequate ..."

  17. The Secretary of State's position is that  the  appellant's  challenge
      is, in reality, no more than disagreement with the Judge's  assessment
      as to whether support will be available to the appellant on return  to
      Albania. It is submitted that what is unequivocally clear is that  the
      Judge considered in very great detail the issue between [45 - 61]  and
      did so in an  entirely  balanced  fashion  noting  factors  that  both
      supported such a conclusion and those that undermined it.
  18. The original Grounds of appeal against the Judge's decision are in the
      following terms:

           "9.   At paragraph 58 of the determination the Judge finds  that
                 the Appellant would not  be  accommodated  in  one  of  the
                 secure shelters  for  victims  of  trafficking.  The  Judge
                 nonetheless finds that  there  would  be  support  for  the
                 Appellant. He relies on  evidence  contained  in  a  report
                 prepared by ASYLOS "Albania: Trafficked Boys and Young Men"
                 which he states (at paragraph 59)  establishes  that  there
                 are charities in Albania paying for rented flats  for  male
                 victims of trafficking. It is submitted that  this  ignores
                 the evidence in the AYLOS report  that  this  provision  is
                 inadequate:


                    "the absence of adequate safe accommodation for boys and
                    young man was also highlighted by the Mary Ward  Loretto
                    Foundation:


                    "I did some research and I found only a day service  and
                    they can stay there and access a  programme  that  still
                    there are no shelters like for women and  girl  victims.
                    Male victims only have day centres where they  can  have
                    trainings, food, clothes and very low level of  services
                    but not a residential centre. In all the  centres  where
                    they accept VOT they do not accept  boys.  Some  of  the
                    centres  like  D&E  for  rent  but  very  few  and  very
                    difficult to find the victims who accept to go  in  this
                    flat. They have to move -  they  don't  have  budget  to
                    support him during this process of rescuing him, to give
                    him a flat or a place to live  -  education  -  so  they
                    always move.'


                    Source: Mr Alfred Matoshi, Mary Ward Loretto Foundation,
                    interview record, January 2019.


           10.   The ASYLOS  report  also  identifies  that  just  21  male
                 victims of trafficking have benefited  from  this  support.
                 The evidence within the report is also inconsistent  as  to
                 whether  such  support  is  available  and  whether  it  is
                 adequate in terms of both provision and capacity - see, for
                 example, the interview with Professor Dr. Edlira Haxhiymeri
                 at pages 269 - 279 (in particular the answers at point  8).
                 The judge has not taken this into account.


           11.   The Judge also relies on reference in the ASYLOS report to
                 an Albanian law requiring  Victims  of  trafficking  to  be
                 given E21.50 per months, however, the  report  specifically
                 states that this is insufficient  to  allow  them  to  live
                 independently (see page 151 of the report).


           12.   It is submitted that in  the  circumstances  the  evidence
                 before the Judge does not justify the conclusion reached at
                 paragraph 61 that "even though the USSD report  shows  that
                 in recent years few men repatriated from abroad  have  been
                 accepted as victims of trafficking by the Albanian NRM,  it
                 does not necessarily follow that the appellant would not be
                 accepted". It is submitted that, contrary  to  the  Judge's
                 finding, the evidence is far from clear.

  19. The material before the Judge showed that a person claiming  to  be  a
      victim of trafficking will be assessed in  relation  to  the  same  in
      Albania. It is  not  known  whether,  despite  a  person  having  been
      accepted as  a  victim  of  trafficking  by  an  organisation  outside
      Albania, those on the ground in Albania consider themselves  bound  by
      such a conclusion or reassess the issue for  themselves  in  light  of
      their far more  detailed  local  knowledge  of  the  situation  within
      Albania.
  20. The Judge does not find that every person identified as  a  victim  of
      trafficking will receive the same standard of support as they  may  in
      the United Kingdom. The Judge clearly identifies and discusses what is
      described as a limitation of those identified as potential victims  of
      trafficking and the support the ASYLOS states may not be available  to
      them.
  21. The Judge clearly factored the points relied  upon  by  the  appellant
      into the assessment of the  overall  merits  of  this  aspect  of  the
      appeal. There is no country guidance decision or country  material  of
      such weight to support a finding that no male  victim  of  trafficking
      will receive sufficient support in  Albania.  The  Judge  specifically
      finds an assertion the appellant would not receive assistance from the
      Ombudsman to be unsupported and finds that protection is available  to
      the Horvath standard. The Judge's findings are adequately reasoned and
      whilst the appellant disagrees with them  by  reference  to  a  report
      specifically considered by the Judge, he fails to establish  that  the
      Judge's findings that support and the sufficiency of  protection  will
      be available to him on return is infected by material legal error.
  22. Even if E21.50 is  not  sufficient  to  enable  a  person  to  support
      themselves without more it was not made  out  the  appellant  will  be
      unable to work. As noted by the Judge the appellant will  be  able  to
      obtain financial support and help with finding accommodation and  that
      the NGOs that exist could provide him  with  counselling  as  well  as
      vocational training and assistance with job  seeking.  These  findings
      have not been challenged or shown  to  be  contrary  to  the  evidence
      available to the Judge.
  23. Ground 3 asserts the Judge misapplied the burden and standard of proof
      at [62] where it is alleged the Judge found that  applying  the  lower
      standard of proof, there would be support for  the  Appellant  and  he
      will be identified as a victim of trafficking. It  is  submitted  that
      the burden falls on the Appellant to establish his claim on the  lower
      standard of proof, it is not the case, as the Judge has inferred, that
      evidence which is contrary to his claim, providing it meets the  lower
      threshold, will defeat his claim.
  24. The appellant asserts that if Grounds 2 and 3 are made out the Judge's
      assessment of internal relocation is flawed.
  25. The respondent's position in relation to this ground is that the Judge
      did not place the burden upon the appellant at all although as to  the
      standard of proof the respondent would concede within the  context  of
      the availability of support that the Judge erred in law  in  inverting
      the standard of proof. It is  not  accepted  that  this  is,  however,
      material as a reading of the determination as a whole shows the  Judge
      clearly envisaged the appellant will be able to internally relocate to
      Tirana meaning any such error would not be material.
  26. The Judge sets out the correct legal self-direction in relation to the
      burden and standard of proof and identifies all the available evidence
      that was made available in support of the conclusions he reached.  The
      assertion that at [62] the Judge misapplied the burden and standard of
      proof does  not establish arguable material  legal  error.  The  Judge
      examined country information relevant to an issue relied upon  by  the
      appellant but did not find when considering all the  evidence  in  the
      round that the appellant has discharged the burden of proof  upon  him
      to the required standard of proof to show he had any such entitlement.
      The standard of proof referred to  by  the  appellant  is  the  "lower
      standard" and if evidence exists contrary  to  his  claim,  which  the
      Judge takes together with the points relied  upon  by  the  appellant,
      shows the appellant cannot make out his claim that is,  arguably,  the
      normal application of the relevant test. The Judge  having  given  the
      weight that was considered  appropriate  to  the  evidence  found  the
      appellant has a sufficiency available to him in  Albania.  It  is  not
      made out that conclusion is infected by a material  misapplication  of
      the burden and standard of proof. [62] is set out above.
  27. In  relation  to  the  question  of  internal  relocation,  the  Judge
      considers this between [64 -  65]  of  the  decision  under  challenge
      concluding:

           "64.  For the reasons set out in paragraph 51  above,  I  attach
                 little  weight  to  Dr  Korovilas's  conclusions  that  the
                 appellant would be unable to relocate to  another  part  of
                 Albania. There is no material that support his  claim  that
                 the appellant will be unable to find accommodation all work
                 in the absence of family support; nor is there any material
                 that he cites would likely be able to track  the  appellant
                 down to any part of Albania - let  alone  that  they  would
                 even be aware that he had returned to the country  after  5
                 years away.


           65.   I accept Ms Patel's submission that the appellant  is  now
                 an adult with and  could  be  expected  to  relocate  to  a
                 different part  of  Albania  (including  Tirana)  and  find
                 accommodation and a job on return. That it is  likely  that
                 the appellant could obtain some financial support and  help
                 with finding accommodation as a victim of trafficking,  and
                 that NGOs exist but could provide him with counselling  and
                 as well as vocational  training  and  assistance  with  job
                 seeking."

  28. The appellant fails to establish that  this  finding  is  outside  the
      range of those reasonably available to the Judge on the evidence.
  29. Ground 4 asserts the Judge erred in law in finding that  male  victims
      of trafficking in Albania are not a Particular Social Group (PSG).
  30. The Judge considered the question of a Convention reason between [66 -
      72] noting the appellant's representatives submission that as a victim
      of trafficking the appellant shared a common background that cannot be
      changed with other victims of trafficking and  therefore  fell  within
      the PSG of a refugee. The Judge referred to the country guidance  case
      of TD and AD which found that trafficked women may well be members  of
      a particular social  group  on  that  account  alone,  but  found  the
      appellant's situation to be different from those of the appellants  in
      TD and AD. At [69] the Judge writes "Moreover, no  evidence  has  been
      submitted to the tribunal to show that trafficked men are perceived as
      PSG in that country; in fact, the evidence shows that  trafficked  men
      appear to be something of a nonentity in  Albania,  and  that  Albania
      society struggles to accept that men can be victims; e.g., see page 97
      of the ASYLOS report [AB/378]. The evidence before me  does  not  show
      that trafficked men face any form of social  stigma  are  specifically
      targeted for persecution or serious harm on account of the  fact  that
      they have been trafficked.
  31. The appellant's asserts  that  in  SB  (PSG,  Protection  Regulations,
      Regulation 6) Moldova  CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00002,  the  Upper  Tribunal
      accepted for the first time that a former Victims of  Trafficking  can
      be deemed to be a member of a PSG for  the  purposes  of  the  Refugee
      Convention and that this was not restricted to victims of a particular
      gender.
  32. The appellant argues there is not a sufficiency of protection for male
      victims of trafficking in Albania through the failure to  identify  or
      recognise the possibility of such trafficking occurring and there is a
      clear  disparity  and  the  protection  offered  to  male  victims  of
      trafficking and  female  victims.  As  such  male  former  victims  of
      trafficking are a PSG in Albania and that applying the analysis of the
      Judge the appellant is at risk because he was trafficked by  the  gang
      before and that the persecution is therefore directly  linked  to  the
      immutable characteristic.
  33. The respondent's position set out at [7 - 9] of the submissions of  27
      May 2020 in the following terms:

           "7.   In respect of ground 4 the SSHD contends that there was no
                 misdirection in law by the FTTJ. He considered  this  issue
                 between [66 - 71] in the grounds merely disagree  with  his
                 findings. As to which, insofar as the grounds  rely  on  SB
                 (PSG, Protection Regulations,  Reg  6)  Moldova  CG  [2008]
                 UKAIT 00002,  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  that  determination
                 expressly stated:


                       "56.  Accordingly, in our view, and subject  to  what
                            we say at paragraphs 67 to 74,  former  victims
                            of   trafficking   and   former   victims    of
                            trafficking for sexual exploitation are capable
                            of being members of a particular  social  group
                            because of their shared  common  background  or
                            past  experience  of  having  been  trafficked.
                            However,  we  emphasise  that,  in  order   for
                            "former  victims  of  trafficking"  or  "former
                            victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation"
                            to be members of a particular social group, the
                            group in question must have a distinct identity
                            in the society in question."


           8.    The critical issue, as is clear from the above extract, is
                 that former victims of trafficking may be a PSG but whether
                 they indeed are,  is  a  fact  sensitive  issue.  The  SSHD
                 submits that for the  reasons  given  by  the  Judge,  male
                 victims of trafficking from Albania not  a  PSG.  The  FTTJ
                 found at [69]:


                       "moreover, no evidence  has  been  submitted  to  the
                       tribunal to show that trafficked men are perceived as
                       PSG in that country; in fact, the evidence shows that
                       trafficked men appear to be something of a  nonentity
                       in Albania, and that  Albania  society  struggles  to
                       accept that men can be victims; e.g., see page 97  of
                       the ASYLOS report [AB/378]. The  evidence  before  me
                       does not show that trafficked men face  any  form  of
                       social   stigma   are   specifically   targeted   for
                       persecution or serious harm on account  of  the  fact
                       that they have been trafficked."


           9.     The  finding   unquestionably   militates   against   any
                 suggestion that male victims of  trafficking  are  a  group
                 that "as a  distinct  identity  in  the  relevant  country,
                 because  it  is  perceived  as  being  different   by   the
                 surrounding society". On  the  contrary,  Albanian  society
                 does not appear to countenance the notion that males can be
                 such a PSG."

  34. This issue highlights  a  material  difference  between  the  test  to
      establish whether a person can be a member of a PSG under the  Refugee
      Convention and whether they can under the Qualification Directive. The
      Geneva Convention relating to the Status  of  Refugees  1951  provides
      greater protection than the minimum standards  imposed  by a  literal
      interpretation of Article  10(1)(d)  of  the  Qualification  Directive
      (PSG). Under the Refugee Convention a PSG is a group  of  persons  who
      share a  common  characteristic  other  than  their  risk   of   being
      persecuted,  or  who  are   perceived   as   a   group   by   society.
      Under the Qualification Directive, Article 10 (d) replaces  the  word
      "or" with the word "and" creating a cumulative rather than alternative
      tests.
  35.  Under  the  alternative  test,  as  the  appellant  shares  a  common
      characteristic as a  male  former  victim  of  trafficking,  a  common
      characteristic which  is  innate  and  unchangeable,  he  is  arguably
      entitled to be recognised as a member of a PSG even if  not  perceived
      as a group by society; which is  the  additional  requirement  of  the
      cumulative approach under the Qualification Directive. The finding the
      evidence does not  support  the  claim  that  the  appellant  will  be
      perceived as a member of a particular group, the second element of the
      test under the Qualification Directive,  has  not  been  shown  to  be
      outside the range of findings reasonably open  to  the  Judge  on  the
      evidence and does not reveal arguable material legal error.
  36. However,  to  ensure  consistency  between  two  important  protective
      provisions and in  light  of  the  fact  the  Qualification  Directive
      specifically refers to  compatibility  with  the  Refugee  Convention,
      Article 10 (D) should be  interpreted  by  replacing  the  word  "and"
       between Article 10(1)(d)(i) and (ii) with the word "or", creating an
      alternative rather than cumulative test.
  37. Even if the appellant is able to satisfy the definition of a PSG  that
      does not entitle him to be recognised as a refugee without  more.  The
      appellant  still  needed  to  establish  there  is  a  real  risk   of
      persecution for this Convention reason, the Nexus test. In this appeal
      the Judge finds that even though the appellant faces a  real  risk  of
      persecution in his home area he has a valid internal flight option and
      sufficiency of protection.
  38. Paragraph 339O  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  incorporates  the
      Qualification Directive, states:

           '(i)  The Secretary of State will not make:


                 (a)   a grant of asylum if in part of the country of origin
                       a person would not have a well-founded fear of  being
                       persecuted, and the person can reasonably be expected
                       to stay in that part of the country; or


                 (b)   a grant of humanitarian protection if in part of  the
                       country of return a person would not face a real risk
                       of  suffering  serious  harm,  and  the  person   can
                       reasonably be expected to stay in that  part  of  the
                       country.


           (ii)  In examining whether a part of the country  of  origin  or
                 country  of  return  meets  the  requirements  in  (i)  the
                 Secretary of State, when making his decision on whether  to
                 grant asylum or humanitarian protection, will  have  regard
                 to the general circumstances prevailing in that part of the
                 country and to the personal circumstances of the person.


           (iii) (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to  return
                 to the country of origin or country of return.'

  39. The Judge's findings that there is a part  of  Albania  to  which  the
      appellant may reasonably relocate where  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
      protection has not been shown to be infected by material  legal  error
      and shall stand. They are findings that are  adequately  reasoned  and
      within the range of those available to  the  Judge  on  the  evidence.
      Accordingly no  error  arises  in  the  dismissal  of  the  appellants
      protection claim on all grounds.
  40. The human rights element is not challenged and those  are  sustainable
      findings too for the reasons set out by the Judge.

Decision


  41. There is no material error of law in the Immigration Judge's decision.
      The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


  42. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


      I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 8 July 2020
