
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09774/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd January 2019                  |On 4th February 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [L J]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Masood (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Abebrese, promulgated on 23rd October 2018, following a hearing at Hatton
Cross on 6th October 2018. In the determination, the judge dismissed the
appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant subsequently applied for,
and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the
matter comes before me.



The Appellant

The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Somalia, and was born on 30th October
1988.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 25th July
2018, refusing his application for asylum and for humanitarian protection,
pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

The essence of the Appellant's claim is that the Appellant fears al-
Shabaab, who have control of the area from which he originates, and he
fears that they will want to recruit him, and that he will be kidnapped by
other majority clans, because he himself is a member of the Ashraf, a
minority clan.  In 2015 he was captured and beaten and tortured by al-
Shabaab, who wanted him to become a spy for them, as they were trying to
win him over, but he was very young at the time.

The Judge's Findings

The judge did not accept the Appellant's account, and did not regard him to
be credible on the whole (see paragraph 37), and nor did the judge accept
that the Appellant was able to escape in the manner that he claimed on a
particular night in April 2015 (paragraph 38).  The Appellant had remained
in Somalia, even living in Mogadishu, the capital city, for two years,
retaining limited contact with his wife (paragraph 39) before leaving the
country.  He claimed now in the United Kingdom to have an Article 8
relationship with his mother, who had secured refugee and asylum status in
this country, together with some of his siblings.  He had made this claim
on the basis that he was living with his mother and financially supported
by her, but the judge held that in order to succeed as an adult son of his
mother, he had to show elements of dependency that involved more than
normal emotional ties, which he could not do.  So the Appellant failed on
the basis of Article 8 as well. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

The grounds of application state that the judge came to wrongful
conclusions as to the Appellant's credibility, and failed to properly
assess the risk on return, and also made inadequate assessments in relation
to the Appellant's Article 8 claim.

On 13th November 2018 permission to appeal was granted on the basis that
the judge did not adequately consider the Appellant's profile against the
country guidance case of AMM [2011] UKUT 00445, and more recently the
country guidance case of MOJ [2014] UKUT 00442.

Submissions

At the hearing before me on 3rd January 2018, Mr Masood, appearing on
behalf of the Appellant, relied upon the fact that the Appellant was
accepted as being a minority Ashraf clan member from Somalia.  Secondly, he
came from an area that was controlled by al-Shabaab.  Third, he could not
be returned to Somalia as a minority clan member and the case of MOJ [2014]
UKUT 00442 makes clear why this is so, particularly as he has no close
family members in Mogadishu.  Fourth, he would not be able to get
employment.  Fifth, he would therefore end up living in an IDP camp and MOJ
clearly states that the conditions in IDP camps are dire and violate basic
fundamental human rights. Sixth, in relation to the Appellant's Article 8
rights, which were based essentially on his relationship with his mother,
the judge did not apply the Razgar principles properly.  This was a case
where the Appellant had been separated from his mother when he was just
aged 8 years of age, at a time when a civil war was raging through Somalia,
and it was not until a further 22 years, that he was then able to reunite
himself with his mother in the United Kingdom.  But by that time he was an
adult, and the judge had failed to take these "exceptional circumstances"
into account, and had failed to properly determine the fact that there were
indeed more than normal emotional ties between the mother and son, on
account of their history of separation and the way in which they had
eventually been finally reunited.

For his part, Mr Lindsay made it clear that MOJ [2014] UKUT 00442 did not
assist the Appellant because that made it clear that a person will only
adapt in an IDP camp if he either is not in receipt of remittances from
abroad, or cannot secure livelihood on return.  This was an Appellant who
was financially supported by his mother in the United Kingdom.  Although
the mother gave evidence (see paragraph 26 of the determination) to say
that she would not financially support the Appellant in Somalia, the judge
did not accept this as being credible (paragraph 28).  Therefore, the
Appellant on return to Somalia would be financially provided for by his
mother.

As far as the Appellant's ability to work was concerned, in MOJ, the
Tribunal had stated (at page 352 (paragraph 48)) that jobs had been created
in Mogadishu in a booming economy and so the Appellant would be able to
find work.  Indeed, the judge had made a finding in this particular case
that: "The Appellant in any event is an adult.  He may seek employment in
order to sustain himself" (paragraph 48). Second, insofar as the
Appellant's Article 8 claim was based upon his dependency on his mother, it
was not disproportionate to ask the Appellant to return back to Somalia,
given that he had nine siblings still living in Somalia, and had a wife
there as well.  This was particularly given that the judge had come to the
conclusion that the relationship between the Appellant and his mother did
not involve more than normal emotional ties (paragraph 49). Mr Lindsay
submitted that there was no error of law.

In reply, Mr Masood submitted that the country guidance case of MOJ [2014]
UKUT 00442 had not been followed.  This is because paragraph 407(h) of that
case lists a series of factors to be taken into account, which the judge
had not gone through, and it was not enough to say that because the
Appellant's mother was supporting the Appellant in the United Kingdom, she
could equally do so if he was returned back to Somalia, without
consideration of the factors set out at paragraph 407(h).





Error of Law

I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge involved the
making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA) such that
I should set aside the decision and remake the decision.  My reasons are as
follows.

First, insofar as the Appellant's protection claim is concerned, the judge
has not applied the strictures in MOJ [2014] UKUT 00442.  It is true that
there is a reference to this decision, but it is only a fleeting reference
(at paragraph 42) and even then it is only in terms of the ability of al-
Shabaab "regarding legitimate targets and people who may be of interest to
them" whereby the judge states that "I am of the view that even on the
lower standard the Appellant would not be a legitimate target ..."
(paragraph 42).  There is no consideration, against the backdrop of the
factors set out at paragraph 407(h) of the country guidance case of MOJ
[2014] UKUT 00442, in relation to the Appellant's ability to actually
relocate to Mogadishu.  It is not enough to say that the Appellant had
lived there for two years (although his claim at the time was that he had
been supported by clan members),. This is because what paragraph 407(h) of
MOJ does is to make clear that, in circumstances where a detainee has no
nuclear family or close relatives in Mogadishu to assist him in re-
establishing himself on return, then it would be necessary to look at the
"circumstances in Mogadishu before departure"; the "length of absence from
Mogadishu"; and "family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu",
together with five additional factors, which involved the availability of
remittances from abroad to the Appellant.  The judge's findings in these
respects are inadequate.  For example, the judge speaks in terms of
probabilities, stating that "he has family still in the country and he may
make efforts to contact them" (paragraph 47).  This is insufficient, given
that of the nine siblings that the Appellant had in Somalia, three of them
are missing, according to the Appellant.  In the same way, when the judge
looks at the question of the Appellant's ability to get employment, the
judge states: "The Appellant in any event is an adult.  He may seek
employment in order to sustain himself" (paragraph 48).  The implicit
assumption in this statement, namely that because the Appellant is an adult
he would be able to seek employment, is not what the country guidance case
of MOJ [2014] UKUT 00442 is authority for.

Second, the conclusions with respect to the Appellant's Article 8
relationship with his mother are equally questionable.  This is a case
where the Appellant was separated from his mother at the age of 8, during
the civil war in Somalia, and had only been able to reunite himself with
her some 22 years later in the United Kingdom, following which he was not
only just living with her, but was being financially supported by her.
When the mother made her application for asylum, she mentioned the
existence of her son in those applications (paragraph 27).  When in 2001
she made an application on the basis of family reunion, she mentioned her
son (paragraph 20 and paragraph 27).  Her evidence was that the Appellant
had no family in Somalia left and that three of her children were still
missing (paragraph 28).  That evidence has not been properly rejected.

In addition to this, there remains the fact that the Appellant is now
living with his mother and is supported by her.  Although the judge refers
to Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31, he does not explain why it is that there
are not here "further elements of dependency, involving more than the
normal emotional ties" (paragraph 49).  He simply states that dependency
does not have to be economic, but the fact that it is economic does not
detract from the fact that there is a dependency; if anything, it may only
add to it.  This is an Appellant who had been separated from his mother
since 1996 and the mother gave evidence before the Tribunal about the
effect of the separation on her and how this had laid heavily on her over
the years (see paragraph 3(iii) of the Grounds of Appeal).  The issue of
dependency, accordingly, needs to be revisited, as does the question of the
Appellant's return to Mogadishu on the basis of the country guidance case
of MOJ [2014] UKUT 00442.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error on a point of law
(see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that I should aside the decision and
remake the decision.  I remit this matter back to the First-tier Tribunal,
to be heard by a judge other than Judge Abebrese pursuant to practice
statement 7.2(b) of the practice statement.

No anonymity order is made.

The appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st January 2019





