

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/09453/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Determination Promulgated         |
|On 20th September 2018                  | On 27th September 2018            |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                                    K D K
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro, of Counsel, instructed by Adam Bernard
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on  3  April  1966.  He
          challenges the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Khawar,
          promulgated  on  25  June  2018,  dismissing  his  appeal  against
          deportation and the respondent's refusal to grant him asylum.


       2. The appellant entered the UK as a student in May 2007 following  a
          successful appeal and extensions of his leave were granted until 7
          June 2016. On 6 August 2011 he was joined by his  wife  and  their
          three children.  On 13 February 2015 the appellant  was  convicted
          for conspiracy to facilitate the breach of  the  immigration  laws
          and sentenced to 20 months in prison. On  22  March  2015  he  was
          served with the respondent's decision to deport him dated 16 March
          2015. Representations were submitted on his behalf on 31 March and
          17  June  2015  raising  an  asylum  claim.  The   appellant   was
          interviewed  and  on  6  November  2015   he   forwarded   further
          documentary evidence in support of the claim to the respondent. On
          18 August 2016 the respondent made a deportation order and refused
          the asylum /human rights claim.


       3.  The  deportation  order  was  made  following   the   appellant's
          conviction for his involvement in the conspiracy to  facilitate  a
          sham marriage between his nephew and an  EEA  national.  it  would
          appear that fraudulent documents were obtained  by  the  appellant
          through his accountant in  support  of  the  claim  that  the  EEA
          national was exercising treaty rights in the UK.


       4. The appellant's asylum claim was that he worked  for  the  UK  and
          that his role involved working with  women  in  rural  communities
          with a view to helping them become more independent and  that  for
          this role he had become a target for  the  Taliban  and  that  his
          vehicle had been attacked in 2004.


       5. Permission to appeal against the determination of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal was granted by Judge Andrew on 24 July 2018.  The  matter
          then came before me on 20 September 2018.



      The Hearing



       6. I heard submissions from  the  parties  in  the  presence  of  the
          appellant.



       7. Mr Jorro, who had also represented the appellant before the First-
          tier Tribunal (and has been wrongly named in  the  determination),
          criticized the judge for his treatment of the documentary evidence
          adduced in support of the appellant's employment with  the  United
          Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and his work with rural women
          in the Kashmir region and the tribal areas of Pakistan. He  argued
          that although the judge had set out all the  documents  which  did
          not make reference to the appellant's work with women,  and  which
          the appellant claimed made him a target of the Taliban, he  failed
          to make reference to any of the  documentary  evidence  which  did
          support that part of his claim. The supporting evidence which  had
          been disregarded was set out in the skeleton  argument.  Moreover,
          in maintaining that the evidence did now show that  the  appellant
          had worked with women, the judge had raised a new point which  the
          respondent had not relied on. The judge's  error  in  disregarding
          this evidence infected all his findings and resulted in  a  flawed
          determination.



       8. Mr Jorro also submitted that there was no basis on which the judge
          could  have  concluded  that  the  newspaper  articles  had   been
          fabricated. The originals had  been  adduced  and  the  judge  had
          speculated in finding that the reports had been prepared  for  the
          appellant's  appeal.   Finally,  the  judge  had  erred   in   his
          consideration of article 8. He had failed to undertake a balancing
          exercise and had not had regard to any of the factors contained in
          paragraphs 22-27 of the skeleton argument. The decision should  be
          set aside and the appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


       9. In response, Ms Everett submitted that there were no  errors  made
          by the judge. The determination was sound and  should  stand.  She
          argued that the judge had referred to there being  no  documentary
          evidence from the UN in respect of the appellant's employment  and
          he was entitled to conclude that the absence of evidence from that
          source was of great significance. She submitted that there was  no
          strong evidence that the appellant's role had  been  working  with
          and empowering women  and  that  work  with  communities  did  not
          automatically mean that  he  would  be  involved  with  women.  Ms
          Everett submitted that the expert in his report concluded that the
          attack in 2004 was more likely to have been against the UN  as  an
          organisation than against the appellant as an individual.  He  had
          been able to remain living in a city for  three  years  after  the
          attack without any problems despite the expert's claim that he was
          more likely to be tracked in a city than in a village.


      10. Ms Everett submitted that the judge's findings  on  the  newspaper
          articles was made in the context of the evidence from witnesses.


      11. With regard to article 8 she submitted that the  judge  had  found
          that the rules had not been met and there was no evidence that the
          decision was disproportionate. However, if the assessment was  not
          considered to be adequate, the matter could  be  retained  in  the
          Upper Tribunal.


      12. Mr Jorro replied. He pointed out that this was not  a  case  where
          the judge had only been interested in  documentary  evidence  from
          the UK itself as he had considered non-UN evidence to find against
          the appellant. having considered unofficial sources  of  evidence,
          it was incumbent on him to consider all of it. He repeated that it
          was speculative to maintain that the newspaper articles  had  been
          engineered by the appellant and he maintained that article  8  had
          not been properly assessed.


      13. That completed submissions. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I
          reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.



      Discussion and Conclusions



      14. I have considered all the evidence before me and have  had  regard
          to the submissions made.



      15. Three criticisms of the First-tier Tribunal Judge are made. I find
          that there is merit in Mr Jorro's submissions; although the second
          ground is the weakest.


      16. Mr Jorro's strongest argument is the first. Whilst on the face  of
          it, it does appear  that  the  judge  wanted  to  see  documentary
          evidence  from  the  UN  itself  relating   to   the   appellant's
          employment, and I agree that it is curious that such  evidence  is
          not forthcoming, Mr Jorro makes a valid point when he submits that
          the judge did, however, rely on  non-UN  documentary  evidence  to
          undermine the appellant's claim. It follows that either the  judge
          should have found all non-UN documentary evidence unreliable or of
          little weight, or he should have considered all of it.


      17. It may be seen from the determination that what the judge did was
          to list a number of documents from various  sources  as  evidence
          that the appellant's work did not involve women in the community.
          He does not, however, make any reference to the documents  listed
          in the skeleton argument, and which were before him, of similarly
          sourced documents which claimed that the appellant did work  with
          rural  women.  In  failing   to   consider   all   the   evidence
          holistically, the judge's finding with respect to the  nature  of
          the appellant's employment is flawed and unsustainable.  I am not
          persuaded that there is any merit in the argument, following from
          this ground, that the judge raised a 'new point' as  regards  the
          documentary evidence because it is often the case  that  evidence
          adduced for a hearing raises matters that were  not  included  in
          the decision letter. The complaint may have been more meritorious
          had it been argued that the judge did not alert  the  parties  to
          the point he considered the fresh evidence gave rise to; but such
          a criticism is not made.


      18. The second criticism made was that the judge erred in his findings
          on the newspaper articles and that his findings  were  speculative
          and without foundation. There is force in Ms Everett's  submission
          that these findings were made in the context of the evidence given
          by  the  witnesses,  and  indeed  the  appellant's  production  of
          fraudulent documentary evidence  in  his  nephew's  sham  marriage
          claim is noted, but given the judge's flawed findings on the  core
          claim, it is possible that all subsequent findings  were  infected
          by the adverse view taken by the judge regarding  the  appellant's
          claimed employment. Therefore, whilst the appellant will  have  to
          try and resolve the discrepancies arising from the evidence of his
          witnesses and the newspaper articles, I do not seek to uphold  the
          judge's findings in this respect.


      19. Finally, there is the  article  8  assessment.  Whilst  there  was
          limited documentary evidence before the judge as to the nature  of
          any private/family life claim, the factors included in Mr  Jorro's
          skeleton argument should have  been  considered  and  the  judge's
          assessment should have been more than the throwaway assessment  to
          be found at paragraph 95. Whether it would have led to a different
          outcome is another matter, but the assessment carried out  by  the
          judge is plainly inadequate.



      20. The decision is  set  aside.  It  still  serves  as  a  record  of
          proceedings in respect of the oral evidence given by the appellant
          and his witnesses. Further, as  the  summary  of  the  appellant's
          immigration history, the basis for the deportation and summary  of
          his case as set out  at  paragraphs  10-33  are  undisputed,  they
          continue to serve as an accurate  background  to  the  appeal.  No
          findings are, however, preserved.



      Decision


      21. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law. The  decision  is  set
          aside and shall be re-made by  another  judge  of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal.



      Anonymity



      22. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.

    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 24 September 2018








