
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09242/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 March 2018                     |On 10 April 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL KELLY


                                   Between

                          MR ARYAN QADIR MUHAMMEDI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel, Counsel instructed by Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1. Mr Aryan Qadir Muhammedi appeals against the decision of Judge Moran,
       promulgated on the 7th April 2017, to dismiss his appeal against  the
       respondent's refusal of his protection and human rights claims.

    2. The appellant's application for permission to appeal was made on  two
       grounds, each of which sought to challenge  the  judge's  credibility
       findings. Judge Ransley refused permission to appeal on those grounds
       on the 17th August 2017 and, following a renewed application  to  the
       Upper Tribunal on the 2nd September 2017, Judge Lindsley  also  found
       those grounds to be unarguable. She nevertheless  granted  permission
       to appeal on the 'Robinson-obvious' ground that the  appellant  would
       be questioned on return to Iran, and that the  consequent  disclosure
       of his regular church attendance over a period of 7 months (as at the
       date of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal)  arguably,  "...
       might lead to the applicant being subject to further  questioning  on
       return and to a real risk of serious harm [paragraph 23 of SSH and HR
       [2016] UKUT 308]".

    3. The paragraph to which Judge Lindsley referred reads as follows:

           "In our view the evidence  does  not  establish  that  a  failed
           asylum seeker who had left Iran  illegally  would  subjected  on
           return to a period of detention or questioning such  that  there
           is a real risk of Article 3 ill-treatment. The evidence  in  our
           view show no more than that they will be questioned, and that if
           there are any particular concerns arising  from  their  previous
           activities either in Iran or in the United Kingdom or  whichever
           country they are returned from, then there would be  a  risk  of
           further questioning, detention and potential  ill-treatment.  In
           this regard it is relevant to return to Dr Kakhki's evidence  in
           re-examination where he  said  that  the  treatment  they  would
           receive would depend on  their  individual  case.  If  they  co-
           operated and accepted  that  they  left  illegally  and  claimed
           asylum abroad then there would be no reason  for  ill-treatment,
           and questioning would be for a fairly brief period.  That  seems
           to us to sum up the position  well,  and  as  a  consequence  we
           conclude that a person with no history other than that of  being
           a failed asylum seeker who had exited illegally and who could be
           expected to tell the truth when questioned would not face a real
           risk of ill-treatment during the period of  questioning  at  the
           airport. We should add  that  we  see  no  reason  to  doubt  Dr
           Kakhki's evidence that there is a special court at or  near  the
           airport which considers the cases of returnees but the  evidence
           does not show a real risk of ill-treatment in breach of  Article
           3 amounting to persecution as  a  consequence  of  attending  at
           court."

    4. Ms Patel put her argument on the basis that the  appellant  continued
       to maintain that he was a genuine Christian convert and, in order  to
       be true to his conscience, would necessarily be bound to  inform  the
       Iranian authorities that he had been attending church in  the  United
       Kingdom to that end and that he intended  to  continue  doing  so  in
       Iran. She also submitted that the appellant would  have  an  enhanced
       profile as an 'undocumented returnee'. Mrs Pettersen,  on  the  other
       hand,  argued  that  given  that  the  judge  had   disbelieved   the
       appellant's claim to be a genuine convert  to  Christianity,  all  he
       could truthfully say was that he had attended a Christian church  but
       that the judge in the United Kingdom had not  accepted  that  he  had
       done so as a genuine convert. The appellant did not therefore have  a
       profile that was reasonably likely to cause the  Iranian  authorities
       particular concern so as to detain him pending further enquiries. The
       Iranian authorities would therefore view  him  as  simply  a  'failed
       asylum-seeker'

    5. The difficulty with  Ms  Patel's  argument  is  that  it  effectively
       ignores the finding by Judge Moran that whilst the appellant may have
       found "friendship and fellowship" through his attendance  at  church,
       he was nevertheless not a genuine convert to Christianity. Therefore,
       provided that the appellant was to tell the whole  truth  upon  being
       initially questioned by the Iranian authorities (and there cannot  be
       any good reason for him to do  otherwise),  there  is  no  reason  to
       suppose that he would be treated  as  anything  more  than  a  failed
       asylum-seeker who would accordingly be released after a fairly  brief
       period. I do not accept Ms  Patel's  submission  that  the  appellant
       would have an enhanced profile as an  'undocumented  returnee'  given
       the finding in SSH that a person with no history "other than that  of
       a failed asylum seeker who had exited illegally" is not  at  risk  on
       return to Iran. The reality is that the Iranian authorities would not
       accept the return of the appellant unless they were satisfied of  his
       identity and had in  consequence  granted  him  an  emergency  travel
       document. The judge did not therefore make an error of law in failing
       to consider whether the appellant was  at  risk  of  Article  3  ill-
       treatment on return to Iran merely by reason  of  his  attendance  at
       church in the United Kingdom over a period of 7 months.

Notice of Decision

    6. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Date: 9th April 2018

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
