
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09864/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by a remote hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 28 May 2021                   |On 18 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     RAM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Greer, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


      1. The appellant, a citizen of Iraq, appeals with  permission  against
         the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Mack)  (hereinafter
         referred to as the "FtTJ") who dismissed his protection  and  human
         rights appeal in a decision promulgated on the 4 March 2020.


      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 28 May 2021, by means of teams which  has
         been consented to and not objected to by the  parties.  A  face-to-
         face hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and  both
         parties agreed that all issues could  be  determined  in  a  remote
         hearing.  The advocates attended remotely  via  video  as  did  the
         appellant so that he could listen and observe  the  hearing.  There
         were no issues regarding sound,  and  no  technical  problems  were
         encountered during the hearing and I am  satisfied  both  advocates
         were able to make their respective cases by the chosen means.

Background:


      4. The history of the appellant is set out  in  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ, the decision letter and the evidence contained in the bundle.

      5. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish  ethnicity  from  Tuz
         Khurmatu. The appellant stated that he and his family worked  on  a
         farm which was owned by two brothers. The appellant worked  on  the
         farm from the age of 12. When the eldest  brother  was  alive  they
         were treated well until he died at the end of 2017.

      6. After the invasion of Kirkuk the group known  as  Hasht  -Al  Shabi
         (hereinafter referred to  as  "HAS")   started  to  appear  in  the
         village in October 2017, the appellant's house was burned down  but
         he did not know by whom. F offered the appellant and his mother and
         sister stay on the farm. After the eldest  brother  had  died,  the
         younger brother pestered the appellant to join HAS  and  asked  him
         numerous times to join becoming forceful eventually. The  appellant
         was forced to join as F was selling off the farm animals.  He  also
         said he would not be responsible if  the  other  troops  discovered
         that the appellant was a Sunni Muslim.

      7. The appellant started training with HAS and was shown a variety  of
         weapons but when it came to target practice he was not  allowed  to
         hold a gun. After 2 weeks he was told he would get a weapon and  be
         expected to fight. He went home and was told that F had gone to his
         home and had touched his mother and  sister  sexually.  His  mother
         said they needed to leave the area, so we didn't go back to F,  his
         farm or the HAS. The appellant had been paid 2  million  dinar  for
         the month although he had only been there for 2 weeks.

      8. The appellant claimed that as a deserter from the  HAS  they  would
         find him and would kill him. As HAS are Shia Muslims the  appellant
         feared that if people found out in his area that  he  had  betrayed
         the Sunni people he would be killed. As there are peshmerga in  the
         area they would also kill him.

      9. The appellant's sister told in that his face was on Facebook at the
         time he went to join HAS he also feared Arab Shia militia.

     10. The appellant's mother and sister paid  an  agent,  and  he  had  a
         friend who knew  someone  to  help.  The  appellant  left  Iraq  in
         November 2018. The agent was paid US$12,000. The  appellant  became
         separated from his mother  and  sister  in  Turkey.  The  appellant
         travelled through a number of countries until he entered the United
         Kingdom in March 2019 and claimed asylum on 13 March 2019.

     11. In a decision letter dated 3 October 2019 the appellant's claim was
         dismissed. The respondent accepted that he was from Iraq and was of
         Kurdish ethnicity. From paragraphs 32 - 42, the respondent set  out
         the appellant's claim and identified that the  appellant's  account
         was internally and externally inconsistent concerning his claim  to
         have been forced to join HAS. This included that he was  internally
         inconsistent in his account  as  to  how  he  was  treated  by  his
         employer and when the mistreatment occurred (at[32])  that  he  was
         not consistent about the date that the eldest brother F had a heart
         attack and when he went to live at the farm (at[33]).  He  was  not
         consistent about when  he  met  the  younger  brother  nor  was  it
         plausible that the appellant was not able to give the full name  of
         either of the 2 brothers who owned the farm that he and his  family
         had worked upon (at[35]). Other  inconsistencies  referred  to  his
         account of joining the HAS (at [36]-[41]).

     12. The respondent therefore rejected the factual claim advanced by the
         appellant.

     13. The appellant appealed that decision came before  the  FtTJ  on  24
         February 2020.

     14. In a decision promulgated on the 4 March 2020  the  FtTJ  dismissed
         his appeal. At paragraphs [59]-[84] the FtTJ set out  his  analysis
         of the evidence and his findings of fact concerning events in Iraq.
         The basis of the appellant's claim was  that  he  feared  reprisals
         from identified individuals  and  groups,  but  also  from  unknown
         individuals and groups should he be returned.

     15. Having  considered  his  claim,  the  FtTJ  set  out  a  number  of
         inconsistencies in his evidence. In summary the FtTJ  rejected  his
         account to be at risk of harm from his employer F, and his  account
         of having joined HAS or being at risk from them or any other  armed
         group or any individuals in his home area. The judge did not accept
         that he would travel from Iraq without either access  to  a  mobile
         phone or arrange telephone numbers of friends to check the position
         of his family  in  the  event  that  they  were  separated  or  any
         purported threats in Iraq (paragraphs [70 - 71]) given that he  now
         has a mobile  phone,  and  his  sibling  had  a  mobile  phone  (at
         paragraph [69]). The judge rejected his account of why F asked  the
         appellant to join  HAS and that his account was internally coherent
         given the appellant's  ethnicity  and  risk  to  him  and  F's  own
         position if the appellant's ethnicity was discovered by  others  in
         the group (at [73]). The judge also  found  that  the  counterforce
         recruitment by  a  Shia  group  was  inconsistent  with  background
         evidence (at [74)) found that there  were  factual  inconsistencies
         concerning dates relating to his account ([75 - 78] and whether  he
         was armed or not (at [72]).

     16. At [83] the FtTJ concluded  that  he  found  the  appellant  to  be
         "generally vague in his account and lacking in detail. In  summary,
         the appellant has given an incredible story as to why he  would  be
         asked or pressured to join HAS, vague as to why anyone  would  have
         an interest in him in the 1st place, vague as the journey undertook
         the UK and vague as to what actual risk  he  faced  on  return.  It
         follows that the appellant's entire claim essentially hinged on his
         credibility. Even if the appellant had a subjective fear from F  or
         unnamed unknown state actors, I have found, objectively  there  was
         no real risk to him and no threat the appellant has been identified
         to the lower standard of proof. I did not accept any part  of  this
         aspect of his claim."

     17. The FtTJ then turned to the issue of relocation. The FtTJ  set  out
         the CG  decision  of  SMO  and  others  (article  15  (c)  identity
         documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (hereinafter  referred  to  as
         "SMO").

     18. The FtTJ found the following facts:

           . that the appellant had no real or perceived  association  with
             ISIS or any other military group.

           . He was a single young man with no dependents.

           . The appellant is still in contact  with  his  family  and  can
             contact his sister via Facebook.

           . Whilst he had minor surgery it was not exceptional  and  could
             be treated at home whilst in Iraq.

           . The appellant has worked for many years and undertake  a  wide
             range of manual jobs on a farm and therefore he  had  acquired
             skills he could use on return.

           . The appellant has access to his  documentation  including  his
             CSID and passport.

           . Flights have resumed to the IKR and for an Iraqi  national  of
             Kurdish origin in possession of a valid CS ID or  a  passport,
             the journey to the IKR is affordable and practical and can  be
             made  without  a  real  risk   of   the   claimant   suffering
             persecution, serious harm, or article 3 ill-treatment.

           . The appellant has access to financial help from his family and
             the skills he acquired whilst working on the farm.

           . He would be able to show that he has come from the UK are  not
             directly from area formerly occupied by Daesh.

           . The appellant shown himself to  be  resourceful  and  to  have
             reasonably acquired skills which are transferable.

     19.  The FtTJ therefore found that he could internally relocate to  the
         IKR and dismissed his appeal.

     20. Permission to appeal was sought on 4  grounds  and  permission  was
         granted by FtTJ O'Garro on 31 March 2020 stating:

         "the appellant's grounds of appeal assert the  judge  made  several
         errors of law in the decision such as failing to  take  account  of
         material evidence,  taking  into  account  immaterial  matters  and
         procedural irregularity  that  leads  to  unfairness.  However  the
         ground that tips the balance  in  the  appellant's  favour  is  the
         assertion that the judge made a mistake of fact when  she  said  at
         paragraph 89 of her decision that the appellant is  from  the  IKR.
         The appellant is a Kurdish citizen of Iraq from Tuz Khurmatu in the
         Salah al-Din governorate, which is one of the contested areas.

         This mistake meant that the judge failed to factor this  fact  into
         the assessment of the appellant's return which requires account  to
         be taken as to whether the appellant had family in the IKR and  how
         he would cope without family support. I find this ground of  appeal
         is arguable and permission is granted."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     21. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the 12 June 2020, inter alia, indicating that it  was
         provisionally of the view that the error  of  law  issue  could  be
         determined without a face-to-face hearing and directions were given
         for the provision of further written submissions to be provided  by
         the parties.

     22. Written submissions were provided on behalf of the appellant on the
         7 July 2020 and on 2 July 2020, written submissions were  filed  on
         behalf of the respondent. Following the  representations  made,  th
         Upper Tribunal (UTJ Lane) issued further directions for the hearing
         to be listed as a remote hearing.

     23. Both parties have indicated that they were content for the  hearing
         to proceed by this  method.  Therefore,  the  Tribunal  listed  the
         hearing to enable oral submissions to  be  given  by  each  of  the
         parties. I am grateful for their assistance and  their  clear  oral
         submissions.

     24. Mr Greer appeared on behalf of the appellant and  relied  upon  the
         written grounds of appeal and the written submissions.

     25. Mr Walker relied upon the written submissions issued on  behalf  of
         the respondent dated 2 July 2020.   Both  advocates  provided  oral
         submissions to which I have had regard when reaching my decision.

     26. At the conclusion of the submissions, I reserved my decision  which
         I now give. I intend to consider the submissions of the parties  by
         reference to each of the grounds. I have set out above the grant of
         permission by Judge O'Garro. As can be seen from paragraphs  2  and
         3, the judge appeared to  grant  permission  only  in  relation  to
         ground 4. However, for the reasons set out in the decision in  Safi
         and others (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388, I do
         not find that the grant of permission has been restricted  and  the
         respondent did not seek to argue that point  further.  I  therefore
         have considered all 4 grounds of challenge.

    Ground 1:

     27. Dealing with ground 1, it is submitted that  the  FtTJ  engaged  in
         making perverse or irrational findings at   paragrphs [67 - 70] and
         [74] of the decision.

     28. In making  his  oral  submissions,  Mr  Greer  submitted  that  the
         reasoning  is  irrational  because   the   judge   engaged   in   a
         consideration of peripheral points which did not go to the core  of
         the claim. He identified them as follows; that the judge  found  it
         implausible that a  Sunni  Muslim  would  look  at  a  HAS  website
         (paragraph [67]). At paragraphs [68 - 69] the judge concluded  that
         it was inherently implausible that  one  sibling  would  possess  a
         mobile phone and the other would not. At paragraph [69]  the  judge
         concluded that as the appellant attended his solicitor's office  to
         attend an appointment arranged over the phone, the  appellant  must
         have owned a phone in Iraq. At paragraphs [70] and [79], the  judge
         concluded that it was not believable that  the  appellant's  mother
         and sister lost contact with one another fleeing Iraq. At paragraph
         [74] the judge referred to "external evidence" and it  was  unclear
         what that meant.

     29. Thus, Mr Greer on behalf of the appellant submitted that the  judge
         engaged in speculative conjecture and the inherent probabilities of
         the events concerned.

     30. The respondent submitted that there was no  error  of  law  in  the
         judge's approach and that  the  credibility  should  be  looked  at
         holistically and for the reasons set out in the rule 24 response at
         paragraph 10 - 13 the judge gave numerous reasons for rejecting the
         appellant's account when the decision is read as a  whole  and  the
         grounds come nowhere  near  to  establishing  the  threshold  of  a
         perversity challenge.

     31. I have considered the grounds in the light of the  FtTJ's  decision
         and also the evidence that was before the tribunal. Having done  so
         I am satisfied  that  the  challenge  to  the  factual  credibility
         findings is not made out nor are  they  properly  characterised  as
         perverse or  irrational  findings  of  fact  but  ones  which  were
         reasonably open to the judge to make on the evidence.

     32. In reaching that conclusion I remind myself that the assessment  of
         credibility should be considered holistically  rather  than  taking
         strands in isolation which is what the grounds seek to do.

     33. In assessing the decision of the First-tier Tribunal I bear in mind
         that, as Mr Greer submitted ground 1 is a perversity challenge.

     34. In Lowe v SSHD [2021] EWCA Civ 62 the Court of Appeal held at [29]
         to [32]:

             "29. At [114] - [115], Lewison LJ explained the caution to  be
             exercised by appellate courts in interfering  with  evaluative
             decisions  of  first   instance   judges.   Para.   [114]   is
             particularly well known, but para. [115] is also of  relevance
             to the present case. The Lord Justice said this:

                  "114.    Appellate courts have been repeatedly warned,  by
                  recent cases at the highest level, not to  interfere  with
                  findings of fact by trial judges, unless compelled  to  do
                  so. This applies not only to findings of primary fact, but
                  also to the evaluation of those facts and to inferences to
                  be  drawn  from  them.  The  best  known  of  these  cases
                  are: Biogen Inc v Medeva Plc [1997] RPC 1 ; Piglowska v
                  Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360 ; Datec Electronics Holdings
                  Ltd v United Parcels Service Ltd [2007] UKHL 23 ; [2007] 1
                  WLR 1325 ; Re B (A Child) (Care Proceedings) [2013] UKSC
                  33 ; [2013]  1  WLR  1911 and  most   recently   and
                  comprehensively McGraddie  v   McGraddie [2013]   UKSC
                  58 ; [2013] 1 WLR 2477 . These are all decisions either of
                  the House of Lords or of the Supreme  Court.  The  reasons
                  for this approach are many. They include

                      i. The expertise of a trial judge is  in  determining
                      what facts are relevant to the  legal  issues  to  be
                      decided,  and  what  those  facts  are  if  they  are
                      disputed.

                      ii. The trial is not a dress  rehearsal.  It  is  the
                      first and last night of the show.

                      iii. Duplication of the trial judge's role on  appeal
                      is a disproportionate use of the limited resources of
                      an  appellate  court  and  will  seldom  lead  to   a
                      different outcome in an individual case.

                      iv. In making his decisions the trial judge will have
                      regard to the whole of the sea of evidence  presented
                      to him, whereas  an  appellate  court  will  only  be
                      island hopping.

                      v. The atmosphere of the  courtroom  cannot,  in  any
                      event,  be  recreated  by  reference   to   documents
                      (including transcripts of evidence).

                      vi. Thus even if it were possible  to  duplicate  the
                      role of the trial judge, it  cannot  in  practice  be
                      done.

                  115. It is also important to have in mind the  role  of  a
                  judgment given after trial.  The  primary  function  of  a
                  first instance judge is to find  facts  and  identify  the
                  crucial legal points and to advance reasons  for  deciding
                  them in a particular way. He should give  his  reasons  in
                  sufficient detail to show the parties and, if need be, the
                  Court of Appeal the principles on which he has  acted  and
                  the reasons that have led him to his decision.  They  need
                  not be elaborate. There is no duty on a judge,  in  giving
                  his reasons, to deal  with  every  argument  presented  by
                  counsel in support of his case. His function is  to  reach
                  conclusions and give reasons to support his view,  not  to
                  spell out every matter as if summing up  to  a  jury.  Nor
                  need he deal at any  length  with  matters  that  are  not
                  disputed. It is sufficient if what he says shows the basis
                  on  which  he  has  acted.  These  are  not  controversial
                  observations:  see Customs  and  Excise  Commissioners  v
                  A [2002] EWCA Civ 1039 ; [2003] 2 WLR  210 ; Bekoe  v
                  Broomes [2005] UKPC 39 ; Argos Ltd  v  Office  of  Fair
                  Trading [2006] EWCA Civ 1318 ; [2006] UKCLR 1135

     35. The issue raised in the grounds relate to the factual findings made
         concerning the issue of  mobile  phones  and  that  the  conclusion
         reached by the judge was irrational and perverse. In  my  judgement
         this is not reflected in a reading of the decision. Paragraphs  [68
         - 71] address the appellant's account that he had lost all  contact
         with his family, he had lost contact with  his  mother  and  sister
         whom he claimed to have left  Iraq  with  en  route  as  they  were
         separated and that he  was  "alone  and  isolated  "(see  paragraph
         [71]).

     36. Contrary to the grounds this was not a "peripheral issue"  but  one
         that went to the core of the account concerning  his  circumstances
         in Iraq, why he had left Iraq and the position on return. The  FtTJ
         recorded the appellant's evidence that he had never  had  a  mobile
         phone and he didn't have one because he didn't know how to  use  it
         (at [68]). The judge recorded the tenor of his  evidence  that  "he
         was at pains at the hearing to state that he'd never had  a  mobile
         phone." In his fact-finding assessment the judge gave adequate  and
         sustainable reasons as  to  why  she  disbelieved  the  appellant's
         evidence. In my judgement those paragraphs  do  not  demonstrate  a
         lack of reasoning or an overemphasis on inherent probability as the
         reasoning is based on the appellant's own evidence and the  factual
         account given.

     37. It was open to the  FtTJ  to  contrast  the  circumstances  of  the
         appellant and that of the other family members and  that  both  his
         sister and mother had access to mobile phones but that  he  claimed
         he did not. The judge disbelieved his account that he did not  know
         how  to  use  a  mobile  phone  by  reference  to  the  appellant's
         explanation and his evidence which the FtTJ recorded  at  [69]  and
         where the appellant was asked why  his  other  family  members  had
         mobile phones and he did  not.  His  reply  was  "some  people  are
         interested, and others are not." Furthermore, his account  that  he
         didn't know how to use a mobile phone and didn't have one  in  Iraq
         or the UK, the appellant's evidence on this issue was also set  out
         at [69].  When  the  appellant  was  asked  how  he  contacted  his
         solicitors and they him, the  appellant  said  that  the  solicitor
         would phone him that as he couldn't speak English he  would  travel
         to x if he got such a  call.  The  judge  plainly  disbelieved  the
         appellant and gave the reason "I do not accept that  the  appellant
         would, if he heard an English voice on the phone, then  go  to  the
         trouble of travelling all the way to x just to see what the  person
         wanted." The judge  found  the  explanation  to  be  one  that  was
         "incredible, and wholly lacking in credibility".  Furthermore,  the
         factual finding made later at [69] wholly undermined the  claim  to
         not use a phone as the judge made reference to the written evidence
         in the documents before the  court  which  recorded  the  appellant
         "smiling and laughing on the phone with friends."

     38. At [70 - 71] the FtTJ pointed to the relevance  of  these  findings
         when he stated:" I find I must look  at  this  within  the  overall
         context of someone who says he has not been  in  contact  with  his
         mother and sister. I find it is an essential part of his case  that
         he has no idea where they are and will be  vulnerable  on  return."
         Thus, the context of the findings made as to the mobile  phone  and
         issues  surrounding  contact  were  not  peripheral  but   relevant
         evidence to the core issue as to contact with his  family  and  his
         circumstances in Iraq.

     39. When addressing this, the judge  did  not  accept  the  appellant's
         account that if the circumstances in Iraq were as he claimed, which
         led to him being in fear and that as a result he,  his  mother  and
         sister were required to leave, he would not be  in  a  position  to
         make contact with them in the event of their separation. The  judge
         was entitled to consider this in the context of the  evidence  that
         his sister and mother had mobile phones, but he claims not to  have
         one and didn't use one and that the evidence was undermined by  the
         conduct when he was seen happily using a phone in the UK (at [70]).

     40. At [71] the FtTJ was also entitled to  find  that  the  appellant's
         credibility was undermined by his evidence relating to contact with
         others in Iraq. The appellant's account was that he had a friend in
         Iraq who had arranged an agent so that he could leave the  country.
         The judge recorded the appellant's evidence that he claimed to have
         no one in Iraq despite having referred to someone who had  gone  to
         the lengths of providing help and assistance for him  when  leaving
         Iraq. It was open to the FtTJ to find that the appellant's  account
         of having no available means of any kind to contact the person  who
         had arranged his affairs so he could check what  was  happening  in
         Iraq and whether there were any  threats  against  him  (given  his
         claim to have deserted from the HAS) was not  credible.  The  judge
         was entitled to find his account was not credible that he would not
         have had contact with his friend to see if there had been any  news
         of his mother and sister.

     41. The grounds submit that the appellant had provided evidence that he
         had attempted to trace the family and that because such  a  service
         existed it demonstrates that it is  not  impossible  that  families
         fleeing conflict lose contact with one  another.  In  my  judgement
         that has no bearing on the credibility assessment made and in  fact
         supports the FtTJ's reasoning that if his account were true that he
         lost contact with his relatives,  he  would  have  taken  steps  to
         contact his friend in Iraq to  make  enquiries  about  events  that
         occurred since he left and also his family's whereabouts.

     42. Those findings should also be  read  in  the  light  of  the  other
         factual findings made at [79] where the judge made reference to the
         long journey taken in the different places on that journey and  the
         appellant's inability to identify any countries other than  Turkey.
         The FtTJ considered that in the knowledge  of  undertaking  such  a
         journey, it would not be reasonably likely  or  credible  that  the
         appellant would not have a system in place to  contact  his  mother
         and sister should they become separated.

     43. Furthermore, as to contact, the judge was  entitled  to  take  into
         account the appellant's evidence that his sister had seen  a  photo
         of him on Facebook (this was on the basis that he would be at  risk
         because he had been seen on a HAS  Facebook  page).  As  the  judge
         recorded, if the  appellant's  sister  could  access  Facebook  and
         therefore make contact, it did  not  preclude  the  appellant  from
         doing so.

     44. Against that factual background, it was open to the  FtTJ  to  find
         that the appellant had not a given credible or consistent  evidence
         as to having lost  contact  with  his  family  and  that  this  was
         relevant to the overall credibility of his claim.

     45. The grounds also seek to challenge paragraph [74]  where  the  FtTJ
         referred to the "external evidence". The grounds assert that it was
         unclear what "external evidence" the judge was referring  to.  This
         paragraph should not be read in isolation but should be read in the
         light of the  credibility  assessment  concerning  the  appellant's
         account of being forced to join the HAS (set out at paragraph 73  -
         83 of the decision). The external evidence  set  out  at  paragraph
         [74] is referred to in the decision  letter  at  paragraph  38  and
         comprises of country materials relied upon by the  respondent.  The
         document  itself  is  in  respondent's   bundle   entitled   "Iraqi
         recruitment (including forced recruitment) of  young  men  by  Shia
         Militia." Therefore, the reference to the  "external  evidence"  is
         not unclear. The grounds do not seek to challenge the assessment of
         that country material which was plainly set  out  in  the  decision
         letter at paragraph 38 and therefore the reference made  to  it  by
         the FtTJ is consistent with that material.

     46. There is no perversity or irrationality in the finding at [67]. The
         judge was entitled to take into  account  that  the  appellant  had
         offered no reasoned explanation as to why his  sister  as  a  Sunni
         Muslim of Kurdish  ethnicity  would  be  looking  at  a  HAS  (Shia
         paramilitary organisation) on Facebook and as the judge stated, the
         appellant given no background as to how that had occurred.

     47. I am therefore not satisfied that ground 1 has been established.

    Ground 2:

     48. Whilst ground 1 seeks to challenge the findings made at  paragraphs
         67, 68, 69, 70-71 and 74, the  FtTJ  made  other  factual  findings
         adverse to the appellant at paragraph 72, 73, 75 and 76 - 83, those
         findings went to the core of the appellant's claim that he  was  at
         risk on return to Iraq from the man known as F or from any military
         organisation and the circumstances in which he claimed that he  was
         recruited to the HAS.

     49. Ground 2 seeks to challenge some of those findings (but not all  of
         them) on the basis that the FtTJ was procedurally unfair by  giving
         undue weight to immaterial matters.

     50. The grounds assert that the appellant was entitled to  be  given  a
         fair opportunity to seek to correct the transcript of the interview
         prepared by the respondent and that at paragraphs [76  -  78],  the
         judge failed to take into account the manner in which the  evidence
         was gathered by the respondent and that  while  the  appellant  was
         assisted by an interpreter arranged by the respondent, he  was  not
         given the opportunity to read over the contents of  the  transcript
         and make amendments prior to the conclusion of the interview.

     51. Thus, Mr Greer submits at paragraphs [76 - 78] the judge  took  the
         respondent's  transcript  at  "face   value"   and   rejected   the
         appellant's attempt to amend it on the basis that the appellant was
         unable to provide an explanation for the mistakes in the transcript
         prepared.

     52. In oral submissions Mr Greer submitted that  mistakes  happened  in
         interviews and that this should be taken into account. Furthermore,
         by reference the respondent's reply  whilst  the  appellant  stated
         that he was happy with the replies in interview that  assumes  that
         the appellant was able to monitor the accuracy of the translation.

     53. The respondent submits that there is  no  procedural  irregularity.
         The tribunal's attention is drawn to  the  copy  of  the  interview
         record where at the bottom it is stated that "at  the  end  of  the
         interview you will be given a copy of the interview transcript  and
         the audio recording.". The tribunal's attention is  also  drawn  to
         the transcript at  Annex  C  of  the  bundle  where  the  appellant
         confirmed that he had understood all  the  questions  when  he  was
         asked if there was anything else he would like to  add  or  clarify
         the appellant had stated "no". When asked if there were  any  other
         reasons that he wished to remain in the  UK  (which  could  include
         personal  family  circumstances  that  he  would  like  taken  into
         consideration) the appellant also stated "no".

     54. The respondent also makes the point that the  amendments  that  the
         judge was  referring  to  were  made  in  the  appellant's  witness
         statement dated 6 February  2020  which  was  4  months  after  the
         receipt of the interview and came after the appellant's  claim  was
         rejected.

     55. Prior to paragraphs 76-78, the judge set out a  number  of  adverse
         credibility findings  which  were  relevant  to  the  core  of  the
         account. At paragraph 72, the judge  referred  to  the  appellant's
         statement where he claimed he was never involved in target practice
         (paragraph 24) and saw numerous weapons but did not use them.  This
         was inconsistent with his initial interview where he  said  at  5.2
         when asked if he had been a member of the National Armed Forces  he
         replied "worked for 2 weeks for HAS-farming. I was armed".

     56. At [73] the FtTJ addressed the appellant's case that he was a Sunni
         Muslim and that HAS members would kill him if they found  out.  The
         FtTJ made reference to the appellant's witness  statement  that  he
         believed that F, who he says he thinks held a high ranking  in  HAS
         (paragraph 14) did not tell HAS that he was a Sunni Muslim  because
         he thinks F wanted to use him  to  work  on  the  farm.  The  judge
         considered that this was not credible, and it did not explain why F
         would have wanted  the  appellant  to  join  HAS.  The  judge  also
         considered the appellant's account that F told him  that  he  would
         not be responsible if the appellant admitted to other  HAS  members
         that he was a Sunni Muslim as they would kill him.  The  judge  did
         not accept that F, a possibly high-ranking individual  would  bring
         someone into an organisation who we knew would not  be  wanted  and
         may be killed if the others knew about it. The judge did  not  find
         it credible that F would put his own position and his own  life  at
         risk by doing this and that on the appellant's account, he "brought
         no special skills would cause F to take such a risk  with  his  own
         welfare."

     57. Having read the FtTJ's decision I am not satisfied  that  there  is
         any procedural  irregularity  giving  rise  to  unfairness  as  the
         grounds submit.  I do not accept that there is any misunderstanding
         on the part of the judge as to how  evidence  is  gathered  by  the
         respondent. In her assessment of the  evidence  the  FtTJ  properly
         took into account that there were a number  of  inconsistencies  in
         the appellant's account and as reflected in the decision letter and
         also the appellant's explanation that he  was  inconsistent  as  to
         dates because he  was  not  good  at  giving  dates  in  a  witness
         statement. Later at [76] the judge noted "it is  common  to  see  a
         statement  or  letter  requesting   corrections   to   the   asylum
         interview." The judge also noted that he could accept that if a lot
         had happened then dates could be confused but went on to  make  the
         point relevant to the discrepant evidence that it  did  not  solely
         arise from the asylum interview and the questions that he was asked
         about arose from the written witness statements.

     58. In this context the FtTJ stated "the appellant has had the  benefit
         of legal representation and has had for some time;  the  statements
         are not written under pressure and they will have  been  translated
         before  they  were  signed  by  him."  Therefore,  the  judge   was
         highlighting the inconsistencies from the  written  statements.  At
         paragraph [75] which the grounds are silent upon,  the  judge  sets
         out the issues. In the asylum interview the appellant  stated  that
         on 16 October 2017 after his home area was attacked and  10  to  12
         hours after the soldiers entered the  town,  F  took  him  and  his
         family to the farm and F had a heart attack  6  or  7  days  later.
         However, in the statement of September 2019, the  appellant  stated
         that the heart attack was 2 months after he moved with  his  family
         to the farm. The judge took into account that he  sent  corrections
         to the asylum interview in the witness statement and that at page 3
         of the bundle the appellant stated that the  facts  from  September
         2019 were true but that he had problem  with   "dates  and  times."
         However, in the witness statement filed later the appellant  stated
         that the asylum interview was correct,  and  that  F  had  a  heart
         attack about a week  after  they  moved  to  the  farm.  The  judge
         therefore was highlighting the inconsistent evidence given  by  the
         appellant and that the statement made in February 2020 matched that
         of the asylum interview however a previous witness statement  which
         he had signed on 4 September 2019 the appellant was  equally  clear
         at paragraph 13 F had the heart attack about 2  months  after  they
         moved to  the  farm.  The  judge  was  therefore  highlighting  the
         inconsistent evidence as to the timeframe beginning at  the  asylum
         interview followed by a different time in a  written  statement  in
         September 2019 but then having reversed back to what  was  said  in
         the asylum interview in a later  statement.  It  was  against  this
         background that the judge considered the explanation that he had  a
         problem with dates and times, but the judge was  entitled  to  take
         into account that the appellant had failed to explain why  when  he
         was not under  any  pressure  at  the  time  he  made  his  witness
         statement he had given a completely different time for the events.

     59. In this context the FtTJ also accepted that it was common to see  a
         statement or letter requesting corrections to the asylum  interview
         but that "it does not mean that the asylum interview is incorrect."
         And also, that "small errors are easy to understand, not  so  large
         areas of difference". At paragraph 78 the decision letter set out a
         reference to the witness statement that F was involved with the PMF
         and used to visit his house before he moved  to  the  farm  in  his
         uniform and carrying a gun. In the asylum interview  the  appellant
         said that he had first  met F after 16 October 2017 (Q 63) and when
         asked if he had met him before  16  October  2017  the  appellant's
         response was "no" (question 64). At question 67 he  was  asked  did
         you know anything about F before you 1st met  him?  The  reply  was
         "no". The judge set out that that was inconsistent with the witness
         statement filed. The correcting statement of October 2019 does  not
         account for this inconsistency as to when the appellant first saw o
         knew F. In the statement dated February 2020 at  paragraph  12  the
         appellant said that he could not give any explanation  for  why  he
         had said this the witness statement and that "I found it  difficult
         to concentrate during the statement process." Therefore,  what  the
         judge had stated at [78] was correct and  there  is  no  procedural
         unfairness  by  the   judge   considering   his   explanation   for
         inconsistent evidence given in the witness statement and  after  he
         had  had  the  opportunity  to  explain  the   reasons   for   such
         inconsistent evidence but the FtTJ reached the conclusion that  his
         explanation had lacked support and credibility. In this context  it
         was open to the FtTJ to reject the  appellant's  explanation  given
         the contents of the witness statement at paragraph 12 that he found
         it difficult to concentrate during the statement  process.  As  the
         judge had stated "the statement from September 2019 was prepared by
         reference to the appellant's instruction and will be read  back  to
         him. I find that a  lack  of  education  would  not  lead  to  such
         inconsistencies as this." The judge went on to state that  "we  are
         not talking about dates here, the evidence that is contradictory is
         important as it relates to a core element of the appellant's  claim
         as to the behaviour of F to both the appellant and his family plays
         a large part in why the appellant says he left Iraq. He  cannot  be
         relied upon to provide consistent evidence even with the benefit of
         such evidence been read back to him prior  to  signing  as  to  the
         truth of its contents."

     60. In my judgement the grounds  misread  the  FtTJ's  assessment.  The
         judge did not conclude that the appellant's attempts to  amend  the
         transcript undermined his credibility but that  the  appellant  had
         given inconsistent evidence  and  when  given  the  opportunity  to
         provide  an  explanation  for  those  inconsistencies  in   further
         documents, he was unable to do so  or  at  [78]  when  he  gave  an
         explanation in his witness statement, it was not one which stood up
         to any scrutiny.

     61. The grounds do not challenge paragraph 80 where the judge  assessed
         the appellant's evidence and his  perception  of  a  future  threat
         against him. The judge reached the conclusion on  the  evidence  of
         the appellant that the claim of future threat had not been based on
         any actual evidence of any threat made and that the appellant could
         not have known who would be in the home area when he returned.

     62. Drawing together those matters, I am satisfied that  there  was  no
         procedural unfairness in the judge's approach to the  evidence  and
         the credibility assessment in the way advanced  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant.

    Ground 3:

     63. it is asserted on behalf of the appellant that the  judge  appeared
         to allude to behaviour falling within section 8 of the 2004 Act  as
         damaging the appellant's credibility  but  failed  to  state  which
         parts of the section applied.  The  grounds  point  to  the  FtTJ's
         decision at [82] were the  judge  disbelieved  the  appellant;  the
         grounds  stating  "he  was  unable  to  speak  for  himself"   when
         encountered by the authorities in other EU countries.

     64. In reaching this finding it is submitted that  the  judge  made  no
         reference the appellant's explanation given at paragraphs 37  -  40
         of his 1st witness statement and that  the  agent  responsible  for
         smuggling the appellant out of Iraq spoke on  his  behalf  and  the
         authorities did not provide an interpreter.

     65. The respondent submits there is no error in the  FtTJ's  assessment
         and that on a proper reading of the decision the judge gave reasons
         for reaching the decision that he did on this issue.

     66. There is no dispute that the  appellant  had  travelled  through  a
         number of European countries, including safe countries in Europe on
         his journey  to  the  UK.  This  is  clear  from  his  account  and
         geographically to enter the UK given the route that  the  appellant
         had taken. It is also clear that at [82] the judge  was  addressing
         section  8  (4)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment   of
         Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 and that the judge  was  considering  the
         failure to claim asylum in a safe country. Any failure to  set  out
         the section in my judgement does not mean that the judge  erred  in
         law. The quotation cited in the grounds does not set out  paragraph
         82 in full. Here the judge stated "at his  screening  interview  he
         was unable to provide any detail  to  the  countries  he  travelled
         through. I do not accept, on the lower standard of proof, that  the
         appellant was unable to  speak  for  himself  whilst  in  other  EU
         countries I do not accept that when he was initially interviewed he
         did not know where he had been and was satisfied that his  lack  of
         detail was another deliberate attempt to bolster his claim  in  the
         UK." At [83] the judge  set  out  his  overall  assessment  of  the
         evidence finding "the  appellant  to  be  generally  vague  in  his
         account and lacking in detail".

     67. At paragraphs [43 - 49] the FtTJ had previously set out  in  detail
         the factual account  of  the  appellant's  journey  from  Iraq  and
         therefore was fully aware of the appellant's account which was  set
         in his witness statement that he was with an agent. It is  implicit
         in the judge's finding at [82] that the judge rejected his account.
         The judge was entitled to take into account that the appellant  was
         unable to provide any details of  the  countries  that  had  passed
         through and that when interviewed he did not know where he had been
         and that the lack of detail as to how he came to the UK and the  EU
         countries that had passed through was an  attempt  to  bolster  his
         account. It is noted from the appellant's account that he  accepted
         that he had been fingerprinted on more than one occasion and it can
         be inferred from this that his account of not being told  where  he
         was when he had plainly been fingerprinted  was  not  credible  and
         that it is in this context the judge rejected his account  that  he
         was unable to speak for himself when he  had  been  encountered  in
         other EU countries.

     68. I am therefore not satisfied that there was any error but  even  if
         the judge was wrong, this was only one issue of credibility adverse
         to the appellant and it is not one that would undermine the  safety
         of the other factual findings made which were relevant to the  core
         of his factual account. Furthermore it is plain that the judge  did
         not reject his account on this point  only  and  thus  it  was  not
         determinative of his claim.

     69. Drawing together the conclusions of grounds 1, 2 and 3, it was open
         to the FtTJ to find that the appellant had not provided a  credible
         or consistent account as to the events in Iraq, the risk  from  HAS
         or that he had lost contact with his family. The findings  of  fact
         and the assessment of credibility should  be  viewed  holistically,
         and I am satisfied  there  was  no  procedural  unfairness  as  the
         grounds assert. The test of irrationality  is  an  onerous  one  to
         meet.  It requires the Tribunal to be satisfied that no  reasonable
         Tribunal properly directing itself could have reached  the  finding
         or conclusion challenged.  For the reasons I have given, I  am  not
         satisfied  that  those   factual   findings   could   properly   be
         characterised as perverse or irrational.

     70. I should also deal with paragraph 12 of the grounds which refer  to
         the FtTJ's conduct. None of those matters been the subject  of  any
         supporting evidence either at the time permission was  applied  for
         or subsequently. Mr Greer accepted in his submission  that  he  did
         not seek to rely on or advance the matters set out at paragraph 12.



    Ground 4:

     71. I now turn to ground 4 which Mr Greer on behalf  of  the  appellant
         submits is the "strongest ground".

     72. The appellant originates from Tuz Khurmatu which is in the Salah al-
         Din governorate lying directly to the north-west of Baghdad. It  is
         submitted that the FtTJ made a mistake of fact that  the  appellant
         is a former resident of the IKR.

     73. Whilst the grounds cite paragraph [95], at this paragraph the judge
         stated "as per SMO the return of former residents of the  IKR  will
         be to the IKR. Iraqi authorities will allow an  Iraqi  national  in
         the UK to enter Iraq only if in possession of a current or  expired
         passport, or a laissez  passer."  This  appears  to  be  a  general
         reference rather than one referable to  the  appellant  although  I
         accept the judge did make reference to the appellant at [89] in the
         following terms "the appellant however is from the IKR."

     74. The grounds therefore state that the judge erred in law  because  a
         judge misdirected himself in respect of the state  of  conflict  in
         the appellant's home area at [90] and the route of return  at  [95]
         and therefore the judge did not determine the risk of harm  in  the
         home area applying paragraphs 262 - 267 of SMO and the difficulties
         the appellant might face on relocation to the  IKR  as  opposed  to
         return to the IKR.

     75. Mr Greer in  his  oral  submissions  submitted  that  there  was  a
         "sliding scale" in  relation  to  the  appellant's  home  area  and
         therefore individual factors were necessary. He submits  the  judge
         did not consider return to his home area where  HAS  remain  in  de
         facto control. He therefore submits the judge did not  perform  the
         "sliding scale" as necessary as set out in SMO  and  therefore  the
         error was material.

     76. The respondent's written submissions accept that the judge did  not
         make a finding on return to his  home  area  of  Tuz  Khurmatu  and
         appeared to proceed on the basis that the appellant  was  a  former
         resident of the IKR as referred to at [89] but that the  error  was
         not material because the judge considered  internal  relocation  to
         the IKR taking into account the country guidance decision of SMO.

     77. Mr Greer submits that the circumstances of  someone  who  does  not
         originate from the IKR and  is  seeking  to  relocate  is  entirely
         different and that as he has no familial links and relocating  from
         an area of conflict that because of the mistake of fact  the  judge
         did not approach the question  of  relocation  by  looking  at  the
         decision in SMO.

     78. I have considered with care the submissions advanced on  behalf  of
         the appellant relevant to ground 4. There is some agreement between
         the advocates on the basis the judge did not make an assessment  of
         return to his home area of Tuz but secondly that the judge gave the
         appearance that he proceeded on the basis that the appellant was  a
         former resident of the IKR.

     79. Whilst both advocates refer to paragraph  [89]  that  is  the  only
         paragraph where the judge refer to the appellant as "from the IKR".
         Throughout the decision the judge records the  appellant's  history
         correctly as a resident from the government-controlled Iraq and not
         the IKR (see paragraphs 17, 19 where the home area of  Tuz  is  set
         out). At [85) and after having set out the  findings  of  fact  and
         assessment of the evidence, the judge stated,  "the  crucial  issue
         therefore is as to whether the appellant can safely relocate within
         Iraq" and at [87] the judge stated "the appellant was born  in  Tuz
         Khurmatu. This is a formally contested  area".  Also  at  [89]  the
         judge referred to "relocation to the IKR and not return to the IKR.
         I do accept  there  is  a  reference  at  [93]  to  the  phrase  "I
         considered what, if any difficulties, the appellant would have been
         returning to the IKR" but the sentence continues  "and  whether  he
         would be able to establish himself there."

     80.  Against that background it is possible to view paragraph 89  as  a
         slip rather than a mistake of fact given the other paragraphs where
         the judge correctly identifies the IKR as  a  place  of  relocation
         rather than return.

     81. However, even if there were a mistake of fact, the issue relates to
         whether the error was material to the outcome.

     82. Whilst the judge did not consider a return to the home area of  Tuz
         Khurmatu on the findings of fact made in my judgement  it  has  not
         been  demonstrated  that  any  "sliding  scale"  applies  to   this
         appellant. The judge wholly rejected  the  appellant's  account  of
         events in his home area and that he would not be at risk  from  any
         person in Iraq including F or on the basis that he had  joined  the
         HAS either by way of having deserted from that group or from ethnic
         Kurds who knew he had joined the group. Therefore the  judge  found
         that he was not at risk from anyone in his home area.

     83. Mr Greer in his submissions referred to paragraphs 262 and  267  of
         SMO.

     84. In SMO the Upper Tribunal assessed the circumstances in the  former
         contested areas and concluded that:

              "The evidence clearly shows that the degree of indiscriminate
             violence characterising  the  current  armed  conflict  taking
             place in Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah, Salah  Al-Din  [the
             appellant's region] and Anbar is not at such a high level that
             substantial grounds have been shown  for  believing  that  any
             civilian  returned  there  would  solely  on  account  of  his
             presence there face a real risk of a threat  to  his  life  or
             person." T

     85. Therefore  the  appellants  home  area  of  Tuz  fell  within  that
         paragraph.

     86. The Upper Tribunal then went on (at paragraph 291)  to  hold  that,
         nonetheless, an individualised assessment must be made as  required
         by Article 4(3)(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive  to  consider
         whether an individual applicant might be able to show  that  he  is
         specifically affected  by  reason  of  factors  particular  to  his
         personal circumstances - the 'sliding scale' to which Mr Greer  has
         referred to in his oral submissions.

     87. They are also set out in SMO (both in the headnote and the decision
         itself as follows:




             "4. Those with an actual or perceived  association  with  ISIL
             are likely to be at enhanced risk throughout  Iraq.  In  those
             areas in which ISIL retains an active presence, those who have
             a  current  personal  association  with  local   or   national
             government, or the security apparatus  are  likely  to  be  at
             enhanced risk.

             5.     The  impact  of  any  of  the  personal characteristics
             listed immediately below must be  carefully  assessed  against
             the situation in the area to  which  return  is  contemplated,
             with particular  reference  to  the  extent  of  ongoing  ISIL
             activity and the behaviour of the security actors  in  control
             of that area. Within the framework of such  an  analysis,  the
             other personal characteristics  which  are  capable  of  being
             relevant, individually, and cumulatively, to the sliding scale
             analysis required by Article 15(c) are as follows:

                  Opposition to or criticism of the GOI, the  KRG  or  local
                  security actors.

                  Membership of a national, ethnic, or religious group which
                  is either in the minority in the area in question, or  not
                  in de facto control of that area.

                  LGBTI individuals, those not conforming to  Islamic  mores
                  and wealthy or Westernised individuals.

                  Humanitarian or medical staff and  those  associated  with
                  Western organisations or security forces.

                  Women and children without genuine family support; and

                  Individuals with disabilities.

     88. In the light of the factual findings  made  by  the  FtTJ  and  the
         rejection of his factual account, the  only  relevant  factor  from
         those set out above relates to his ethnicity as a Kurd.

     89. The appellant is an ethnic Kurd and Kurds  are  in  a  minority  in
         Iraq. They are also in a minority in the appellant's home area  (as
         set out at paragraph 262 of SMO).

     90. By reference to paragraph 300 of SMO, it does not follow that those
         of Kurdish ethnicity will be of particular risk in  that  area  and
         the Tribunal  has  not  been  directed  to  any  material  (country
         materials) or by reference to any characteristics personal  to  the
         appellant which would lead to the  conclusion  that  the  appellant
         would be at an enhanced risk in his home area solely by  reason  of
         his ethnicity as a Kurd. The  grounds  make  no  reference  to  any
         country information in support, and I have not been referred to any
         country material to  demonstrate  that  this  characteristic  alone
         would satisfy the "sliding scale" analysis. Therefore a failure  to
         consider this issue was not material to the outcome.

     91. Furthermore as the respondent sets out in the written  submissions,
         the judge did not err in law materially as the judge considered the
         issue of internal relocation and  made  factual  findings  in  this
         respect is reflected in SMO and the previous decision of AAH.

     92. Whilst Mr Greer submits that the materiality of the error was based
         on the judge considering his  return  as  a  resident  rather  than
         relocating there as the respondent's written submissions state,  it
         is not been demonstrated that the judge's assessment of  relocation
         was in error or failed to take account of any relevant issues.



     93. In SMO the following guidance was set out:


         (i)                  For an Iraqi national returnee (P)  of Kurdish
         origin in possession of a valid CSID  or  Iraqi  National  Identity
         Card (INID), the journey  from  Baghdad  to  the  IKR  by  land  is
         affordable and practical and can be made without a real risk  of  P
         suffering persecution, serious harm, or Article 3 ill treatment nor
         would any difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.
         (ii)               P is unable to board a  domestic  flight between
         Baghdad and the IKR without either a  CSID,  an  INID  or  a  valid
         passport. If P has one of those documents, the journey from Baghdad
         to the IKR by land is affordable and  practical  and  can  be  made
         without a real risk of P suffering persecution,  serious  harm,  or
         Article 3 ill treatment nor would any difficulties on  the  journey
         make relocation unduly harsh.
         (iii)             P will face considerable difficulty in making the
         journey between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a  CSID  or  an
         INID. There  are  numerous  checkpoints  en  route,  including  two
         checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of  the  airport.  If  P  has
         neither a CSID nor an INID there is a real risk of P being detained
         at a checkpoint until such time as the security personnel are  able
         to verify P's identity. It is not reasonable to require P to travel
         between Baghdad and IKR by land absent the ability of P  to  verify
         his identity at a checkpoint. This normally requires the attendance
         of a male family member and production of  P's  identity  documents
         but may also be achieved by calling upon "connections" higher up in
         the chain of command.
         (iv)             Once at the  IKR  border  (land  or  air)  P would
         normally be granted entry to the  territory.  Subject  to  security
         screening, and registering presence with the local mukhtar, P would
         be permitted to enter and reside in the IKR with no  further  legal
         impediments or requirements. There are no sponsorship  requirements
         for entry or residence in any of the  three  IKR  Governorates  for
         Kurds.
         (v)                Whether P would be at  particular  risk  of ill-
         treatment during the security screening process must be assessed on
         a case-by-case basis. Additional factors  that  may  increase  risk
         include: (i) coming from a family with  a  known  association  with
         ISIL, (ii) coming from an area associated with ISIL and (iii) being
         a single male of fighting age. P is likely to be able  to  evidence
         the fact of recent arrival from the  UK,  which  would  dispel  any
         suggestion of having arrived directly from ISIL territory.
         (vi)             If P has family members living in the IKR cultural
         norms  would  require  that  family  to  accommodate  P.  In   such
         circumstances P would, in general, have sufficient assistance  from
         the family so as to lead a 'relatively normal  life',  which  would
         not be unduly harsh. It is  nevertheless  important  for  decision-
         makers to determine the extent  of  any  assistance  likely  to  be
         provided by P's family on a case-by-case basis.
         (vii)           For Kurds without the assistance of  family  in the
         IKR the accommodation options are limited:


     94.  (i)                   Absent  special  circumstances   it   is not
         reasonably likely that P will be able to gain access to one of  the
         refugee camps  in  the  IKR;  these  camps  are  already  extremely
         overcrowded  and  are  closed  to  newcomers.  64%  of   IDPs   are
         accommodated in private settings with the vast majority living with
         family members.
         (ii)                 If  P  cannot  live  with   a   family member,
         apartments in a modern block in a new neighbourhood  are  available
         for rent at a cost of between $300 and $400 per month.
         (iii)               P   could   resort   to   a   'critical shelter
         arrangement', living  in  an  unfinished  or  abandoned  structure,
         makeshift  shelter,  tent,  mosque,  church  or  squatting   in   a
         government building. It would be  unduly  harsh  to  require  P  to
         relocate to the IKR if P will live in a  critical  housing  shelter
         without access to basic necessities such as food, clean water,  and
         clothing.
         (iv)             In considering whether P would be  able  to access
         basic necessities, account must be taken of the  fact  that  failed
         asylum seekers  are  entitled  to  apply  for  a  grant  under  the
         Voluntary Returns Scheme, which  could  give  P  access  to  1500.
         Consideration  should  also  be  given  to  whether  P  can  obtain
         financial support from other sources such as  (a)  employment,  (b)
         remittances from relatives abroad, (c) the availability of  ad  hoc
         charity or by being able to access PDS rations.


         (v)               Whether P is able to  secure  employment  must be
         assessed on a case-by-case basis taking the following matters  into
         account:
         (i)Gender. Lone women are  very  unlikely  to  be  able  to  secure
         legitimate employment.
         (ii)The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the IKR is 70%.
         (iii)P cannot work without a CSID or INID.
         (iv)Patronage and nepotism continue  to  be  important  factors  in
         securing employment. A returnee  with  family  connections  to  the
         region  will  have  a  significant  advantage  in  that  he   would
         ordinarily  be  able  to  call  upon   those   contacts   to   make
         introductions to prospective employers and to vouch for him.
         (v)Skills, education, and experience. Unskilled workers are at  the
         greatest  disadvantage,  with  the  decline  in  the   construction
         industry reducing the number of labouring jobs available.
          (vi)If P is from an area with a marked association with ISIL, that
         may deter prospective employer.

     95. The FtTJ found that the appellant had access to his CSID  card  and
         that he was in contact with his family (see paragraphs 98  -  100).
         At [101] the judge set out his  assessment  of  relocation.  It  is
         correct as Mr Greer submits  that  the  appellant  as  a  Kurd  and
         relocating to the IKR has no support network there. As acknowledged
         in the guidance in AAH it is  unreasonable  for  the  appellant  to
         relocate from the formally  contested  areas  to  the  IKR  in  the
         absence  of  a  viable  support  network  or  the  means  to   find
         accommodation and employment. Whilst the appellant had  no  support
         network, the judge expressly found that he would have  a  CSID  and
         passport (at paragraph 100) and that  he  would  receive  financial
         help from his family (at paragraph (101] and would be able to  rely
         on his experience of manual labour . At paragraph [94] the FtTJ had
         found that the appellant from his own evidence had worked for  many
         years and undertaken a wide range of manual jobs on a farm and  the
         judge found that it was "not unreasonable for me to  find  that  he
         had acquired skills he can use". The judge also found at [101] that
         he had  shown  himself  to  be  "resourceful  and  have  reasonably
         acquired skills which are transferable". As to any risk  of  having
         come from an area formerly occupied by ISIS, the  FtTJ  found  that
         the appellant would be able to show that he had come  from  the  UK
         and not directly from an area  formerly  occupied  by  them.  As  a
         result of those findings, the judge found that he  would  not  fall
         into the category of those who are destitute and that it would  not
         be unduly harsh or unreasonable to relocate to the IKR.  The  judge
         expressly stated that in making the findings "I  adopt  and  follow
         the findings in SMO "which can only refer to the  factors  set  out
         relevant to the issue of internal relocation  to  the  IKR  in  the
         light of the assessment made at paragraph [101].

     96. Consequently it has not been demonstrated that the FtTJ  materially
         erred in law and therefore the appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated    7  June 2021


