
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal
Numbers: PA/09032/2017

                                                        PA/09034/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |    Decision and Reasons         |
|                                          |Promulgated                      |
|On 13 February 2018                       |    On 15 February 2018          |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                   KN & HA
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellants:    Mrs P Glass, instructed by Emazon Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellants'  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Paul promulgated  2.11.17,  dismissing  on  all  grounds
    their linked appeals against the decisions of the Secretary  of  State,
    dated 4.9.17, to refuse their protection claims.

 2. Sitting as a First-tier Tribunal Judge I granted permission  to  appeal
    on 7.12.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 13.2.18 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.



Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I found such  error  of  law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as  to  require  that
    the decision to be set aside and remade by remitting the appeal to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The protection claim was based on the appellants' same-sex relationship
    with each other and a fear of persecution on return to  Pakistan.  They
    claim to have started their relationship in Pakistan in 2005  but  were
    caught. As a result, they were both tortured and beaten. The  appellant
    KN was burned with a hot iron and his fingers were broken and  damaged.
    They were separated, but each made his way to the UK, where they met up
    again by chance.

 6. The judge found the claim not credible and observed that there  was  no
    evidence of any cohabitation, whether  in  the  past  or  present.  The
    medical evidence was rejected at [26] of the decision,  which  evidence
    the judge considered to be based on  self-serving  statements  made  to
    support a false case.

 7. In granting permission to appeal, I considered  it  arguable  that  the
    judge erred in law by overlooking the statement within the  appellants'
    bundle of the witness Mr A, and  that  the  treatment  of  the  medical
    evidence was arguably inadequate.

 8. The Rule 24 response, dated 5.1.18, submitted that  the  findings  were
    open to the judge, including the assessment of the medical evidence. It
    was also asserted that the absence of reference  to  Mr  A  within  the
    decision was not material to the outcome of the appeal.

 9. Prior to the listing of the appeal before Judge Paul on  16.10.17,  the
    appellants'  representative  wrote  to  the  Tribunal  to  request   an
    adjournment of the appeal to allow the witness Mr A to attend.  He  was
    said to be an important  witness,  who  gave  evidence  supporting  the
    claimed relationship between the  two  appellants,  and  was  also  the
    appellants' landlord. The application was refused, on the basis that  a
    statement from Mr A would be available to the Tribunal. It is important
    to note  that  the  adjournment  request  was  not  renewed.  In  those
    circumstances no error of law is disclosed by the judge  proceeding  in
    the absence of the witness.

10. However, the decision omits any reference to the witness  Mr  A,  other
    than at [25] of the decision, where it was stated, "the fact  that  the
    appellants stated that they had a witness who was in Pakistan who could
    have testified to them living together, in my view, is neither here nor
    there." The judge appears to have been oblivious to the  fact  that  Mr
    A's witness statement was within the  appellants'  bundle.  Whilst  the
    statement of Mr A would have limited weight in  his  absence  from  the
    hearing to give oral evidence, it cannot be given no weight  or  simply
    ignored. Further, whilst Mr A was said to be the appellants' friend, he
    was also their landlord, which gave some weight to his statement to the
    effect that he knew from first-hand knowledge that the  two  appellants
    were in a relationship with each other. It follows that the decision is
    inaccurate when it is stated at [25] that  there  was  no  evidence  of
    cohabitation. This amounts to a serious error of law.

11. I also find the judge's  treatment  of  the  medical  evidence  flawed.
    Looking at the way in which the first sentence of [26]  is  worded,  it
    appears that the judge fell into the trap  of  making  findings  as  to
    credibility without taking into account the medical evidence alleged to
    be consistent with the account of torture and beatings in Pakistan,  in
    particular the damage to MN's fingers, and then dismissing the  medical
    evidence as being based on what the judge considered to be self-serving
    statements made to support a false claim. That  is  reinforced  by  the
    statement which follows, that the causation of the  injuries,  "remains
    in doubt so long as the primary account as to their cause is  suspect."
    The medical evidence should have been taken into account along with all
    the evidence, in  the  round,  before  the  credibility  findings  were
    arrived at,  and  not  addressed  separately  only  after  the  adverse
    findings were made.

12. It follows that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  flawed  for
    multiple errors of law, material to the  outcome  of  the  appeal,  and
    cannot stand. It must be set aside and remade.



Remittal



13. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision vitiate all the findings of fact and the  conclusions
    from those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of
    the issues in the appeal.

14. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.



Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier Tribunal in accordance with the directions below.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Consequential Directions

 1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross;

 2. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

 3. The ELH is 4 hours;

 4. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge Paul;

 5. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;

 6. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further or alternative directions
    as are deemed appropriate.

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. However, I consider anonymity appropriate.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.  Breach  of  this
direction may lead to proceedings for contempt of court.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup




