
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09040/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 10 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     S A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss P Yong, Counsel instructed by Davies, Blunden &
                    Evans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Home Office Presenting Office


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ross
    which was promulgated on 7 March 2019.

2.   The appellant was born on 6 August 1986 and is a citizen  of  Pakistan.
    He was refused asylum by the Secretary of State  in  a  refusal  letter
    dated 3 July 2018. He appealed on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights grounds. That appeal was dismissed on all three bases.

3.   The grounds of appeal were settled by solicitors and are in a  somewhat
    form, but the thrust of the document is the effect that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge omitted making material and adequate findings  of  fact.
    The judge concluded that the appellant was not  a  political  activist,
    and that his activities would not cause  him  to  be  targeted  by  the
    Pakistan  Army.   It  is  contended  that  the  judge  did  so  without
    considering all of the relevant evidence and  particular  reference  is
    made to paragraph 32 of the decision.

4.   In granting permission to appeal on 16 April 2019, First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grimmett noted:

         "The appellant says the judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
         evidence of the appellant relating to his activity with the  UKPNP.
         It is clear from paragraph 30 that the judge was not satisfied  the
         appellant was a  member  as  he  found  the  documents  unreliable.
         However, no mention was made of the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
         witness and I therefore grant leave to appeal".

5.    This  was  the  principal  argument  advanced  by  Miss  Yong  in  her
    submissions. The appellant's witness here referred to is an  individual
    by the name of Sardar Amjad Yousaf. For the sake of completeness, I set
    out in full (and without correcting the grammar)  the  entirety  of  Mr
    Yousaf's evidence which was to be found at pages  165  to  166  of  the
    appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.

         "I, Mr Sardar Amjad Yousaf currently  residing  at  [address]  make
         this statement in support  of  the  appellant's  appeal  against  a
         decision of the Home Office refusing his.  I  declare  and  confirm
         that; I am a British citizen born on 8 August 1972  in  Poonch  AJK
         Pakistan.

         1.   I am a politically active in the United Kingdom.  I belong  to
             UKPNP (United  Kashmir  People's  National  Party)  under  the
             leadership of  Sardar  Shaukat  Ali  Kashmiri  who  reside  in
             Switzerland.

         2.   I am President of UKPNP for Europe zone.

         3.   I personally know Mr [SA].  I therefore  ready  to  give  oral
             evidence in relation to Mr [SA]'s political activities in  the
             UK".

         The content of this statement are true and correct to the  best  of
         my knowledge and belief and nothing has been misstated herein".

    It is then signed and dated 16 December 2018.

6.   It is immediately apparent that this  witness  statement  is  far  from
    adequate because it has no  substantive  content.  It  describes,  very
    briefly, the activities of the deponent (as opposed to  the  appellant)
    and evinces a willingness to give oral  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's political activities in the UK.  It  does  not  state  what
    that evidence might be.

7.   I asked Miss Yong directly why  the  statement  had  been  put  in  the
    appellant's bundle  and  she  could  give  no  response.  She  said  it
    indicated that Mr Yousaf would be called and that oral  evidence  would
    be extracted from him. Self-evidently this was not the  proper  way  to
    put evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   In her submissions this morning, Miss Yong made representations  as  to
    what she said had taken place at the  First-tier  Tribunal.  She  found
    herself professionally embarrassed in having  to  give  oral  evidence.
    This should have anticipated.  An agreed note should have been prepared
    as to what took place at the First-tier Tribunal.

9.   Miss Yong also told  me  that  up  until  this  morning  she  had  been
    expecting Mr Yousaf to be present at the Upper Tribunal today  to  give
    oral evidence.  No explanation was given  as  to  why  she  believed  a
    witness would be allowed to give oral  evidence  on  an  error  of  law
    hearing without any prior notification to the Home  Office  or  to  the
    Tribunal  and  without  producing  a  witness  statement   in   advance
    containing the substance of the evidence to  be  called.  I  asked  her
    whether she wished to make an application to have the matter  adjourned
    to allow for these irregularities  to  be  addressed  and  for  her  to
    prepare a witness statement, allowing alternative counsel to  represent
    the appellant. She declined my invitation, indicating that  she  wished
    to proceed with the appeal. However, in reply,  she  suggested  that  I
    might, at that stage, adjourn the matter. I declined  to  do  so.  Miss
    Yong had been put to her election and  I  did  not  consider  that  the
    interests of justice would be served by standing the matter out when it
    had been fully argued. Her very late application was, in my assessment,
    opportunistic and tactical.

10.  The way Miss Yong advanced  her  case  did  not  sit  easily  with  the
    grounds of appeal, but there was no  application  to  vary  or  enlarge
    those grounds. The thrust of her argument was that when  the  appellant
    gave oral evidence to the First-tier Tribunal he was  questioned  about
    inconsistencies in the letterheads of certain documents  and  responded
    that he was unable to  explain  those  inconsistencies,  but  that  his
    witness, Mr Yousaf, would do so.

11.  Miss Yong's contention is that  when  Mr  Yousaf  was  called  to  give
    evidence in the First-tier Tribunal, he attested to the  truth  of  his
    witness statement, notwithstanding that it had no substantive  content.
    Miss Yong then sought to put questions to Mr Yousaf. She tells me  that
    she was prevented by the judge from putting those questions.

12.   If  this  allegation  is  said  amount  to  some  form  of  procedural
    irregularity, it is not put in that  way  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    albeit they do record by way of narrative that a request  to  call  the
    witness was denied, something which is not strictly true.  Miss  Yong's
    case today is that he was called, but she was not permitted to  put  to
    him all the questions she would have wished. Even if I  entertain  this
    new (or at least re-framed) ground, I do  not  consider  it  compelling
    because as a general rule it is not open to a party to seek  to  adduce
    additional oral evidence-in-chief beyond that contained  in  a  witness
    statement. With the leave of the court or tribunal a witness  might  be
    asked to clarify or amplify certain parts of his or her evidence. Or  a
    witness may be tendered for cross-examination on the content of his  or
    her witness statement. But this was not the case here.

13.  I took Miss Yong to the decision itself and in particular to  paragraph
    23 which reads as follows:

         "Oral evidence was also given by Mr  Yousaf  who  provided  a  very
         short witness statement consisting of three short paragraphs.   His
         evidence was that he had seen the appellant at a UKPNP  meeting  in
         Leeds on 13 April 2017".

14.  I asked Miss Yong whether paragraph 23 represented a  fair  summary  of
    Mr Yousaf's oral  evidence.  Her  immediate  reply  was  that  it  did.
    Shortly afterwards she changed her stance somewhat  and  said  that  Mr
    Yousaf had in fact said rather more than that. Seemingly  referring  to
    her own notebook, she said that Mr Yousaf had also  said  that  he  had
    spoken to the President (presumably of UKPNP)  and  the  President  had
    apparently confirmed matters dealing with  Mr  Yousaf's  attendance  at
    various UKPNP events.

15.  I hesitate to take into account evidence given by  Counsel.  Miss  Yong
    properly acknowledged if such evidence were to be produced it should be
    in the form of a witness statement and she should have recused  herself
    and allowed other Counsel to represent the appellant  today.   She  had
    chosen  not  take  that  course.   However,  I  am  anxious  to   avoid
    perpetuating an injustice in consequence  of  a  mistake  or  error  of
    judgment on the part of a party's representative.

16.  Miss Yong also referred me to her backsheet which she prepared  at  the
    conclusion of the  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  a  document
    expressly referred to in the grounds of appeal.  Paragraph  6  of  that
    backsheet reads:

         "The respondent  challenged  the  reliability  of  the  documentary
         evidence.  They related to the official letterheads and the varying
         spellings of the address of the  UKPNP  office  in  Pakistan.   The
         appellant maintained in cross-examination that UKPNP would be  able
         to comment on that.  When the appellant sought to  adduce  evidence
         from the President of the UKPNP who  was  present  in  relation  to
         that, the First-tier Tribunal Judge prevented it".

17.  Notwithstanding the absence of a distinct  ground  of  appeal  alleging
    procedural irregularity, I do not consider there to be any substance in
    this complaint as advanced tenaciously by Miss Yong.  In particular,  I
    bear in mind that even today no witness statement has been produced  to
    inform the Upper Tribunal of what Mr Yousaf would  have  said  had  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge not declined to allow certain questions to be
    put. Taking Miss Yong's submission at its very highest, all that  could
    be said is that the First-tier Tribunal denied itself the benefit of  a
    very limited amount of second-hand hearsay evidence. I do not  consider
    an error of law to be revealed in this contention, and  even  if  there
    were one, it was not material to the ultimate disposal of the appeal.

18.  Miss Yong made further submissions under the broad head of the  judge's
    omission to make material and adequate findings of fact (to borrow from
    the terminology of the third paragraph of the first page of the grounds
    of appeal). She contends that the judge failed to take into account two
    letters in the appellant's bundle. The first is at page  140  on  UKPNP
    notepaper dated 16 November 2017 and signed by Sadar Shafique Khan.  It
    reads:

         "I also confirm that  Mr  [SA]  has  been  participating  in  party
         activities  and  peaceful  political  demonstrations,  due  to  his
         political commitments he was elected secretary information of UKPNP
         Crawley/Worthing unit from January 2011  to  July  2014  and  again
         appointed as organiser UKPNP West Sussex unit on 20 March 2017.  He
         has been playing an effective role for the cause of civil  society,
         constitutional, political, democratic, educational rights  and  the
         independence of the State of Kashmir on  non-religious  bases.   He
         received  life  rights  due  to  his  political   activities.    He
         subscribes the same political ideology with the party".

19.  The second is at C4 and C5  of  the  respondent's  bundle.  This  is  a
    letter from the UKPNP signed by Raja Usman Kayani and dated 15  October
    2017 which asserts that the appellant was an active member of the UKPNP
    from 2006 and gives certain details relating thereto.

20.  In paragraph 32 of the decision, the judge says:

         "I  accept  that  there  is  some  independent  evidence  that  the
         appellant has attended a party meeting in Leeds in 2017.   However,
         I find that the appellant is not a political activist nor that  his
         activities would cause him to be targeted by the Pakistan Army".

21.  The judge had stated previously at paragraph 30:

         "It is unclear from the appellant's evidence whether his  detention
         and torture was as a result of his land dispute or whether  it  was
         because of his membership of the UKPNP.  I find the UKPNP documents
         produced by the appellant in support of this claim are  unreliable.
         The undated letter regarding the appellant has a different  address
         for the Central Secretariat from the  membership  card.   The  word
         'Secretariat' is spelt with an 'e' at the end of the Secretariat on
         the letter and without an 'e' at the  end  of  Secretariat  on  the
         membership card, which also does not have any  logo,  although  the
         letter  does  have  a  logo.   Further,  in  relation  to  the  two
         photographs produced by the appellant,  he  accepted  in  his  oral
         evidence that the two different dates on  the  photographs  were  a
         mistake and that they were actually taken at  the  same  event  and
         having been pointed out by the respondent in the refusal letter".

22.  It my assessment, it was perfectly open to the judge  to  come  to  the
    conclusion which he did, namely that the appellant is not  a  political
    activist and that his activities would not cause him to be targeted  by
    the Pakistan Army. That conclusion might perhaps  have  been  expressed
    more fully but in essence it summarises the  conclusion  to  which  the
    judge came and his reasoning. The judge had the  advantage  of  hearing
    the evidence, and assessing the credibility of witnesses.  He was  also
    entitled to take a view on the  documentary  evidence,  which  he  did,
    providing supportable reasons for his conclusions.

23.  A number of additional points were raised by Miss Yong, not alluded  to
    in the grounds of appeal, but which she sought to  subsume  within  the
    umbrella rubric of "without considering all of the  relevant  evidence"
    at paragraph 3 of the first page of the grounds. These were  very  much
    in the nature of  make-weight  submissions,  suggestive  of  the  judge
    misunderstanding  or  misinterpreting  the   evidence   overall.   They
    concerned inconsistencies over dates and the  extent  to  which  dental
    records corroborated one or more of the versions of events  as  related
    by the appellant. However, none of these matters is  mentioned  in  the
    grounds of appeal, nor do they form any part of the  reasoning  in  the
    grant of permission.

24.  In any event, I was not  persuaded  by  Miss  Yong's  submissions.  The
    judge properly recorded that there was a series of  inconsistencies  in
    the appellant's evidence and, again quite properly, drew conclusions as
    to the overall  reliability  of  that  evidence.   That  was  a  proper
    exercise of the judicial function and cannot be regarded as an error of
    law. The submissions amount to no more than  a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's findings on the facts.



Notice of Decision

      1) The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
         is affirmed.

      2) An anonymity direction is made in the following terms.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 5 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

