
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal ref: PA/09579/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 February 2019                     |On 19 February 2019              |
|                                        |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              IMAD JALAL OTHMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by DGF Solicitors,
Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has permission to appeal  against  the  decision  of  FtT
    Judge Green, promulgated on 14 March 2018,  dismissing  his  protection
    appeal.

 2. The grounds are these:

         "... the judge erred in law at [17]  and  [20]  for  the  following
         reasons:

         (i) By failing to provide any or sufficient  reasons  when  finding
         that the appellant's account is not credible or plausible regarding
         the appellant's fear of his maternal uncle ... The judge  holds  on
         the lower standard of proof that he accepts that the appellant  and
         his family fled Iraq because of the Isis threat however  the  judge
         states that the appellant's evidence regarding his maternal uncle's
         position and influence are "essentially bare  assertions"  ...  the
         judge erred in law by placing a high burden of proof on this aspect
         of the appellant's claim.

         (ii) The determination does not identify any proper basis on  which
         the judge could properly have come to the conclusion that  "he  has
         not established the threats from his uncle [or] his  uncle's  power
         and influence, I cannot see why he will be at risk from  him."  ...
         care must be taken in concluding an account is  incredible  without
         looking  at  the  issue  through  the  evidence  of   the   country
         information. The determination does not disclose  any  reliance  on
         such evidence and thus the findings on credibility are inadequately
         reasoned ... If  the  judge  had  looked  the  appellant's  account
         through the evidence of the country information, he would not  have
         reached the findings quoted from [20] above."

 3. The main further points which I noted from Mr Winter's submissions were
    these:

      i) The judge accepted at [15] that the appellant is from Dibis, in the
         Kirkuk Governorate, and at [16] that he fled from Isis.   The  last
         sentence of [17], "These are essentially bare assertions", was then
         key.  That was not an adequate reason, and perhaps only a statement
         of a conclusion.

     ii) There is no requirement of corroboration.  (Mr Winter  accepted  my
         observation that an appellant must do what  he  reasonably  can  to
         support his case.)

    iii) This is not a case where an appellant has been found generally  not
         credible, and an  adverse  finding  might  extend  to  other  minor
         aspects, even if not expressly stated.

     iv) The judge set out the respondent's reasons for doubting credibility
         at [3], but did not say what he made of those reasons.

      v) The error was material, because if there was a real risk  from  the
         appellant's maternal uncle, the extent of  his  reach  impacted  on
         ability to relocate.

 4. Mr Govan made these points:

      i) The grounds now focused on the appellant's  fear  of  his  maternal
         uncle, but that had been a wholly subsidiary part of  the  case  he
         put to the respondent and in the FtT.

     ii) The appellant's witness statement in the FtT (inventory II, item 1,
         pp 1 - 9) mentioned his uncle only briefly, at paragraphs 2 and 59-
         60.

    iii) The matter was mentioned at interview Q/A 81 - 85, 106 and 107, but
         that made clear  that  the  appellant's  maternal  uncle  lived  in
         Howler, an hour and 15 - 20 minutes by car from where the appellant
         lived in Erbil.

     iv) At  highest,  this  was  a  risk  which  did  not  reach  even  the
         appellant's home location.

      v) The evidence was so scanty that it was sufficient to say it  was  a
         "mere assertion".

     vi) The judge might have said what was made of the respondent's  doubts
         about the evidence, but any omission was immaterial.

 5. In reply, Mr Winter said:

      i) There was further evidence in an inventory forwarded on 12 February
         2019.   These  are  items  designed  to  show  the  power  of   the
         appellant's maternal uncle.  Although more obviously admissible  if
         error of law was found, they might go to  the  materiality  of  any
         error.

     ii) There were other  references  to  the  matter  in  the  appellant's
         witness statement, at paragraphs 10, 46-49, and 60.  The  statement
         was not as detailed as it might have been on the  subject,  but  it
         was enough to show the inadequacy of the judge's reasoning  on  the
         issue.

 6. I reserved my decision.

 7.  It  might  have  been  useful  if  the  judge,  having  recorded   the
    respondent's credibility doubts, had said what was made of those,  even
    in absence of a risk from Isis, and if he had explained further why the
    appellant's assertions about his  maternal  uncle  were  not  accepted.
    However, no decision is exempt from all  criticism.   The  grounds  and
    submissions do not show that the making of the  decision  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law; and even if the shortcomings  did
    amount to error of that nature, they are not such  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside.

 8. It is significant that nothing was drawn to  attention  in  support  of
    ground (ii).   There  was  no  evidence  before  the  FtT,  beyond  the
    appellant's assertion, to show that his uncle was a man of power.

 9. The interview was mainly about other matters, but it was thorough.  The
    passages referred to above show that it was difficult  to  derive  much
    sense  about  the  persistence  of  ill-feeling  from  the  appellant's
    maternal uncle.  The gist is  that  the  risk  was  local,  might  have
    dwindled away, and was not a reason for leaving the country.  I further
    note the following:

         Q.111 Who do you believe would kill you?

         A.  I am scared of Daesh [Isis] mainly from Daesh even though I was
         safe from my uncle I was living away from him,  my  fear  is  Daesh
         they are doing it for their own interests.

10. There are some references in the appellant's statement, but they do not
    describe a risk extending even to where he lived:

         paragraph 45, "I was only safe from my uncle when I was living away
         from him."

         paragraph 49, "We decided to move and live  elsewhere  and  not  to
         make a huge problem within the tribe".

11. The grounds seek to elevate a  minor  issue,  in  hindsight,  now  that
    flight from Isis does not ground an ongoing claim.


12. There may well have been ill-feeling in the family,  and  even  in  the
    extended family or tribe,  over  the  appellant's  marriage.   However,
    there was no evidence by which that might sensibly have been  found  to
    be a reason for his departure from Iraq and his travel to the UK, or to
    be a matter qualifying him for protection against return.

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

14. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      14 February 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




