
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09602/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Heard on 2nd of February 2018          |On 13th of February 2018            |
|Prepared on 2nd of February 2018       |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                    [T S]
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on [ ] 1984.  She  appeals
    against the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  McIntosh
    sitting at Taylor House  on  27th  of  March  2017  who  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated  25th  of
    August 2016. That  decision  was  to  refuse  to  grant  the  Appellant
    international protection on refugee and human rights grounds.

 2. The Appellant  travelled  from  Sri  Lanka  to  India  in  1990  before
    returning to Sri Lanka in 2004. In 2005 she travelled  to  India  on  a
    student visa valid until 2009. The Appellant married  her  husband,  an
    Indian citizen, and obtained a spouse visa in 2009.  She  travelled  to
    Sri Lanka every 6 months to visit her parents last travelling there  in
    2013. On 26th of January 2012 the Appellant  applied  from  Switzerland
    for a six-month visit visa to  the  United  Kingdom  stating  that  she
    intended a visit of one week. This was issued to her valid from 30th of
    January 2012 until 30th of July 2012. The Appellant thereafter made two
    visits to the United Kingdom of between one and two weeks in 2012.

 3. On 9th of September 2014 the Appellant applied from India  for  a  six-
    month visit visa to the United Kingdom stating she intended a  two-week
    visit. This was issued  and  the  Appellant  travelled  to  the  United
    Kingdom by air on 27th of September 2014. On 25th  of  March  2015  she
    applied for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on  compassionate
    grounds outside the immigration rules. This application was rejected by
    the Respondent on 8th of October 2015 as the Appellant  did  not  enrol
    her biometrics as required. On 21st of January 2016 the Appellant  made
    an appointment to claim asylum which was registered by  the  Respondent
    on  13th  of  February  2016  with  the  Appellant's  daughter  as  her
    dependent. It was the refusal of that application  on  25th  of  August
    2016 that has given rise to the present proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

 4. The Appellant and her husband worked in the  family  computer  business
    formed and registered in Switzerland in 2012  and  also  registered  in
    India.  This  company  hosted  a  website  of  an   organisation,   the
    Transitional Government of Tamil Elam, the TGTE. The Appellant also had
    an association with the separatist group the LTTE. Both of her  parents
    had assisted that organisation and her uncle had been shot by  the  Sri
    Lankan army. Between 2005 and 2010 she  undertook  training  with  them
    delivering and collecting parcels.

 5. In October 2013 the Appellant was arrested in Sri Lanka for helping the
    LTTE. She was held in  detention  for  3  days  during  which  she  was
    questioned extensively about the LTTE and the details contained on  the
    company website that assisted the TGTE. During this period, she was ill-
    treated including being raped. Her release from  detention  took  place
    after the intervention of her uncle in Switzerland who had a great deal
    of influence in Sri Lanka. The uncle paid a bribe for  the  Appellant's
    release and made arrangements for  her  to  leave  the  country.  After
    spending 2 or 3 days in a house in Colombo she travelled to India where
    she continued to work with the TGTE. The Sri  Lankan  authorities  made
    visits to the Appellant's home enquiring about her whereabouts.

 6. She went to register herself in India at a police station but felt  the
    Indian authorities were monitoring her. The company's business premises
    were visited by Indian security officers. The family  home  was  raided
    and police visits continued even after she and her husband  moved.  The
    Appellant was detained for a few hours by the  Indian  authorities  and
    slapped and abused by the officers. This detention which took place  in
    Chennai was confirmed by an Indian advocate who was able to secure  the
    Appellant's release. As the Appellant's two sisters were already in the
    United Kingdom arrangements were made for the Appellant to come to this
    country on a visit visa which she subsequently overstayed.

 7. After coming to the United Kingdom, she lost contact with her  husband,
    last having contact with him in October 2015.  Her  husband  was  still
    being monitored by the authorities in India. As a result  of  what  she
    suffered in Sri Lanka she suffered  from  stress  and  depression,  had
    attempted suicide twice in  India  and  had  been  admitted  to  Newham
    hospital for 8 days between 21 December 2015 and 29 December 2015 after
    feeling suicidal. She was attending counselling in this country feeling
    guilty and depressed about the ill-treatment she had  received  in  the
    past. She was seen for the purposes of the  appeal  by  Dr  Dhumad  who
    diagnosed her with post-traumatic stress disorder, a moderate  risk  of
    suicide and moderate to severe depression.

 8. At the hearing before  Judge  McIntosh  in  March  2017  the  Appellant
    produced an affidavit from her mother and a signed statement  from  her
    uncle in Switzerland in support of the appeal. Her uncle said  that  he
    was unable to attend the  hearing  of  the  appeal  because  he  had  a
    personal engagement in  Switzerland  and  was  unable  to  travel.  The
    Respondent did not accept the credibility of the Appellant's claim.

The Decision at First Instance

 9. The Judge began her findings at [42] of the  determination.  The  Judge
    found inconsistencies in the  Appellant's  account  which  led  to  her
    conclusion at [60] that the Appellant's account was not  credible.  The
    Appellant was able to travel between India and Sri Lanka on  a  regular
    basis and  able  to  travel  to  Switzerland  without  difficulty.  The
    Appellant had failed to provide any documentary evidence in relation to
    the business which she ran with her husband. Her name did not appear on
    the business documents. The Judge noted that the uncle who had  made  a
    statement in support of the claim had not provided supporting  evidence
    of the business in that  statement  when  it  was  reasonable  to  have
    expected him to have done that.

10. There was little information in relation to any  charges  made  against
    the Appellant's husband. It was inconsistent that  the  authorities  in
    India would seek to detain the Appellant but take no significant action
    against her husband if both were running a website  for  the  TGTE  and
    were being monitored by the Indian  authorities.  It  was  inconsistent
    that the Appellant applied for a visa initially without her husband and
    then applied for a visa to travel with him.  When  it  was  granted  he
    still did not travel with her despite the alleged targeting of  him  by
    the authorities and he did not remain with her in a safe country.  Once
    she arrived in United Kingdom she did not seek asylum,  she  sought  to
    travel on to Canada to be there with her brother. The Judge  felt  this
    undermined the credibility of the claim.

11. At [50] to [54] the Judge gave her findings on the medical evidence  in
    the case. She had summarised the medical evidence at [31] to [38] which
    included a summary of the psychiatric report the Appellant was  relying
    on from Dr Dhumad dated 5th of October 2016. It was Dr Dhumad's opinion
    that the Appellant's presentation was consistent with  a  diagnosis  of
    moderate depressive episodes with somatic (i.e. physical) symptoms. The
    Appellant also suffered from PTSD.  The Judge noted the  Appellant  had
    sought medical assistance for depression and may have received  medical
    treatment for that in India as she had received medication  there.  The
    Appellant had told the GP in the United Kingdom she was  married  to  a
    doctor when that was not the case.

12. On review by the Newham mental health team at Newham  General  Hospital
    the Appellant was given a differential diagnosis of moderate to  severe
    depression, possible postnatal depression  or  possible  post-traumatic
    stress disorder. The Appellant had  become  upset  and  unsettled  when
    discussing her period of detention. The Judge  found  it  difficult  to
    make findings in relation to whether any sexual abuse had occurred. The
    Appellant had not disclosed those matters to  her  family  and  thought
    that starting a family would be an  appropriate  way  of  ensuring  her
    family remained ignorant of what had happened to her. The Appellant had
    been married since 2009 but seemed to have chosen to conceive her first
    child (in January 2014)  after  her  release  from  detention.  It  was
    inconsistent that the Appellant would start a family before securing  a
    safe destination  for  herself  and  her  husband.  The  Appellant  had
    previously travelled to  Switzerland  which  would  have  been  a  safe
    country.

13. The Judge was unable to make findings on whether the Appellant suffered
    from PTSD brought on by the treatment she had received in Sri Lanka  or
    as a result of postnatal depression or depression as a  result  of  the
    circumstances in which she would find herself should her  asylum  claim
    be refused. The Appellant had received treatment for her condition.

14. The Judge also rejected other evidence put forward  by  the  Appellant.
    She referred to an  affidavit  from  the  Appellant's  mother  and  the
    statement from the uncle in Switzerland. The concerns expressed by  the
    Appellant in relation to her  husband  were  inconsistent.  He  had  an
    opportunity to travel to the United Kingdom on a visit visa but had not
    done so. Accusations would have been made against him as he would  have
    been seen as an integral part of the business that was hosting the TGTE
    website.

15. The letter from the Indian advocate dated  17th  of  October  2016  had
    certain material omissions. There were no details of the terms  of  the
    Appellant's release or any prohibitions on her activities.  There  were
    no details of any alleged  harassment  or  documentation  of  continued
    searches  of  the  Appellant's  home  or  business  premises.  It   was
    reasonable to expect the advocate to obtain  a  copy  of  the  released
    documents of the charges on which the Appellant was said to  have  been
    arrested and detained. The advocate's  letter  referred  to  events  in
    April 2014. It  was  reasonable  to  have  expected  a  record  of  the
    advocate's intervention and instruction (as  the  advocate  would  have
    that on file) but no record had been provided.

16. The Appellant had said when interviewed by  the  Respondent  she  would
    provide documentary proof of her registration at the police station  in
    India and documents relating to the company she jointly owned with  her
    husband and uncle but these documents had  not  been  forthcoming.  The
    Judge place no evidential weight on the statement from the uncle or the
    advocate and rejected the credibility of  the  Appellant's  claim.  She
    accepted that the  Appellant  had  suffered  from  depression  and  was
    currently supported by her sister with whom she was  residing  but  the
    Appellant's parents continued to reside in Sri Lanka.

17. The Appellant's continued involvement  with  the  TGTE  whilst  in  the
    United Kingdom was to participate in discussions  at  meetings  and  to
    receive information. The Judge classified this  as  being  a  low-level
    role. There were no reports in the local press or elsewhere  of  anyone
    being arrested in Sri Lanka because of their membership of  association
    with one of the prescribed groups. In the light of that the Judge found
    that the Appellant could return safely to Sri Lanka and  dismissed  the
    appeal. She dealt  with  the  Appellant's  claim  under  Article  8  in
    relation to family life and rejected that too and  there  has  been  no
    appeal against that part of the determination.

The Onward Appeal

18. The Appellant appealed against that decision  on  grounds  prepared  by
    counsel who had not appeared at  first  instance  and  did  not  appear
    before me. The bulk of the grounds concerned the Appellant's complaints
    about the Judge's treatment of the medical evidence. The Judge had  not
    referred to previous suicide  attempts  by  the  Appellant  or  to  the
    current risk that she might attempt suicide in the  future.  This  risk
    engaged Article 3 but the Judge had not dealt with that.  The  previous
    attempts at suicide were noted in both the psychiatric report  and  the
    NHS records.

19. In the country guidance case of GJ one of the  Appellants  therein  had
    mental health issues having been described by a psychiatrist as  having
    clear plans to commit suicide if returned to Sri Lanka. That person was
    described  as  very  ill,  too  ill  to  give  reliable  evidence.  The
    psychiatric resources in Sri Lanka  were  sparse  and  limited  to  the
    cities. Returning that particular Appellant in GJ to Sri Lanka breached
    Article 3. In the Respondent's 2012 operational guidance note (at least
    five years old by the time that the  First-tier  came  to  decide  this
    appeal) there were only 25 working psychiatrists and the whole  of  Sri
    Lanka. The Judge had perversely noted that she was  unable  to  make  a
    finding as to whether the Appellant suffered from PTSD. Dr  Dhumad  had
    said that in his opinion the Appellant's  psychological  symptoms  were
    consistent with response to traumatic experience such  as  torture  and
    there  was  a  causal  relationship  between  the  Appellant's  current
    psychological symptoms in her traumatic experience in  Sri  Lanka.  The
    Judge given no reason for rejecting  holy  rejecting  this  independent
    expert evidence. No reasons were given to explain why the Judge had not
    accepted  that  the  Appellant  met  the  threshold  of   international
    protection on medical grounds.

20. The grounds made three more specific complaints. Firstly, the Judge had
    given no  adequate  reasons  why  she  rejected  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's uncle and the Indian lawyer. Secondly,  the  Judge  had  in
    places failed to make material findings  on  material  issues  such  as
    whether the Appellant had suffered the sexual abuse alleged. The  Judge
    had made no specific findings of fact  on  whether  the  Appellant  was
    arrested in Sri Lanka or India and whether she was subject  to  torture
    and sexually abused or was involved in activities for the TGTE  outside
    supporting their website. Thirdly, whether the  Appellant's  activities
    with the TGTE in the United Kingdom  would  give  rise  to  a  risk  of
    persecution upon return.

21. The Judge had  relied  on  out  of  date  information  in  drawing  her
    conclusions on the risk of sur place activity. Involvement in the Tamil
    separatist movement abroad was expressed to be a risk category  in  GJ.
    Overall the  Judge  had  demonstrated  a  cumulative  lack  of  anxious
    scrutiny. The grounds concluded at paragraph 30 that this was a complex
    protection case involving a young child [although the grounds  had  not
    up to that point referred to the Appellant's daughter].

22. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Resident  Judge  Appleyard  on  13th  of  October  2017.  In   granting
    permission to appeal he found all the grounds  arguable  including  the
    assertion that the Judge's approach to the medical evidence was flawed.
    The Judge had selectively extracted findings from the medical evidence,
    had failed  when  looking  at  Article  3  to  make  reference  to  the
    Appellant's suicide attempts and her  conclusions  were  at  odds  with
    country guidance. The Judge  arguably  failed  to  assess  whether  the
    Appellant's risk of suicide engaged Articles 3 or 8. The Appellant  had
    erred in her approach to corroborative evidence [which appears to be  a
    reference by the Resident Judge to paragraph 21 of  the  grounds  which
    referred to the treatment of the evidence of the uncle and  the  Indian
    lawyer]. The Judge had failed to make material findings or assess  risk
    on return in relation to the sur place activities.

23. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter dated  21st
    of November 2017 stating that she opposed the Appellant's  appeal.  The
    Judge had directed herself appropriately. She  clearly  considered  the
    medical evidence in detail in coming to the conclusion that it did  not
    meet the high threshold in relation to Article 3 or Article  8  medical
    grounds which to be engaged required more than just a lack of treatment
    in the country to which the Appellant would be  returned.  No  material
    error was made out.

The Hearing Before Me

24. At the hearing before me to determine  whether  there  was  a  material
    error of law in the determination such that the determination  fell  to
    be set aside, counsel relied on  the  grounds  of  onward  appeal.  The
    evidence of Dr Dhumad showed  that  the  Appellant  had  made  previous
    suicide attempts and ultimately had been  sectioned  under  the  Mental
    Health Act when admitted to Newham Hospital. The risk  of  suicide  was
    felt to be high. I asked counsel to clarify why if that were  the  case
    Dr Dhumad had merely said that the risk of suicide was moderate and not
    high at section 16.4 of his report. Counsel  replied  that  the  report
    went on to say that although the risk at present was moderate it  would
    become greater if attempts were made to remove the Appellant. The  risk
    of suicide was in itself a separate ground to the  risk  the  Appellant
    faced from the Sri Lankan authorities and the Judge had not dealt  with
    it.

25. Dr Dhumad had made it clear he did not consider that the Appellant  was
    feigning  her  symptoms.  He  had  spent  two  hours  interviewing  the
    Appellant. The Judge had not referred to the diagnosis of the Appellant
    as suffering from PTSD. The Judge overlooked the fact that the  medical
    aspects showed a risk to the Appellant's mental and physical integrity.
    [68], where the Judge found that the Appellant's condition was not life-
    threatening or critical, was not enough to explain  why  there  was  no
    risk of suicide. The Judge had not given clear reasons why she did  not
    accept what Dr Dhumad had said about the risk of PTSD. I  queried  with
    counsel the contents of [54] where the Judge had said in terms that she
    was unable to make a finding that the  Appellant  suffered  from  PTSD.
    Counsel responded that there was an obligation on  the  Judge  to  make
    findings not say that she could  not  make  findings.  It  was  unclear
    whether the Judge had said she could not make a finding at all  on  the
    diagnosis of PTSD or that  she  could  not  make  a  finding  that  the
    Appellant was suffering from PTSD because  of  the  treatment  she  had
    received.

26. A number of experts had expressed concern about the Appellant's  mental
    health and there had been child protection concerns. At [52] the  Judge
    had found it difficult to make findings  in  relation  to  whether  any
    sexual abuse occurred. It was incumbent upon her to make  findings.  At
    [60] the Judge had said that she had considered the  overall  claim  of
    the Appellant and  found  the  account  not  to  be  credible.  Counsel
    accepted that there were findings which had been made by the Judge  but
    her rejection of the claim was based on secondary points  such  as  the
    supposed lack of business documentation. It was  not  accepted  by  the
    Appellant that there was such a lack as there were documents at the end
    of the Appellant's bundle showing the establishment of the  company  in
    Switzerland.

27. Most of the Judge's  adverse  credibility  conclusions  came  from  her
    analysis of the position of the Appellant's husband and the Appellant's
    delay in claiming asylum. The points taken by the Appellant  were  more
    than a disagreement with the result. That the  Indian  lawyer  had  not
    provided documents the Judge would have liked  to  have  seen  was  not
    necessarily an unreasonable point to be taken by the Judge but  it  was
    insufficient. The country of origin information report relied  upon  by
    the Judge to find that the Appellant's sur place activities  would  not
    put the Appellant at risk was out of date. Involvement  with  the  TGTE
    was a risk category in itself according to GJ. There was no  engagement
    with the letter from a member  of  the  TGTE  who  had  said  that  the
    Appellant's involvement was greater than Judge had found at [62]  (that
    the Appellant's role was at a low level).  The  Judge  failed  to  give
    anxious scrutiny and the determination should be set aside.

28. In response the presenting officer  stated  that  the  Judge  had  made
    adequate findings and  was  aware  of  the  substance  of  the  medical
    evidence. The Appellant's challenge had unnecessarily compartmentalised
    the determination rather than looking at the determination as a  whole.
    Dr Dhumad had made clear that the Appellant only had a moderate risk of
    suicide. One had to question why they would be an increased  risk  when
    there had been no suicide attempts since the Appellant had been in  the
    United Kingdom. The two attempts Dr Dhumad referred to had taken  place
    in India. There was no explanation from Dr Dhumad why there would be  a
    heightened risk to the  Appellant's  health  such  that  she  might  do
    something she had not done since arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2014.

29. The Judge had not failed to make a finding on  PTSD  it  was  that  she
    could not make a finding as to the  reason  for  PTSD  because  of  the
    different possible  reasons  that  had  been  given.  At  [51]  of  the
    determination the Judge noted that there were 3 different diagnoses  by
    medical professionals. How in those circumstances was the Judge to come
    to a finding? If the Judge did not accept the Appellant's account  then
    the Appellant would not be suffering PTSD because of what the Appellant
    claimed had happened. Although the Judge had not referred to either the
    case of J or X and Y this case was far  removed  from  a  suicide  risk
    case. From the rejection of the Appellant's account  it  followed  that
    the condition the Appellant presently finds herself in  was  not  as  a
    result of alleged mistreatment at  the  hands  of  the  authorities  in
    either Sri Lanka or India.

30. The Judge did not say that she was not making a finding  about  whether
    the Appellant was sexually abused it  was  that  the  Judge  had  great
    difficulty with the Appellant's  claim  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    sexually abused. The Judge did not accept  the  Appellant's  narrative.
    The Judge had made a finding about the Indian lawyer's evidence, it was
    not accepted. At [59] the Judge had begun the paragraph by  saying  "in
    the circumstances" she  place  no  evidential  weight  on  the  uncle's
    statement or the advocate's letter. The  circumstances  the  Judge  was
    referring to were in the previous two paragraphs, [57]  and  [58],  her
    finding that the letter from  the  lawyer  was  inadequate  because  of
    omissions and there were no documents provided  regarding  the  company
    which the Appellant had previously promised she would supply. The uncle
    should have been in a position to  give  further  evidence  as  to  his
    involvement with the Appellant.

31. The Judge had dealt with the claim about diaspora activities and  found
    the Appellant was operating at a low level. The evidence the  Appellant
    relied upon did not establish a profile that would mean she would  come
    to the attention of the Sri Lankan authorities upon return.  The  Judge
    had applied anxious scrutiny to this case. In conclusion counsel argued
    that the risk of self-harm to the Appellant was reported as high  based
    on  the  letter  from  the  community  health  trust   drafted   by   a
    psychiatrist. This seemed to be the reason why the Appellant  had  been
    admitted to Newham hospital. There had not been a  suicide  attempt  in
    the United Kingdom but the medical authorities evidently  felt  it  was
    likely that there would be one if the Appellant was  not  treated.  The
    sectioning of the Appellant (who had agreed to be admitted) was a  pre-
    emptive move. That was a factor in Dr Dhumad's assessment.

32. The Appellant had given her explanation why she wished to cover up  the
    sexual abuse. The Judge had made a material error of fact stating  that
    the Appellant had conceived her daughter after experiencing problems in
    India. The conception was in January 2014 before she  was  detained  by
    the Indian authorities. The Appellant  had  produced  evidence  of  the
    company although counsel accepted that it was not entirely  clear  when
    she had produced it. The documents  at  the  end  of  her  bundle  were
    written in French. Counsel accepted that the uncle's statement did  not
    refer in terms to those documents.

Findings

33. The Appellant's challenge in this case to the findings of the Judge  is
    a  reasons-based  challenge  arguing  that  the  Judge  has  overlooked
    important aspects  of  the  medical  evidence  and  has  insufficiently
    reasoned  other  parts  of  the  determination   when   rejecting   the
    Appellant's claim. The Appellant's claim broke down into two parts. The
    first was that she feared return to Sri  Lanka  because  she  had  been
    involved outside the country for the TGTE working for  a  company  that
    hosted their website and because she had been arrested and  ill-treated
    in Sri Lanka by the authorities in 2013 for helping the LTTE.  The  2nd
    part of the claim was  that  as  a  result  of  the  ill-treatment  the
    Appellant claimed to have suffered in both Sri Lanka  and  subsequently
    in India she now  had  severe  psychological  symptoms,  had  attempted
    suicide and was a suicide risk. The Appellant's argument  is  that  her
    psychiatric condition is set out in some detail in the medical evidence
    and this had not been properly considered by the Judge.

34. The Judge had not found the Appellant to be a credible witness and  was
    concerned about a  number  of  aspects  of  the  Appellant's  claim  in
    reaching that conclusion. There was  an  absence  of  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's involvement with the company that hosted the TGTE  website.
    Given the claim that this activity put her at risk upon return it was a
    core part of the claim and the Appellant needed to provide evidence  to
    substantiate it. Although corroboration is not required as a matter  of
    course in asylum appeals, where the  information  to  support  a  claim
    could be reasonably easily obtained but it has not been it is open to a
    Judge, as here, to draw an adverse inference.

35. It was inconsistent that if the Appellant's  husband  was  at  risk  he
    would not have travelled to the United Kingdom with the Appellant on  a
    visit visa he was issued with. That he did not travel  to  a  place  of
    safety when he had the opportunity to do so, strongly suggested that he
    did not consider himself at risk undermining the claim that the  Indian
    authorities had an adverse interest in the Appellant. A letter said  to
    support the Appellant's claim written by an Indian lawyer had omissions
    of a type which if the lawyer had been genuinely involved in  the  case
    would not have occurred thereby  undermining  the  credibility  of  the
    letter and that part of the Appellant's case. The Appellant herself had
    substantially delayed her claim  for  asylum  after  arriving  in  this
    country which taken with the husband's non-arrival suggested  a  motive
    for coming to this country that was  not  connected  to  the  need  for
    international protection.

36. The Judge was also concerned as to the nature of the  medical  evidence
    which was not as clear as was put in submissions. Whilst it  was  clear
    the Appellant was suffering from depression as the Judge herself noted,
    the causes of that depression were not  straightforward.  The  treating
    physician at Newham General hospital indicated the Appellant could have
    been suffering from postnatal  depression  or  possible  post-traumatic
    stress disorder or moderate to severe depression. It was  not  for  the
    Judge to speculate on what the Appellant's condition might be  or  what
    was causing it. It was for the Appellant to produce evidence to show to
    the appropriate standard that what  the  Appellant  was  suffering  was
    caused by the Appellant's previous experiences.

37. The Appellant relied very heavily on the report of Dr Dhumad  but  that
    too is not as clear as was argued. Dr Dhumad found that the Appellant's
    current psychological symptoms were caused by  the  Appellant's  arrest
    and torture in 2013 but if the Appellant could not show  to  the  lower
    standard that those events had occurred  that  somewhat  undermined  Dr
    Dhumad's conclusion.  The  doctor  spent  two  hours  interviewing  the
    Appellant but he had not seen the  Appellant  being  cross-examined  or
    heard any observations (as the Judge had) from the  presenting  officer
    as to why the Appellant's claim could not be accepted. By contrast  the
    Judge was in possession of more information than Dr Dhumad  and  better
    placed to assess the credibility of the Appellant's claim. It  was  not
    Dr Dhumad's function to  cross  examine  his  patient.  Whilst  he  had
    clinical  experience  in  diagnosing   mental   health   problems   the
    establishment of the truth behind the Appellant's claims was  a  matter
    for the Judge.

38. It was not the case that the Judge made her findings on credibility and
    then rejected Dr Dhumad's report. That  would  be  to  make  the  error
    disapproved of in the case of Mibangi. The Judge was looking at all  of
    the evidence holistically.  The  risk  of  suicide  was  moderate.  The
    treating physicians at Newham Gen Hospital in December  2015  had  been
    concerned that there might be a risk of suicide but the  Appellant  had
    not  attempted  suicide  in  the  United  Kingdom.  A  difficulty  with
    paragraph 16.4 of Dr Dhumad's report (that the risk of suicide would be
    greater if the Appellant felt deportation was close) is that Dr  Dhumad
    referred to the protective factors  for  the  Appellant  as  being  the
    Appellant's daughter and her husband. The Appellant's case is that  she
    has not had any contact with her husband since  October  2015  implying
    that what she told Dr Dhumad was different to what she told the  Judge.
    This would not be the first time that what the Appellant told a  doctor
    was  different  to  what  she  told  the  Tribunal,  see  [50]  of  the
    determination. There the Judge noted that the Appellant had told her GP
    in the United Kingdom that she was married to a doctor suggesting  that
    the Appellant was an unreliable historian of her own  account.  It  was
    for the Judge to make a finding on credibility.

39. There were a number of reasons why the Appellant might be depressed  as
    the Judge was aware. Dr Dhumad's report was one factor to be taken into
    account. It  had  to  be  given  weight  because  of  his  professional
    experience and qualifications but it was not determinative by itself of
    the case. The Appellant's circumstances were quite different  to  those
    of the Appellant in GJ referred to in the  grounds  of  onward  appeal.
    That Appellant had clearly expressed an indication to  commit  suicide.
    In this case Dr Dhumad was speculating that the risk of  suicide  would
    increase if the Appellant felt the deportation  was  close.  Dr  Dhumad
    specifically reported at paragraph  10.7  that  the  Appellant  had  no
    active plans to attempt suicide. He also referred at section 11.2  that
    the Appellant's condition had worsened after the refusal of her  asylum
    application but it had not  led  to  a  suicide  attempt  then.  It  is
    speculation to argue on the basis of this  medical  evidence  that  the
    Appellant is a suicide risk.

40. The refusal of the Appellant's asylum application had  come  after  the
    Appellant's period of time in Newham General hospital. At  page  41  of
    the Appellant's bundle it was stated that the  Appellant  was  admitted
    into hospital at Newham General because she was considered to  be  high
    risk to herself and her daughter's safety and  well-being.  It  is  not
    surprising that the Judge should have indicated  in  her  determination
    that it was difficult to make  findings  in  relation  to  whether  the
    sexual abuse the Appellant complained of had in fact occurred.

41. The Judge was concerned that the Appellant should have wished to  start
    a family in India before securing a safe destination  for  herself  and
    her husband. Whilst it is correct that the Appellant's case is that she
    conceived in January 2014 she had been living in India since  2005.  In
    interview she said that because of the arrest in 2013 in Sri Lanka  her
    life in India became miserable. Whilst she  said  that  people  from  Q
    Branch came to the company and accused her  of  working  for  the  LTTE
    after she became pregnant, she also  referred  to  the  authorities  in
    India coming to her company three to four times and also to  her  house
    to  ask  questions.  The  evidence  suggested  that   the   Appellant's
    complaints of harassment from the Indian authorities included  episodes
    before she became pregnant leading to the Judge's querying of this part
    of the case. The evidence was not as clear-cut as was submitted.

42. The Judge had not said in her determination that the  Appellant  became
    pregnant after the Indian authorities visited her  company/house.  What
    the Judge said was that the Appellant's perception was the  authorities
    were treating her differently  following  her  return  to  India.  That
    followed from what the Appellant had said  in  her  substantive  asylum
    interview and the Judge did not make a material error of fact  at  that
    point of the  determination.  The  Appellant  had  indicated  that  her
    problems began when she returned to India after her  detention  in  Sri
    Lanka in 2013.

43. The Appellant's answers in interview were that after what had  happened
    to her in detention she was worried whether she might get  pregnant  at
    all. The Judge's point was that it was inconsistent the Appellant would
    wish to start a family at that stage. In  those  circumstances  it  was
    open to the Judge to conclude as she did that it was  implausible  that
    the  Appellant  would  seek  to  become  pregnant  rather   than   seek
    international protection. As the grounds conceded it was a  matter  for
    the Judge to decide how much weight could be  placed  on  the  evidence
    presented to her.

44. The Appellant relied on evidence of the company she  said  she  jointly
    owned with her husband and uncle because  that  was  the  link  to  the
    Appellant's support for  the  TGTE.  However,  the  Appellant  did  not
    produce evidence that she was involved with the company even though she
    had promised in her substantive asylum interview that that was what she
    would do. What  was  actually  produced  were  a  number  of  documents
    concerning a company operating in Switzerland and India but which  were
    not linked to the Appellant herself. The witness statement of the uncle
    did not clarify the matter and it was open to the Judge to  reject  his
    evidence accordingly.

45. The Appellant's case was not helped by the vague reason  given  by  the
    uncle why he could not travel from Switzerland to  the  United  Kingdom
    for something as important as the Appellant's  asylum  appeal.  Through
    his contacts he had apparently arranged  for  the  Appellant's  release
    from Sri Lanka on payment of a bribe yet he could not make  the  flight
    to the United Kingdom. In those circumstances the Judge had to evaluate
    a statement written by a witness who was not present and who could  not
    be cross examined on the veracity of that statement. The statement  did
    not take the Appellant's case significantly further because it did  not
    clarify the issue regarding the company. In those circumstances it  was
    open to the Judge to place no weight on the statement.  The  criticisms
    of the determination made in the grounds and in submissions to me are a
    mere disagreement with the Judge's findings. The disagreement with  the
    Judge's findings regarding the  inadequate  letter  received  from  the
    lawyer in India are also not indicative of a material error of law.

46. There were a number of serious problems with the Appellant's case.  For
    example, at [60] the Judge pointed out that when it was clear that  the
    authorities were aware that the Appellant had escaped  from  Sri  Lanka
    they were said to have continued to  attend  the  Appellant's  parents'
    home in Sri Lanka. That as the Judge pointed out would be  superfluous.
    The fact that the  Appellant  put  forward  such  implausible  evidence
    inevitably led the Judge to question the veracity of what the Judge was
    being told. The finding at [60] that  the  Appellant's  claim  was  not
    credible was not made in isolation. The Judge relied on cogent  reasons
    which she gave in her determination.

47. The final point made by the Appellant is that the  Judge's  conclusions
    on risk from sur place activities was based on out  of  date  evidence.
    The grounds of onward appeal noticeably do not indicate what difference
    any  up  to  date  background  material  would  make  to  the   Judge's
    conclusions. What GJ in  fact  said  at  paragraph  356  (7)  (d)  was:
    "Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to the integrity
    of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are, or  are  perceived  to
    have a significant role in relation to post-conflict  Tamil  separatism
    within the diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities  within  Sri  Lanka
    would be at risk".

48. The important words there are "significant role".  This  Appellant  did
    not  have  a  significant  role  in  post-conflict   Tamil   separatist
    activities within the diaspora. Her role was a low-level one.  Although
    the Judge was criticised for not accepting or  indeed  referring  to  a
    letter of support the Appellant had received, given that the author  of
    the letter had not made himself available to be cross examined,  it  is
    difficult to see what  weight  the  Judge  could  have  given  to  that
    evidence. In any event it was not necessary for the Judge  to  set  out
    each and every piece of evidence put before him or her. The grounds are
    quite wrong at paragraph 25 when they claim that the Judge had made  no
    specific findings of fact on whether the Appellant's activities in  the
    United Kingdom would give rise to a risk of persecution.

49. The Judge had found  in  terms  at  [64]  that  on  the  basis  of  the
    background material the Appellant could  safely  return  to  Sri  Lanka
    because mere involvement with prescribed  organisations  did  not  give
    rise to a risk. As I have indicated GJ requires a significant level  of
    support for diaspora activities to give rise to risk on return but this
    Appellant could not show that. The Appellant  had  sought  to  raise  a
    large number of different arguments each of which the  Judge  carefully
    considered and gave  cogent  reasons  for  rejecting.  The  Appellant's
    overall  credibility  was  rejected  for  sound  reasons.  The  medical
    evidence was not clear-cut, it was looked at  in  some  detail  by  the
    Judge but it did not  necessarily  confirm  the  Appellant's  case.  Dr
    Dhumad's report was predicated on an assumption  that  the  Appellant's
    account was correct but the Judge was in a better position to  evaluate
    the Appellant's credibility.

50. Dr Dhumad had said that the nature  of  the  Appellant's  psychological
    symptoms were consistent with the response to a  traumatic  experience.
    He postulated "such as torture". It was not for the Judge to  speculate
    on what the cause of the Appellant's psychological  problems  were,  it
    was for the Appellant to demonstrate that  they  arose  from  what  she
    claimed had happened to her in Sri Lanka in 2013 and to a lesser extent
    what had happened in India. The Judge did not accept  that  the  events
    described in India had happened at all for the reasons she gave.

51. The Judge inevitably had more problems in determining what had happened
    in Sri Lanka in 2013 since  the  Appellant's  overall  credibility  was
    suspect. As the Judge pointed out  there  were  a  number  of  possible
    traumatic  events  which  could  be  contributing  to  the  Appellant's
    depression. Dr Dhumad postulated torture  because  that  was  what  the
    Appellant had said had happened to her and he found that the  Appellant
    symptoms were consistent with that account. If however that account was
    not be believed or accepted then that diagnosis to a large extent  fell
    away. The objections taken by the Appellant to this  determination  are
    mere disagreements with conclusions which were open to the  Judge.  The
    Appellant and her representatives have embarked on a lengthy search for
    errors in a bid to overturn this determination. The components  of  the
    determination should not be looked at in isolation from each other. The
    determination should be looked at holistically. On that  basis  I  find
    that the Judge gave sufficient reasons why she rejected the Appellant's
    claim and dismissed the appeal.  I do not find that  the  Appellant  is
    able to demonstrate any material error of law in this determination and
    I dismiss the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 8th of February 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 8th of February 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
