
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
PA/10464/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On December 22, 2017                   |    On January 03, 2018             |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              mr JABER MUHAMMED
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeetie, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, Counsel, instructed by Broudie Jackson
and Canter


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I do not make an anonymity direction in this matter.

 2. The respondent in these proceedings was the appellant before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  From hereon I have referred to the parties as they were
    in the First-tier Tribunal so  that,  for  example,  reference  to  the
    respondent is a reference to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.

 3. The appellant claimed to be a citizen of Iran and on March 22, 2016  he
    entered the United Kingdom and claimed asylum the  following  day.  The
    respondent considered the application but refused it on  September  15,
    2016 under paragraphs 336 and 339F/339M HC 395.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision on  September  28,  2016  and  the
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ruth on  March  14,
    2017. In a decision promulgated on March 27, 2017 he allowed the appeal
    on asylum and human rights grounds.

 5. The respondent appealed that decision on April 8, 2017 arguing that the
    Judge had erred in his approach. The  respondent  argued  firstly,  the
    Judge made no findings on his actual  account  in  circumstances  where
    credibility was an issue and secondly, he  had  made  findings  on  the
    Sprakab report despite not having the expertise to make such findings.

 6. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grimmett  considered  the  grounds  of
    appeal on August 4, 2017 and found there was an arguable error  of  law
    for the reasons argued.

 7. Mr Hussain filed a Rule 24 response in which he argued that the grounds
    amounted to a disagreement with the decision and nothing more.

 8. At the hearing before me Mr McVeety  adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    Whilst the Judge set out the appellant's account it  was  incumbent  on
    him to make findings on which  aspects  of  the  case  he  accepted  or
    rejected. Whilst the Judge made findings  on  credibility  he  gave  no
    reasons for  his  conclusions  despite  accepting  there  were  serious
    credibility issues at [30].  With  regard  to  the  Sprakab  report  he
    submitted the Judge was not an expert and  had  speculated  on  whether
    differences in "accent" supported the  appellant's  claim.  Whilst  the
    Judge was entitled to reject the report  he  had  to  explain  why  and
    demonstrate he had the expertise to make such findings.

 9. Mr Hussain adopted the Rule 24 response and submitted the  Judge  dealt
    adequately with all evidential matters and the  respondent  was  simply
    challenging what weight the Judge attached to the evidence. With regard
    to the Sprakab report it was wrong to say the Judge had not  considered
    its contents carefully as he had spent a large  part  of  his  decision
    considering the actual report. With regard  to  the  remainder  of  the
    Judge's decision the Judge had made a number of  positive  findings  on
    the appellant's evidence and ultimately it was a matter for  the  Judge
    what weight he attached to which piece of evidence. He submitted  there
    was no error in law.

    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

10. This was an appeal in which the respondent disputed his claim to be  an
    Iranian national and argued that he was in fact from Iraq. Between  [6]
    and [11] and [12] and [17] the Judge set out the respective claims.

11. The respondent's basis for concluding the  appellant  was  not  Iranian
    was:

      a) When interviewed he claimed he stated he was from Iraq.

      b) When fingerprinted by the Greek authorities he claimed he was Iraqi
         although he claimed he only did this because he was told to  do  so
         by some Iraqis with whom he was with.

      c) Discrepancies between his screening and substantive interviews.

      d) The results  of  an  independent  language  analysis  conducted  by
         Sprakab.

12. The appellant denied ever claiming in interview he was from Iraq and he
    disputed inconsistencies between his two interviews.

13. At [30] in the Judge's findings the Judge wrote-

         "In  this  case  I  agree  with  the  respondent  that  there   are
         credibility concerns which cast serious doubt  on  the  appellant's
         claims. Taking the guidance above into  account  I  have  concluded
         those concerns are not  such  as  to  lead  to  the  conclusion  no
         credence at all can be attached to the appellant's statements."

14. The Judge considered the interviews and concluded the answers  recorded
    were inconsistent regarding where he came from and  he  concluded  that
    there was a real uncertainty about both what  the  appellant  said  and
    what  his  nationality  was.  The  Judge  further  commented  that  the
    appellant's knowledge of Iran was consistent with him coming from  Iran
    and that it was unlikely he would have been able to prepare answers for
    those questions unless he had local knowledge by virtue of where he was
    said to be living.

15. The Judge was unsure at this juncture whether the  appellant  was  from
    Iran or Iraq and identified the Sprakab report as the  "key"  document.
    However, he concluded this report was  also  not  definitive.  He  took
    issue  with  the  fact  there  was  no  description  of  the  analyst's
    qualifications and this was important, in  his  view,  because  of  his
    finding that the Kurdish Sorani spoken by the appellant was  spoken  in
    the area around Mariwan and Erbil but not Sulaymaniyah.

16. Mr McVeety challenges the Judge's approach to the report on  the  basis
    he is not a language expert and in the absence of other expert evidence
    or country evidence the conclusions of  the  expert  should  have  been
    accepted.

17. In giving  permission  to  appeal  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Grimmett highlighted the Judge's approach to  the  report.  Mr  Hussain
    says the findings were open to  the  Judge  but  I  find  Mr  McVeety's
    argument more persuasive on this topic. The Judge made findings on  the
    report that it are outside his area  of  expertise.  Where  the  expert
    states a particular language is spoken in place "A" then in the absence
    of other evidence the Judge cannot simply discount that  based  on  his
    own assessment of the expert evidence. He was entitled  to  reject  the
    report's contents if he had evidence to do so. I am satisfied there was
    no such evidence and this is the first error the Judge made.

18. The second issue raised by Mr McVeety was that the Judge failed to make
    any findings about his actual protection claim.  At  no  stage  in  his
    decision did the Judge consider the core claim. He  may  have  set  the
    claim out but he should have made findings especially in  circumstances
    where the respondent raised credibility. The Judge's findings from [44]
    onwards amount to general findings without any reference to  the  claim
    itself. No findings on any of the issues, for instance, in [7] to  [11]
    were made.

19. The respondent was entitled to know which aspects  of  the  appellant's
    claim was accepted or rejected. By failing to make such findings  I  am
    satisfied that this also amounted to an error in law.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the Judge's decision
    and I remit the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo
    hearing.


Signed                              Date     22/12/2017


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have set aside the earlier decision.




Signed                              Date     22/12/2017


[pic]



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

