
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10381/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 June 2019                      |On 02 July 2019                      |
|Extempore                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    M Y L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, Counsel, instructed by Milstone
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant challenges the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hussain ("the judge"), promulgated on 16 November  2018,  by  which  he
    dismissed her appeal against the Respondent's  decision  of  14  August
    2018, which had refused her protection and human rights claims.

 2. The Appellant, a Malaysian national, arrived in this  country  in  2003
    and had leave to remain as a student for a certain period of time.  The
    claims leading to the Respondent's decision were made in February 2018.
     The basis of these claims was that the Appellant is lesbian and  would
    for that reason be at risk on return to her home country.

 3. In refusing the protection and  human  rights  claims,  the  Respondent
    expressly accepted the Appellant's sexuality and the fact that she  had
    had relationships both in Malaysia and this country.  There was also an
    acceptance that if the Appellant were to live as an openly gay woman in
    Malaysia she would be at risk of persecution and/or serious harm.   The
    protection claim was refused by the Respondent because it was concluded
    that she had in the past and would  on  return  live  "discreetly"  and
    therefore would not be at risk in light of the guidance set out  in  HJ
    (Iran) [2010] 1 WLR 386.

 4. At the hearing before the  judge,  the  Respondent's  concessions  were
    maintained.  At para. 24 the judge set out what he considered to be the
    core issue in  the  appeal  before  him,  namely  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant would "choose to live openly"  on  return  to  Malaysia.   At
    para. 25 he concludes that she would not  live  openly  and  that  this
    would be the case for purely personal and/or social reasons, not  as  a
    result of a fear of harm.

 5. It is worth setting out para. 25 in full:

         "I have come to the view that the Secretary of State's position  is
         to be preferred.  This is  because  if  the  appellant  apprehended
         living an openly gay lifestyle in her home country on return,  then
         she would have said so.  Instead, she very clearly  said  that  she
         would live discreetly.  That evidence was consistent, firstly  with
         the appellant having maintained a  5  year  relationship  with  her
         female partner in Malaysia, as well as her reference  to  it  being
         'private' matter between her and her partner."

 6. At  para.  26  the  judge  in  effect  finds  that  the  Appellant  had
    embellished her account after her asylum interview in order to give the
    impression that a reason for her wishing to lead a private lifestyle on
    return was as a result of the fear of harm if she did not.





The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The grounds of appeal attack the judge's conclusions  squarely  on  the
    basis that he misapplied the  guidance  set  out  in  HJ  (Iran).   The
    challenge included an assertion that the judge had failed  to  consider
    relevant evidence given by the Appellant throughout the course  of  her
    protection claim.

 8. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on 30 May 2019.



The hearing

 9. At the hearing before me,  Ms  Cunha  very  properly  acknowledged  the
    difficulties with the judge's decision.  In particular, it was the case
    that the Appellant had stated at numerous stages of her claim that  she
    held a fear of living as  a  gay  woman  in  Malaysia  because  of  the
    consequences of doing so.  These consequences, she had stated, included
    harm being done to her.  Ms Cunha also quite properly  recognised  that
    the judge's failure to have regard to this evidence was material to his
    assessment of risk under HJ (Iran).

10. In the circumstances I did not need to hear from Mr Briddock.



Decision on error of law

11. It is quite clear that the judge has materially erred in law.  From the
    very outset of her claim the Appellant stated that she believed that if
    people found out about her sexuality in Malaysia she would be  at  risk
    of harm, in particular from the authorities of that  country  (see  for
    example question 4.1 of the screening interview).   The  expression  of
    this fear  runs  throughout  the  asylum  interview  (see  for  example
    questions 40-41, 43, 62-64, 80, 94, 96, and 151-153).  With respect  to
    the judge, he was entirely wrong to have said that her  fear  was  only
    expressed after the interview.

12. The judge's failure  to  have  regard  to  this  clear  and  consistent
    evidence fundamentally undermines his conclusions on the  appeal.   For
    these reasons I set his decision aside.



Remaking the decision

13. Having canvassed the issue with both representatives,  and  with  their
    agreement, I now go on to remake the decision in this appeal.

14. The Respondent has, from the outset, accepted the Appellant's sexuality
    and other aspects of her account.  That acceptance has been  maintained
    before me.  On the evidence as a whole, in particular that to  which  I
    have already referred, it is quite clear that the Appellant  has  held,
    and still holds, a genuine fear of the consequences of her living as an
    openly gay woman in Malaysia.

15. It is true that at certain points in her case she  has  also  expressed
    her desire to live privately with certain regard to her own personality
    and the conservative views of some members of the Chinese community  in
    this country.  However, in the light of the  guidance  set  out  in  HJ
    (Iran) that is in no way fatal to her case. It is clear, and I so find,
    that the fear of consequences of living openly in  Malaysia  played  at
    least a material part in her assertion that she  would  not  do  so  if
    returned to Malaysia.

16. Turning to the issue of risk on return, Ms Cunha, having taken  what  I
    consider to be a fair and realistic view of the evidence, has  conceded
    that there would be a risk to this particular Appellant if she returned
    to Malaysia and lived as an openly  gay  woman.   She  referred  me  to
    paragraphs 56-58 of the reasons for  refusal  letter  and  the  country
    information cited therein.  In my view that information  does  indicate
    that there would be a risk of persecution and/or serious harm  to  this
    Appellant if she were to return to Malaysia and live openly.  As I have
    already found, a material reason for why the Appellant might  not  live
    in an open fashion is her fear of the consequences.

17. In light of the above, the Appellant is at risk of  persecution  and/or
    serious harm on return to Malaysia on account of her sexuality. She  is
    a refugee and a person whose removal would expose her to Article 3 ill-
    treatment.

18. For those reasons I allow the Appellant's appeal on protection grounds.
     To the extent that the same factual matrix applies, I also  allow  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

19. I add the following observations. Although the error  of  law  in  this
    case involved a failure to take account of evidence that  had  in  fact
    been stated by the Appellant throughout, it is also  worth  emphasising
    the importance of applying the guidance set  out  in  para.  82  of  HJ
    (Iran) in full. Evidence from an appellant that they have in  the  past
    and/or would on return to their home country live "discreetly"  is  not
    an end point to the necessary inquiry into risk. There must always be a
    further step in order to ensure that any  reasons  for  why  they  have
    acted as they did in the past and/or why they would act in a particular
    way in the future are properly evaluated and clear  findings  made.  In
    other words, the "why" question must be posed and answered.

20.  The  importance  of  asking  the  "why"  question  has  recently  been
    highlighted by the Court of Appeal in WA  (Pakistan)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
    302, a case concerning the risks to Ahmadis who practise their faith in
    Pakistan  in  a  manner  which  might  attract  the  attention  of  the
    authorities, or who would avoid such  behaviour  out  of  fear  of  the
    consequences. It was found that the country guidance given  by  MN  and
    others (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT
    00389 (IAC) failed to incorporate the  "why"  question,  was  therefore
    misleading and should not be followed (paras. 52-61).

21. Adherence to the binding guidance set out in  HJ  (Iran)  and  now  re-
    emphasised by the Court of Appeal in the context of the  expression  of
    religious beliefs will go a long way to  avoid  flawed  assessments  of
    risk in cases where an appellant relies on a status covered by  any  of
    the reasons under Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention.



Anonymity

22. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and  I  set
it aside.

I remake the decision by allowing the Appellant's appeal on the ground  that
the Respondent's refusal of her protection claim is contrary to  the  United
Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention and that the  refusal  of
her human rights claim is unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
1998.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 26 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

