
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10348/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 March 2019                              |On 29 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     t m
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Rylatt, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. His date of birth is 27th  July
    1982.  He made an application on protection grounds. This  was  refused
    by the Secretary of State on 14 August 2018.

2.    The  Appellant  appealed  against  this  decision.   His  appeal   was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Butler in a decision promulgated
    on  21  January  2019,  following  a  hearing  on  26  November   2018.
    Permission was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blundell  on  15
    February 2019.

The decision of the FTT

3.   The Appellant's account that he is at risk of  persecution  on  account
    of his Christian faith was not accepted by the First-tier Tribunal. The
    Appellant gave evidence. He relied on documentary evidence, namely  the
    documents at pages 145 and 147 of the Appellant's bundle which  purport
    to be a Fatwah and a FIR.He gave  an  account  of  incidents  that  had
    occurred since April 2017, including threats that had been made to  him
    and said that a false allegation of blasphemy was being pursued against
    him by the police in his home area.

4.   The judge considered the documentary evidence and he  said  as  follows
    at paragraph 35:

         "35. Accordingly, whether the Appellant faces a risk of persecution
             on return to  Pakistan  depends  on  the  credibility  of  his
             evidence.  Following Tanveer Ahmed, it is for the Appellant to
             satisfy me that the documents he has produced are genuine.  He
             has  not  done  so.   The  documents  produced,  albeit   with
             certified translations, are copies.  The CIPN of March 2017 at
             paragraph 15 notes that the availability and accessibility  of
             forged documents is widespread in Pakistan and  that  document
             fraud  there  is  'endemic'  particularly  in  the  case  FIRS
             provided by police officers in  return  for  bribes.   If  the
             fatwah and application to the police produced by the Appellant
             were sent by his father-in-law,  I  would  have  expected  the
             originals to be produced.  I do not accept these  are  genuine
             documents and attach little weight to it."

5.   There was an expert report  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  from  Ms
    Moeen who referred to  the  CPIN  relating  to  Christian  converts  in
    September 2018.  His conclusions are recorded by the judge at paragraph
    2. The judge relied on the country guidance case  of  AK  and  SK  (see
    paragraphs 30, 31, 32 and 33  of  the  decision).    At  34  the  judge
    concluded that the Appellant does not claim to be an  Evangelist.  This
    is not challenged by the Appellant. He found that he  is  educated.  He
    owned two business and was financially comfortable (in Pakistan) and as
    such would not be at risk of persecution.  The judge said at  paragraph
    34 of his decision with reference to the CPIN at 2.4.13; "state  actors
    who use blasphemy laws against Christians are often motivated by spite,
    personal or personal disputes over land or property or may be triggered
    by certain political events.  None of these, on his own evidence, apply
    to the Appellant". The judge went on to find  the  Appellant's  account
    vague and unconvincing and that he failed to cite a single  example  of
    the kind of threats or action taken against his family by the police or
    others.  The judge found that the account of his brother  having  moved
    to Cambodia "because of his problems" gave no hint that this was caused
    by threats or other interference in their lives.

6.   The judge did not accept at paragraph 38 that  the  Appellant  was  not
    aware that he could claim asylum immediately  on  arrival.   The  judge
    attached weight to the failure by the Appellant to mention  matters  in
    his screening interview, (see paragraph  39).  The  judge  found  other
    inconsistences in the Appellant's account, (see paragraphs 41,  42  and
    43).

The grounds of appeal

7.   There are four grounds of appeal. Having heard submissions, I  conclude
    ground 2 is made out.  Ground 2 challenges the conclusions of the judge
    relating to the documentary evidence.  It is asserted  that  the  judge
    failed  to  apply  Tanveer  Ahmed  (documents  unreliable  and  forged)
    Pakistan [2002] UKAIT 00439 in analysing  the  documentary  evidence.At
    paragraph  35  the  judge   identified   credibility   as   being   the
    determinative issue. He considered whether the documents  were  genuine
    (which is a different matter to reliability which was the issue here in
    the absence of  any  evidence  produced  by  the  Respondent  that  the
    documents were not genuine).  The judge found that the  documents  were
    not genuine. He gave two reasons for this.  The first reason  given  is
    that the original documents were not produced.  The  second  reason  is
    that there is document fraud in Pakistan is endemic.  In conclusion  he
    found that the documents were not genuine and attached little weight to
    them.

8.   The principles in Tanveer Ahmed were  summarised  by  the  Tribunal  in
    that decision at paragraph 38 as follows:

         "38.     In summary the principles set out  in  this  determination
             are:

          1. In asylum and human rights  cases  it  is  for  an  individual
             claimant to show that a document on which he seeks to rely can
             be relied on.

          2. The decision maker should consider whether a document  is  one
             on which reliance should properly be placed after  looking  at
             all the evidence in the round.

          3. Only very rarely will there be the need to make an  allegation
             of forgery, or evidence  strong  enough  to  support  it.  The
             allegation should not be made without such  evidence.  Failure
             to establish the allegation on the balance of probabilities to
             the higher civil standard does not show  that  a  document  is
             reliable.  The decision maker still needs to apply  principles
             1 and 2."

9.   In submissions my attention was drawn to paragraph 44 of  the  decision
    where the judge said:

         "44. Having considered all the circumstances in the round, adopting
             the lower standard of proof, I do not accept  the  Appellant's
             account nor that the documents he has produced are genuine.  I
             do not accept that his family has been threatened or  that  he
             will have any difficulty returning  to  Pakistan  through  any
             airport.  It follows that I do not find he has a  well-founded
             fear of persecution on account of his religion if returned  to
             Pakistan.  The question of internal relocation is not relevant
             in these circumstances.  I do not find he is a refugee."

Error of law

10.  A proper reading of paragraph 35 discloses  an  erroneous  approach  to
    the documentary evidence at odds with  Tanveer  Ahmed.   The  issue  is
    whether what is said by the judge at  paragraph  44;  namely,  that  he
    considered all the circumstances in the round, throws a different light
    on paragraph 35. I have also taken on board that a judge must start  at
    some point in the assessment of credibility. That he started  with  the
    documents does not amount to an error of law. However, I cannot be sure
    that the judge  considered  the  documentary  evidence  in  the  round;
    notwithstanding what he said at  paragraph  44.  The  judge's  findings
    about the documents, at paragraph 35, are emphatic. His conclusions are
    grounded in the documents themselves with no reference to the  evidence
    as a whole.  Moreover, the reference to the documents not being genuine
    indicates that the judge may not have been aware of or  understood  the
    decision in Tanveer Ahmed.  I am satisfied that  the  judge  found  the
    documents not  genuine  having  considered  them  in  isolation  before
    considering the rest of the evidence. Having found that  the  Appellant
    had produced documents that were not genuine he had effectively decided
    at that point that his account was not credible.  I am  satisfied  that
    the judge considered the  documentary  without  properly  applying  the
    second principle in Tanveer Ahmed. This is a material error. Whilst the
    judge made a number of adverse credibility findings it is impossible to
    conclude that the erroneous approach to the documentary evidence  would
    have no impact on the outcome of this  appeal.   The  decision  is  set
    aside.

11.  The appeal will  be  remitted  to  the  FTT  for  a  re-hearing  having
    considered para 7.2 of the Practice Statement of the  Senior  President
    of Tribunals of 25 September 2012.  There will need to be an  extensive
    fact-finding assessment conducted by the Tribunal. I indicated  at  the
    hearing that I did not see a good reason why a  judge  determining  the
    appeal should go behind the evidence that was recorded  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, but this is a matter for the judge rehearing the appeal.



12.  I do not need to make any ruling in relation to the  applications  that
    have been made under Rule 15 of the 2008 Procedure Rules. It is for the
    First-tier Tribunal to consider what evidence should  be  admitted  and
    the weight to attach to it in the light of late disclosure.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed            Joanna McWilliam               Date 25 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

