
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10527/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC on 25 August 2020 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|At a Remote Hearing via Skype             |On 01 September 2020             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     EU
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Greer, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.

Introduction

       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to her international protection claim  and  domestic  abuse
          allegations.


       2. This is an appeal by the appellant, a citizen of Albania,  against
          a decision of First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') Judge CJ Cowx,  sent  on
          26 March 2020, dismissing her asylum  appeal.   The  FTT  did  not
          accept the  appellant's  credibility  and  rejected  much  of  her
          account as to events which led her to leave Albania  in  order  to
          claim asylum.

       3. In  a  decision  dated  9  June  2020,  FTT  Judge  Keane  granted
          permission to appeal observing  inter  alia  that:  "overall,  the
          judge's findings as to the appellant's  credibility  were  replete
          with a reliance on  arguably  irrelevant  considerations  and  his
          findings as a whole were accordingly contaminated".


       4. The matter now comes  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  FTT
          decision contains an error of law, and if so whether it should  be
          set aside.

Hearing

       5. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Clarke informed me that it  had
          been agreed that grounds one to three (addressing the  appellant's
          asylum claim) contain errors of law such that the appeal  must  be
          allowed.  Mr Clarke  also  agreed  with  my  suggestion  that  the
          errors of law are such  that  the  decision  needs  to  be  remade
          completely.  This will require fresh findings of fact in  relation
          to detailed and extensive evidence.  I had regard to para  7.2  of
          the relevant Senior President's Practice Statement and the  nature
          and extent of  the  factual  findings  required  in  remaking  the
          decision, and I decided (with the agreement of the  parties)  that
          the matter should be remitted to the FTT.


       6. Although ground 4 (addressing  Article  8)  was  relatively  weak,
          both parties agreed that  the  FTT  must  address  Article  8  and
          asylum as at the date of  hearing  and  in  the  circumstances  it
          would be wrong to limit the hearing to asylum only.

Error of law discussion

Standard of proof

       7.  Although  the  FTT  judge  correctly  directed  himself  to   the
          applicable lower standard of proof at [12] and  referred  to  this
          thereafter at [23],  there  was  a  failure  to  apply  the  lower
          standard of proof when addressing the appellant's  assertion  that
          her husband threatened to remove their daughter  ('E')  from  her.
          The FTT found at [31] that it was "more likely than not" that  the
          husband would have removed E during the course of  2000-2013  when
          he returned her to the appellant after visits to his family.   The
          real question for the FTT was whether the husband's  threats  were
          reasonably likely in the light of his past behaviour.   A  finding
          that scenario X is  more  likely  than  not  does  not  mean  that
          alternative scenario Y is not reasonably likely.  The FTT  made  a
          similar error of law in the latter  half  of  [44]  regarding  the
          impact  of  the  appellant's  sister's  asylum   appeal   on   the
          appellant's decision making.

       8. The correct application of the standard of proof is a  fundamental
          requirement in the determination  of  an  asylum  appeal.   In  my
          judgment, the respondent was entirely correct to concede that  the
          FTT has erred in law in applying the incorrect standard of proof.

Plausibility

       9. The FTT's approach to the plausibility of the appellant's  account
          is fundamentally flawed in many ways.


      10. The FTT appears to have considered that  the  appellant's  account
          was inherently implausible, without  considering  the  consistency
          of the account with the country background evidence regarding  the
          plight of many women in Albania.  An applicant's  account  of  her
          fears must be  judged  in  the  context  of  the  known  objective
          circumstances and  practices  of  the  state  in  question  and  a
          failure  to  do  so  constitutes  an  error  of  law  -   see   AM
          (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 at [19b] and [21(e)].

      11. In KB & AH (credibility-structured approach) Pakistan [2017]  UKUT
          491 (IAC) the Tribunal addressed the approach to the  'credibility
          indicators' in the respondent's policy  and  said  this  regarding
          the 'plausibility indicator':

                 "28. Second, Mr Wilding's concession rests the respondent's
                 case on [lack of] plausibility, an indicator or factor that
                 has been seen by the Tribunal and the courts - as is indeed
                 reflected in this same Instruction - as one that,  although
                 in itself valid, requires a certain degree  of  caution  in
                 its application. Thus in HK v Secretary of  State  for  the
                 Home Department [2006] EWCA  Civ  1037  case  at  [28]-[30]
                 Neuberger LJ stated:


                       "28. Further, in many asylum cases, some, even  most,
                       of the appellant's story may seem inherently unlikely
                       but that  does  not  mean  that  it  is  untrue.  The
                       ingredients of the story, and the story as  a  whole,
                       have to be considered against the  available  country
                       evidence and  reliable  expert  evidence,  and  other
                       familiar factors, such as consistency with  what  the
                       appellant has said before,  and  with  other  factual
                       evidence (where there is any).


                       29.  Inherent probability, which may  be  helpful  in
                       many domestic cases,  can  be  a  dangerous,  even  a
                       wholly inappropriate,  factor  to  rely  on  in  some
                       asylum cases. Much of the evidence will be  referable
                       to societies with customs and circumstances which are
                       very different from those of which the members of the
                       fact-finding tribunal  have  any  (even  second-hand)
                       experience. Indeed, it is  likely  that  the  country
                       which an asylum-seeker has  left  will  be  suffering
                       from the sort of problems and dislocations with which
                       the  overwhelming  majority  of  residents  of   this
                       country will be wholly  unfamiliar. The point is well
                       made in Hathaway on Law of Refugee Status  (1991)  at
                       page 81:


                            'In  assessing   the   general   human   rights
                            information, decision-makers must constantly be
                            on guard to avoid  implicitly  recharacterizing
                            the nature of  the  risk  based  on  their  own
                            perceptions of reasonability."


                       30. Inherent improbability in the context  of  asylum
                       cases was discussed at some length by Lord Brodie  in
                       Awala -v- Secretary  of  State  [2005]  CSOH  73.  At
                       paragraph 22, he pointed out that it was "not  proper
                       to reject an applicant's account merely on the  basis
                       that it is not credible or not plausible. To say that
                       an applicant's account is not credible is to state  a
                       conclusion" (emphasis added).  At  paragraph  24,  he
                       said  that  rejection  of  a  story  on  grounds   of
                       implausibility must  be  done  "on  reasonably  drawn
                       inferences  and   not   simply   on   conjecture   or
                       speculation". He went on to emphasise, as did Pill LJ
                       in Ghaisari, the entitlement of  the  fact-finder  to
                       rely "on his common  sense  and  his  ability,  as  a
                       practical and informed person, to identify what is or
                       is not plausible". However, he accepted  that  "there
                       will  be  cases  where  actions  which   may   appear
                       implausible if judged by...Scottish standards,  might
                       be plausible when considered within  the  context  of
                       the applicant's social and cultural background".


                 29. Reflecting much the same caution,  paragraph  5.6.4  of
                 this Home Office Instruction invokes, inter alia, what  was
                 said in Y v Secretary of State [2006] EWCA Civ 1223:


                       "[I]n  [Y]  the  Court  of  Appeal  stated  that   in
                       regarding an account as incredible the decision-maker
                       must take care not to do so merely because  it  would
                       not be plausible if it had happened in the UK. Again,
                       underlying factors may well  lead  to  behaviour  and
                       responses on the  part  of  the  claimant  which  run
                       counter to what would be expected."


                 30. The reference by Neuberger LJ at [28] of HK to the need
                 to consider factors  related  to  plausibility  along  with
                 "other familiar factors... such  as  consistency"  is  also
                 illustrative  of  the  need  to  avoid  basing  credibility
                 assessment on just one indicator. We would  add  that  even
                 when focusing just on plausibility, it  is  not  a  concept
                 with  clear  edges.  Not  only  may  there  be  degrees  of
                 (im)plausibility, but sometimes an  aspect  of  an  account
                 that may be implausible in one respect may be plausible  in
                 another.


                 31. It seems to us that the indicators  identified  in  the
                 Home  Office  Instruction  (which  can  be  summarised   as
                 comprising sufficiency  of  detail;  internal  consistency;
                 external consistency; and plausibility) provide  a  helpful
                 framework within which to conduct a credibility assessment.
                 They facilitate a more  structured  approach  apt  to  help
                 judges avoid the temptation to look at the  evidence  in  a
                 one-dimensional way or to focus in an ad hoc way solely  on
                 whichever  indicator  or   factor   appears   foremost   or
                 opportune."


      12. When the decision is read as a whole, the FTT overly focused  upon
          the  plausibility  indicator  in  an  ad   hoc   manner,   without
          considering  this  alongside  and  in  the  light  of  the   other
          indicators supporting the credibility of the account  provided  by
          the appellant:  internal  consistency;  consistency  with  country
          background evidence; detail and specificity.


      13. Although the FTT refers to  the  respondent's  country  background
          evidence at [47], and mentions that domestic abuse  against  women
          is prevalent in Albania, the FTT has nonetheless  entirely  failed
          to take this into account when assessing the plausibility of  this
          particular appellant's account of domestic abuse at [44] or  [47].
           At [47] the FTT regarded it  to  be  unnecessary  "to  deliver  a
          detailed analysis" of  the  country  background  evidence  on  the
          basis  that  the  appellant's  claim  was  not  considered  to  be
          genuine.  This indicates a misunderstanding of the proper role  of
          country  background  material  when   assessing   credibility   in
          international   protection   appeals.    Such   evidence   informs
          plausibility, which in turn  is  a  relevant  indicator  (but  not
          determinative) of a genuine claim.

      14. In addition, as observed above,  the  finding  that  it  is  "more
          likely than not" that  news  of  her  sister's  successful  appeal
          motivated the appellant's claim, was reached  without  considering
          whether  the  appellant's  allegation  of   domestic   abuse   was
          reasonably likely.  The findings at [44]  are  also  difficult  to
          reconcile with the apparent acceptance (to the lower standard)  at
          [27] and [28] that the appellant was a victim  of  domestic  abuse
          at the hands of her husband in the past.   In  addition,  the  FTT
          failed to have regard to the relevant country guidance on  Albania
          when assessing the plausibility of the appellant's account.

Corroboration

      15. The FTT unlawfully required corroborating evidence to support  the
          appellant's allegations at [34] and [35], in order for  it  to  be
          worthy of belief, when it is well-established  that  corroborating
          evidence is not necessary for  asylum  appeals,  given  the  lower
          standard of proof  and  the  inherent  difficulties  in  obtaining
          supporting documentary  evidence  faced  by  those  fleeing  their
          country of origin.

Approach to the screening interview

      16. The  FTT  rejected  aspects  of  the  appellant's  account  solely
          because they were  not  raised  within  the  screening  interview,
          which took place on the  day  of  her  arrival  in  the  UK  on  6
          September 2013, at 21.30.  This played  a  material  role  in  the
          FTT's adverse general credibility assessment.   Although  the  FTT
          made a  general  reference  to  the  appellant  having  failed  to
          provide a credible explanation for these inconsistencies, the  FTT
          failed to take into account the likely difficulties faced  by  the
          appellant at an interview held  almost  immediately  upon  arrival
          after a long and arduous journey - see  the  helpful  observations
          in this regard set out in YL (Rely  on  SEF)  China  [2004]  UKIAT
          00145.

Conclusion


      17. The above errors of approach in relation to credibility are multi-
          faceted and constitute material errors of  law.   As  conceded  by
          the  respondent,  these  errors  have  infected  the   credibility
          findings made, such that the decision needs to be  set  aside  and
          remade de novo.

Decision

      18. The FTT decision contains errors  of  law.   Its  decision  cannot
          stand and is set aside.  The matter is remitted to the FTT,  where
          it will be remade de novo by a  judge  other  than  FTT  Judge  CJ
          Cowx.


Signed:  Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 25 August 2020
