
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10203/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Skype for Business  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated:|
|On 7 April 2021                             |                               |
|                                            |On 9 April 2021                |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 M A (Iran)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Mya James, solicitor with Alex James Law
For the respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of M A who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission from the  decision  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  on
   27 September 2019 to refuse him refugee status under the 1951 Convention,
   humanitarian protection, or leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
   human rights grounds.

2. The respondent accepts that  the  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Iran  of
   Kurdish ethnicity, and that he was born in June 2002.

Background

3. The appellant came to the  United  Kingdom  as  a  unaccompanied  asylum-
   seeking child, having left Iran illegally with a friend, travelling first
   to Iraq, where he stayed for two to three weeks, then on via  Turkey  and
   France, arriving in the United Kingdom by lorry.  The  appellant  claimed
   asylum for the first time on 10 December 2018. He was 16 years old.

4. The basis of his account then was that he had been working as a  smuggler
   to support his mother and younger brother, who were still  in  Iran,  and
   that he was discovered by the Iranian authorities and fled to the  United
   Kingdom via Iraq.  The appellant said in  a  witness  statement  dated  8
   March 2019 that his younger brother was 10 or 11 years old and his mother
   was rising 40.  He had lost his father at a young age but did not wish to
   go into details as it was distressing for him.

5. The appellant said he had not gone to school in Iran as the family  could
   not afford it.   School cost money, which his mother did not have, so  he
   went out to work to help support his mother and  brother.   He  had  been
   working since he was 14 or 15 years old.

6. In a refusal letter dated 27 September 2019, the appellant's account  was
   rejected.  However, as the appellant was a minor, discretionary leave was
   granted until 22 December 2019 because the respondent was  not  satisfied
   that there were adequate reception arrangements for him in Iran.

First-tier Tribunal decision

7. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.    His  account  was
   modified by the time the appeal was heard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
   He now produced evidence that he had an anti-government Facebook page and
   had attended demonstrations in London against  the  Iranian  authorities.
   He said his family had left Iran and that he was no longer in touch  with
   his mother, having not spoken to her since he left Iran.

8. The First-tier Judge did not find the appellant's  account  credible  and
   dismissed the appeal.

9. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.



Permission to appeal

10. On 6 July 2020, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Sheridan  granted  permission  to
   appeal on the basis that:

    "2.  It is arguable that the  judge  failed  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant would be at risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment as
    a consequence of having on his Facebook page  a  photograph  of  people
    trampling on the Iranian flag.  Arguably, in the  light  of  the  'hair
    trigger' approach of the authorities (as described in HB  (Kurds)  Iran
    CG [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC)), merely having posted a picture that  might
    be perceived as disrespectful to Iran may give rise to a risk  even  if
    the appellant is not in (or identifiable in)  the  photograph  and  the
    only reason he posted the picture is to bolster and asylum claim."

Rule 24 Reply

11. On 23 February 2021, significantly out of time, Mr Melvin filed  a  Rule
   24 Reply on the respondent's  behalf.   The  respondent  considered  that
   there was no material error of law in the  First-tier  Judge's  decision,
   given that the core claim had not been found credible.  He relied on  the
   First-tier Tribunal decision at [16], arguing that the  judge  had  dealt
   with the Facebook evidence, finding that there was no picture of him  and
   that she did not believe the appellant's evidence  that  there  had  been
   messages from the Iranian authorities, which he had deleted.

12. The judge had taken account of the appellant's  lack  of  any  political
   activity in Iran and applied correctly the country guidance in SSH and HR
   (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC) and HB
   (Iran).  Mr Melvin urged the Upper Tribunal  to  reject  the  grounds  of
   appeal in their entirety.

13. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

14. At a hearing on 5 November 2020, I  found  an  error  of  law,  for  the
   following reasons:

    "21. I proceed to consider the appellant's challenge to the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision.  The appellant does not now seek to assert  that  he
    has,  or  ever  had,  any  anti-regime  opinion  against  the   Iranian
    government.  He relies  on  his  United  Kingdom  sur  place  activity,
    reflected at the hearing in a photograph on  his  Facebook  page  which
    showed unidentifiable feet standing on the Iranian  flag,  and  on  his
    claim to have attended three anti-government demonstrations in  London,
    but the judge found that to be at best intended to support a fabricated
    asylum claim and that the appellant would not be at risk in Iran due to
    his actual political opinion.

    22.  It is right, however, that there is no finding as to the  risk  to
    the appellant at the airport, or from his perceived political  opinion.
     That is an error  of  law  and  is  plainly  material.   There  is  no
    alternative but to set this decision aside for remaking  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal."

15. I gave directions for skeleton arguments, to be limited to 'the risk  to
   the appellant  on  return  from  his  perceived  anti-regime  opinion  as
   evidenced by his sur place activity and Facebook pages' and directed  the
   appellant to serve an updated bundle of documents and witness  statement.
   I further directed that there should be no additional  evidence  save  as
   directed by the Upper Tribunal.

16. On 24 February 2021, there was  an  abortive  hearing.   Ms  James,  who
   represents the appellant, had been in difficulty and had  not  filed  the
   witness statement, skeleton argument or documents until the  day  of  the
   hearing.  Mr Melvin considered that he did not have  sufficient  time  to
   prepare cross-examination.

17. The appeal came back before me today and  I  have  heard  and  seen  the
   appellant give oral evidence through an interpreter.  I have examined the
   evidence which the parties placed before me.

Preliminary matters

18. For the respondent, Mr Melvin made a rule 15(2A) application  to  adduce
   what is described as a Generic Iran Facebook Bundle,  which  includes  an
   unreported decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson (LKIK,  decided  on  2
   May 2018) and a copy of Facebook's Privacy Policy.   The relevance of the
   Facebook policy is clear and I admit it.

19. Mr Melvin said, when I asked, that he was not seeking an adjournment  of
   today's hearing.   He was aware that the question of  Facebook  posts  in
   Iranian cases was still before the Presidential panel for a decision.  Mr
   Melvin said that LKIK was being cited around the country in such cases.

20. In relation to LKIK, Mr Melvin's application is to adduce an  unreported
   decision of the Upper Tribunal, which is governed by the  Joint  Practice
   Direction of the Immigration   and  Asylum  Chambers  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, (as amended  on  18  December  2018)  at
   [11]:

         "11.          Citation of unreported determinations

         11.1. A determination of the Tribunal which has not  been  reported
         may not be cited in proceedings before the Tribunal unless:

             (a)  the person who is or was the appellant before the  First-
             tier Tribunal, or a member of  that  person's  family,  was  a
             party to the proceedings in which the  previous  determination
             was issued; or
             (b)  the Tribunal gives permission.

         11.2. An application for permission to cite a  determination  which
         has not been reported must:

             (a)  include a full transcript of the determination;
             (b)  identify the proposition for which the  determination  is
             to be cited; and
             (c)  certify that the proposition is not to be  found  in  any
             reported determination of the Tribunal, the IAT or the AIT and
             had not been superseded by the decision of a higher authority.



         11.3. Permission under paragraph 11.1 will be given only where  the
         Tribunal considers that it would be materially assisted by citation
         of the determination, as distinct from the adoption in argument  of
         the reasoning to be found in the determination. Such instances  are
         likely to be rare; in particular, in  the  case  of  determinations
         which were unreportable (see Practice Statement  11  (reporting  of
         determinations)). It should be emphasised that  the  Tribunal  will
         not exclude good arguments from consideration but it will  be  rare
         for such an argument to be capable of being made only by  reference
         to            an             unreported             determination."
              [Emphasis added]

21. LKIK is an unreported decision.  More than that, Mr Melvin says that  it
   is a decision which was considered for reporting as country guidance, but
   then not reported.  Mr Melvin provided a full  transcript,  as  required,
   but did not identify a proposition of law therein, still less  one  which
   is not the subject of any other authoritative decision.  In his  skeleton
   argument, Mr Melvin said this:

         "The respondent submits that this decision gives the reader an idea
         of how easily manipulated a Facebook account can  become  in  order
         for it to appear to publicly display an opinion when in  fact  that
         opinion is only available to a small number of  likeminded  friends
         that are pursuing the same end. ...

         The respondent is aware that  [the]  Upper  Tribunal  have  finally
         listed the appeal that will consider the sur place activities of an
         Iranian national with special interest in 'Facebook'.  This  appeal
         is due to be heard by a Presidential panel [details given].  ...The
         respondent is currently  trying  to  ascertain  whether  the  Upper
         Tribunal is deferring hearing appeals  that  raise  the  'Facebook'
         issue, given that there appear to be so many."

22. That is not the type of decision which paragraph 11 contemplates.  I  do
   not consider that the respondent has identified any proposition for which
   the decision should be cited, nor am I satisfied that that  the  Tribunal
   will be materially assisted by citation of the determination, as distinct
   from the adoption in argument  of  the  reasoning  to  be  found  in  the
   determination.  I decline to admit this decision.

Appellant's documents

23. The appellant's bundle for the  remaking  hearing  contained  Ms  James'
   skeleton argument, the appellant's updated witness  statement,  and  some
   Facebook pictures.  The same group of pictures are  repeated  many  times
   over.

24. The posts accompanying  the  pictures  say  things  such  as  'Death  to
   Iranian regime', 'We  will  never  give  up  protesting  against  Iranian
   regime, we only have stopped because of the virus, soon as this  is  over
   we will be back out there', and so on.  Those  are  not  the  appellant's
   posts, but are the posts of a small number of other people.  Mainly,  the
   posts  on  his  page  are  in  Kurdish  and  are  not  accompanied  by  a
   translation.

25. In fact, as one would expect given his  inability  to  read  and  write,
   there are few posts visible with the appellant's  name  at  all.   On  20
   November 2019, the appellant posted as follows:

         "The Iran protests held the cities of eastern  Kurdistan  by  death
         [illegible] their main roads.  Control and they started to kick off
         the acams [sic] 20/11/2019. ..."

   There follows a row of emojis: four of the Iranian flag, four thumbs down
   symbols, four more Iranian flags, four shoes,  three  Iranian  flags  and
   three defecation emojis.

26. Also on 20 November 2019,  the  appellant  updated  his  Facebook  cover
   photograph to show  three  different  people's  feet  standing  in  dirty
   trainers on the Iranian flag.  Earlier that day, he had updated his cover
   photograph to an drawing of the Iranian flag in the shape  of  a  map  of
   Iran, with 12 hooded men being hanged from the map edge. At the top is an
   image of a religious leader, with his face blood red.

27. There is another post dated 5 January 2020 by the appellant which  says,
   in English:

         "Stop killing Kurdish people in Iran.  Free all political prisoners
         in Iran.  Death to the terrorist  regime  of  Iran  inshallah.   On
         Sunday 5.1.2020 ..."

   There follows several lines of texts in  Kurdish  and  the  Iranian  flag
   emoji, repeated and interspersed with the  same  red  X.   This  post  is
   accompanied by an image of a man holding  a  photograph  of  a  religious
   leader with a red X across his face.

28. The photographs show pictures of a religious leader  with  a  red  cross
   across his face, and the word 'Fashism [sic]', or  of  the  same  leader,
   with illegible words in red across the poster.  One  of  the  photographs
   shows a picture of a number of persons  in  uniform,  with  a  red  cross
   across it, which is being burned, but not by the appellant, though he  is
   visible behind, holding a poster which he told me he could not read.

Appellant's oral evidence

29. The appellant gave oral evidence against his updated witness  statement,
   which had been translated to him  in  Kurdish.   In  the  course  of  his
   evidence, it emerged that he is functionally  illiterate.   He  has  been
   learning English at Northampton College, but does not read it easily  and
   he can neither read nor write Kurdish.

30. The appellant has no political background in Iran, either personally  or
   in his family.  He said that he is against the Iranian  authorities,  who
   treat people badly, and that he  intends  to  continue  to  post  on  his
   Facebook page and attend demonstrations.  He  had  no  knowledge  of  the
   political history of Kurds in Iran.

31. The appellant denied ever having instructed his solicitors to  say  that
   he has a blog.  He did not know what blogging was, and even after several
   attempts by the interpreter, by me and by Mr  Melvin,  and  then  by  his
   solicitor in re-examination, he clearly did not understand  the  concept.
   He is not a blogger.  His evidence was that he posted the photographs and
   that was all he thought he needed to do.

32. The appellant was assisted by a friend in setting up a Facebook  account
   after he received the September 2019 refusal letter.  The appellant  said
   he was too young to know about Facebook earlier.  The friend is literate,
   and he reads the appellant's posts to him and also  the  responses.   The
   posts with the appellant's name are drafted by this friend: the appellant
   then 'posts' them but really has no idea of the content.   The  page  has
   over 1000 followers, but none of the followers had been asked  to  assist
   the appellant in tracing  his  family,  nor  had  any  of  them  provided
   evidence.

33. The appellant said that he had been told  of  London  demonstrations  at
   the Iranian embassy by a different  friend,  who  knew  which  trains  to
   catch.  He went to four  demonstrations,  but  during  cross-examination,
   could  not  remember  when  they  were.   He  was  photographed  at   the
   demonstrations, and then he  uploaded  the  photographs.   At  Ms  James'
   request, the Tribunal rose between cross-examination and  re-examination,
   after which the appellant remembered perfectly  the  dates  of  the  four
   demonstrations.

34. The appellant's friend who assist him with his  Facebook  page  did  not
   provide a statement or give evidence, and nor did  the  different  friend
   who told him when and where the  demonstrations  were,  which  trains  to
   catch, and travelled with him to them.

35. Asked to explain why he had  not  had  a  Facebook  account  before  the
   refusal letter, the appellant said he was very young and he did not  know
   about Facebook.  That seems unlikely: in September 2019 he was  17  years
   old.  Even if it is true, it does not greatly assist his claim.

Respondent's submissions

36.  Mr Melvin relied on his  Rule  24  Reply  and  skeleton  argument.   He
   observed that there was no clarity in the Facebook photographs as to when
   and where they  had  been  taken.   After  setting  out  the  appellant's
   contention that his inflammatory posts and pictures on the Facebook  page
   were sufficient to create the risk on return, and that he would be  asked
   for his Facebook password which would disclose  the  existence  of  these
   posts, the rest of Mr Melvin's skeleton argument did not engage with  the
   sur place element of the claim.  Mr  Melvin  observed  therein  that  the
   appellant did not claim to have joined any political organisation in  the
   United Kingdom or have any other  political  opinion  save  that  he  was
   seeking asylum here.

37. In oral submissions, Mr Melvin urged the Tribunal to find the  claim  to
   be fabricated and the appellant not to be a credible witness in  relation
   to his core account.  His latest witness statement  was  misleading:  the
   appellant was not a blogger.  It was unclear whether he  could  read  his
   own posts and the group which posted on his Facebook  page  was  a  small
   group of 7 or 8 friends.  Most of what they posted was emojis.  There was
   nothing here which would interest the Iranian authorities on return:  the
   appellant was no more than a face in the crowd at the demonstrations.

38. The Facebook account itself was easily manipulated: on  the  appellant's
   own evidence, it was his friend who  wrote  his  entries.  The  appellant
   could take down his account at any time and could then truthfully say  at
   the airport, if asked, that he had no social media account.  It  was  not
   the case that every returnee was asked for their Facebook or social media
   details.

39. Illegal departure alone was insufficient to  give  rise  to  a  risk  on
   return.  The respondent would  rely  on  the  Upper  Tribunal's  reported
   decision in AB and Others (internet activity - state of evidence)  [2015]
   UKUT 257 (IAC) (30 April 2015), on the country guidance  in  SSH  and  HR
   (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran (CG) [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC)  (29
   June 2016), HB (Kurds) Iran  (illegal  exit:  failed  asylum  seeker)  CG
   [2018] UKUT 430 (IAC) (12 December 2018), and PS  (Christianity  -  risk)
   Iran CG [2020] UKUT 46 (IAC) (20 February 2020).

40. Mr Melvin asked me to dismiss the appeal.

Appellant's submissions

41. For the appellant,  Ms  James  relied  on  her  skeleton  argument.   In
   particular, in HB (Iran) she relied on the country guidance at (3),  (8),
   (9) and (10).   If asked on return, the appellant would disclose  why  he
   had claimed asylum on return, including his false claim to  have  been  a
   smuggler.  He would be forced to disclose his Facebook password  and  the
   anti Iranian posts would put him at risk of Article 3 ECHR ill-treatment.






42. In  AB and others at [472] the Upper Tribunal had found that:


         "472.   The mere fact that a person, if extremely  discrete  [sic],
         blogged in the United Kingdom would not mean they would necessarily
         come to the attention of the authorities in Iran. However, if there
         was a lapse of discretion they could face hostile interrogation  on
         return which might expose them to risk. The more  active  a  person
         had been on the internet the greater the risk. It is  not  relevant
         if a person had used the internet  in  an  opportunistic  way.  The
         authorities are not concerned with a person's  motivation.  However
         in cases in which they have taken an interest  claiming  asylum  is
         viewed negatively. This may not of itself be sufficient to lead  to
         persecution but it may enhance the risk."        [Emphasis added]



43.  In  oral  submissions,  Ms  James  argued  that  it  was  the   Iranian
   authorities' perception of the appellant's political  views  which  would
   put him at risk.  He had left illegally and would be questioned on return
   about why he left, where he went, what he  did,  and  the  basis  of  his
   asylum claim.  There was a strong possibility that the authorities  would
   demand and get his Facebook password.   Even  if  the  account  had  been
   deleted, it could be revived by logging in again.

44. The appellant had been using Facebook for 18 months.   The  account  was
   an open one and the Iranian authorities might already have  accessed  it.
   If so, he would be specifically targeted on return.  The appellant  would
   be in difficulty explaining himself as he did not know,  apart  from  the
   content of the photographs, exactly what he had posted.  The  photographs
   themselves were inflammatory.  The appellant fell into a  risk  category,
   whatever his real views or the lack of  them,  and  whether  or  not  his
   account was fabricated.   If he told the truth on return, he  would  risk
   harsh consequences which would certainly breach Article 3 ECHR.


45. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Analysis

46. The appellant was an unimpressive witness.  I have no doubt at all  that
   he created his Facebook page and posted the photographs which he did  for
   the purposes of bolstering this appeal and that  his  claim  is  entirely
   fabricated. The question is whether by doing so, he has nevertheless made
   himself a refugee sur place.

47. The question of  the  Iranian  authorities'  perception,  to  the  lower
   standard applicable in international protection claims, is crucial to the
   decision in this appeal. I am obliged to the respondent for the  copy  of
   the Facebook Privacy Guidelines, which make it perfectly  clear  that  an
   account can be revived, long after it was thought to be deleted, and that
   some information survives on other people's posts,  even  if  the  source
   account has been deleted.

48. I have already set out above the  relevant  passage  in  AB  and  Others
   (internet activity - state of evidence)  in  2015,  in  which  the  Upper
   Tribunal expressly declined to give  country  guidance  on  blogging  and
   social media, due to the inadequacy of the evidence before it, but  noted
   that  the  Iranian  authorities  were  not  concerned  with  a   person's
   motivation and generally viewed having sought asylum in a negative light.
    More than that was required to create a risk on return, however.

49. In SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran  (CG)  in  2016,
   the Upper Tribunal held that merely having left Iran illegally, returning
   on a laissez passer, or being a failed asylum seeker, was not  enough  to
   create a real risk on return.   However,  in  2020  in  HB  (Kurds)  Iran
   (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker)  the  Upper  Tribunal  restated  its
   guidance.  The judicial headnote in HB says this:

         "(3)   Since 2016 the Iranian authorities have become  increasingly
         suspicious of, and sensitive to, Kurdish political activity.  Those
         of Kurdish ethnicity are thus regarded with even greater  suspicion
         than  hitherto  and  are  reasonably  likely  to  be  subjected  to
         heightened scrutiny on return to Iran.

         (4)   However, the  mere  fact  of  being  a  returnee  of  Kurdish
         ethnicity with or without a valid passport, and  even  if  combined
         with illegal exit, does not create a risk of persecution or Article
         3 ill-treatment.

         (5)   Kurdish ethnicity is nevertheless a risk factor  which,  when
         combined with other factors, may create a real risk of  persecution
         or Article 3 ill-treatment. Being  a  risk  factor  it  means  that
         Kurdish ethnicity is  a  factor  of  particular  significance  when
         assessing risk. Those "other  factors"  will  include  the  matters
         identified in paragraphs (6)-(9) below. ...

         (7)   Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are at
         risk of arrest, prolonged  detention  and  physical  abuse  by  the
         Iranian authorities. Even Kurds expressing peaceful dissent or  who
         speak out about Kurdish rights also face a real risk of persecution
         or Article 3 ill-treatment.

         (8)   Activities that can be  perceived  to  be  political  by  the
         Iranian  authorities  include   social   welfare   and   charitable
         activities  on  behalf  of  Kurds.  Indeed,  involvement  with  any
         organised activity on behalf of or  in  support  of  Kurds  can  be
         perceived as political and thus involve a risk of adverse attention
         by the Iranian authorities with the consequent risk of  persecution
         or Article 3 ill-treatment.

         (9)   Even 'low-level' political  activity,  or  activity  that  is
         perceived to be political, such as, by way of  example  only,  mere
         possession of leaflets espousing or supporting Kurdish  rights,  if
         discovered, involves the same risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-
         treatment. Each case however, depends  on  its  own  facts  and  an
         assessment will need to be made as to the nature  of  the  material
         possessed and how it would be likely to be viewed  by  the  Iranian
         authorities in the context of the foregoing guidance.

         (10)   The Iranian authorities demonstrate what could be  described
         as a 'hair-trigger' approach to those suspected of or perceived  to
         be involved in Kurdish political activities or support for  Kurdish
         rights. By 'hair-trigger' it means that the threshold for suspicion
         is low and the reaction of the authorities is reasonably likely  to
         be extreme."

50. In PS (Iran), decided in 2020, the Upper Tribunal at [4] said this:

         "4. ... Decision-makers must  nevertheless  consider  the  possible
         risks arising at the 'pinch point' of arrival:
         i)              All returning failed asylum seekers are subject  to
         questioning on arrival, and this will include questions  about  why
         they claimed asylum; ..."

51.  Taking all of these authorities together, and  even  allowing  for  the
   totally fabricated nature of the present  claim,  the  existence  of  the
   Facebook page and the posts thereon is sufficient to put  this  appellant
   at risk on return.  The appellant is an ethnic Kurd whose Facebook  page,
   if discovered, shows him among people burning images of religious leaders
   in  Iran,  stamping  on  the  Iranian  flag,  and  abusing  the   Iranian
   authorities.

52. That would be more  than  sufficient  to  activate  the  'hair  trigger'
   approach, with its low threshold for suspicion and reasonable  likelihood
   of  an  extreme  reaction.   Accordingly,   despite   his   claim   being
   opportunistic and fabricated, this appellant  has  created  the  risk  he
   asserts, to the lower standard  applicable  in  international  protection
   claims, and is a refugee.

53. This appeal is allowed.

DECISION

54. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.

   I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by allowing the
   appeal.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:      7 April
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



