
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10267/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 June 2017                               |On 23 June 2017               |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                    m s k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel, instructed by SG Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Sethi (the judge), promulgated on 24 November  2016,  in
    which she dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh claims to be gay, and that this
    would place him at risk on return to his home country.  His  claim  was
    refused by the Respondent on 9 September 2016.




The judge's decision

 3. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and two witnesses, Mr M and
    Mr R.  Between paragraphs 31 and 37 the judge  makes  numerous  adverse
    credibility findings in respect  of  claimed  past  events  whilst  the
    Appellant was in Bangladesh.  Between paragraphs 39 and  44  the  judge
    makes her findings in respect of the claimed events  occurring  in  the
    United Kingdom.  In summary, the  judge  did  not  accept  any  of  the
    material events claimed to have occurred in Bangladesh and  finds  that
    the Appellant's evidence of matters in  the  United  Kingdom  was  also
    unreliable in significant respects.  As a result the judge  finds  that
    he had failed to show that he was in fact gay.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The grounds of appeal are succinct.  In paragraph 2 it is said that the
    judge  failed  to  make  adequate  and  properly  reasoned  credibility
    findings in respect of the Appellant, but also Mr M and  Mr  R.   These
    errors are particularised in paragraphs 3 and 4.  In paragraph 3 of the
    grounds it is said that despite a finding  that  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and Mr R was generally consistent about  the  nature  of  the
    claimed relationship, the discrepancy relied upon by the judge  was  in
    fact immaterial.  At paragraph 4 the grounds assert  that  there  is  a
    contradiction between what the judge says in paragraph 39 and what  she
    then says in paragraph 41.  Paragraphs 5  and  6  refer  to  supporting
    photographic and other documentary evidence which it is said the  judge
    failed to deal with, with the  effect  that  her  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant was not gay is one to which she was simply  not  entitled  to
    come to.  In this regard there is a clear perversity challenge.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson on  10
    May 2017.  She  considered  that  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge's
    findings were perverse and contrary to the weight of the evidence.







The hearing before me

 6. Mr Karim relied on the grounds of appeal.  Initially he sought to argue
    that paragraph 2 of the grounds was a general catch-all attack  on  the
    judge's fact-finding and reasoning.  However when it  was  pointed  out
    that  generalised  grounds  of  appeal  were  inappropriate,  and  that
    paragraphs 3 and 4 appeared in reality to be a particularisation of the
    general assertion made in paragraph 2, Mr Karim focused  his  attention
    on the specific errors referred to in the latter  two  paragraphs.   He
    submitted that the judge had not rejected Mr R's own evidence about his
    relationship  with  the  Appellant  but  had  simply  found  that   the
    Appellant's evidence about who lived in Mr R's  house  was  unreliable.
    Mr Karim submitted that the reason relied upon by the judge would  have
    gone as much to their social friendship as to  their  claimed  intimate
    relationship.  Therefore the reason provided was immaterial.

 7. In respect of Mr M's evidence Mr Karim  submitted  that  there  was  an
    illogical approach by the judge: on the one hand she was  appearing  to
    say that his evidence was correct (paragraph 39) whilst  on  the  other
    she was appearing to find that it was incredible  (paragraph  41).   In
    addition, Mr Karim submitted that there were  no  findings  on  Mr  M's
    specific evidence relating to the Appellant's  interaction  with  other
    men.  Mr Karim did seek to maintain the perversity challenge,  although
    he accepted that a higher threshold applied.  He submitted that if  all
    of the evidence was taken as a whole, there  was  only  one  conclusion
    open to the judge, namely that the Appellant was in fact gay.

 8. Mr Whitwell relied on the Rule 24 response.  He submitted that  it  was
    difficult to see what else the judge could have said.  She had  covered
    all relevant aspects of  the  Appellant's  evidence  and  that  of  his
    witnesses.  In respect of paragraph 42 there was a clear  inconsistency
    in the evidence and this went  to  the  whole  nature  of  the  claimed
    relationship between the Appellant and Mr R. Mr R's credibility had  to
    be seen in the round.  The judge was entitled to  place  little  weight
    upon Mr M's evidence.  I should look at the decision as  a  whole.   It
    was submitted that I should look at the judge's decision  as  a  whole.
    It was also noted that a number of adverse credibility findings had not
    been challenged and this was significant.  There was no perversity here
    whatsoever.

 9. In response Mr Karim submitted  that  whilst  little  weight  had  been
    placed on M's evidence it was not the case that the judge had placed no
    weight upon it.  If this were the case, what evidence was she  in  fact
    rejecting and what was she accepting?  When this point was added to the
    nature of R's evidence there was, submitted Mr Karim, a material  error
    by the judge.

10. I reserved my decision on error of law.

Decision on error of law

11. I conclude that there are no material errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.  I now give my reasons for this conclusion.

12. First, it is uncontroversial that I must view the judge's decision as a
    whole and read it in a sensible manner, having regard to  the  need  to
    provide adequate reasons.

13. Second, it is of course the  case  that  a  large  number  of  material
    adverse credibility findings are unchallenged by the Appellant.   These
    are set out in paragraphs 31 to 37.  I appreciate  that  if  there  are
    significant  material  errors  in  relation  to  the  aspect   of   the
    Appellant's case relating to his time in the United Kingdom, this would
    have a bearing on  the  findings  made  in  relation  to  his  time  in
    Bangladesh.  However, the converse is also true.  The  absence  of  any
    challenge to the first tranche of findings is in  my  view  significant
    and it forms part of the assessment of what the judge says in  relation
    to the second part of her findings.

14. I also note that what is said in paragraph 40 has not been  challenged.
    This relates to another material aspect of the Appellant's case, namely
    the timing of his protection claim.  This too has a material impact  on
    my consideration of the particular points challenged by  the  Appellant
    before me.

15. Third, I turn to Mr M's evidence as dealt with in paragraphs 39 and  41
    of the judge's decision.  In my view, when  the  relevant  passages  in
    these two paragraphs are read not only together but in the  context  of
    the decision as a whole (as they must be), the  reality  is  that  they
    simply represent examples of the judge's overall  dissatisfaction  with
    the evidence before her.  There were clearly aspects of the Appellant's
    own evidence and that of Mr M which the judge found (for  reasons  that
    were entirely  open  to  her)  unreliable  for  various  reasons.   The
    specific points raised in the grounds and relied on by Mr Karim  cannot
    be seen in isolation from everything  else  that  surrounds  them,  and
    having looked at the surrounding passages in the judge's  decision  the
    overall dissatisfaction with the evidence that I have just referred  to
    becomes all the more apparent.

16. The point taken against the  Appellant  at  the  end  of  paragraph  39
    relates to his delay in seeking protection.  This point is  dealt  with
    in greater detail in the next paragraph wherein the judge  sets  out  a
    number of matters, all of which she was fully  entitled  to  take  into
    account, and concludes that there was no credible reason for the  delay
    in seeking protection in the United Kingdom.  The judge  quite  rightly
    states that this was a relevant but not a conclusive factor in reaching
    her overall findings.

17. In respect of Mr M's evidence, the second part of paragraph 41 must  be
    read in light of what  the  judge  says  in  the  first  part  of  that
    paragraph.  M provided what on  the  face  of  it  was  clearly  untrue
    evidence about what he had  purported  to  have  witnessed  himself  in
    respect of the Appellant when he was in  Bangladesh.   There  was  then
    reference to evasiveness during the course of oral evidence.  The judge
    was fully entitled to take these matters into  account  when  assessing
    the overall credibility of Mr M.   In light of the above I see no error
    in what the judge says in paragraphs 39 and 41.  If there was an  error
    it was not material given the  references  to  other  passages  in  her
    decision I have stated previously.

18. Fourth, Mr Karim has taken issue with  the  judge's  use  of  the  term
    "little weight" at the end of paragraph 41.  It is true that the  judge
    could have stated that  she  placed  "no  weight"  upon  his  evidence.
    However, her use of this particular terminology does not  indicate  any
    material error of law on  her  part.   In  my  view  it  is  simply  an
    indication that in light of her findings on Mr M's evidence any  weight
    she did place  on  it  had  no  material  bearing  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's ability to prove his case on the lower standard  of  proof.
    In this regard I note that the judge has made  repeated  references  to
    the need to consider all aspects of the evidence in the  round  and  to
    apply the lower standard of proof.

19. Fifth, following on from the previous point, it is quite  clear  to  me
    that the judge was placing little weight (in other  words  no  material
    weight) on all of Mr M's evidence.  She was entitled to  conclude  that
    the adverse points she has stated in  her  decision  were,  taking  the
    evidence as a whole, sufficient to attach the epithet of little  weight
    to his evidence as a whole.

20. Sixth, I turn to the evidence of Mr  R.   The  judge  was  in  my  view
    entitled to  reach  the  finding  she  did  in  respect  of  the  clear
    inconsistency as to who lived with  Mr  R.   There  was  a  very  clear
    inconsistency in the evidence and the judge took  the  view  that  this
    went to a core issue, namely the nature of the Appellant's  ability  to
    have conducted an intimate relationship with Mr R at  his  house.   The
    judge's view of this has to be seen in the context of the decision as a
    whole (as do all other elements of her findings and  reasons).   In  my
    view the reason provided in paragraph 42 was material to the core issue
    of the claimed intimate relationship.  As the judge herself says at the
    end of that paragraph, the question of whether Mr R lived alone or with
    a number of other people went to the ability of the  Appellant  to,  as
    she put it, be together privately at the house.

21. Seventh, it is true that the judge has not in terms rejected  the  rest
    of Mr R's evidence and  that  she  found  that  in  general  terms  his
    evidence was consistent with that of the Appellant in relation  to  the
    claimed  open  relationship.   However,  general  consistency  is   not
    necessarily sufficient to establish credibility.  Again, I come back to
    the importance of viewing the decision as a whole.   Numerous  material
    aspects of the Appellant's case have been rejected  by  the  judge  for
    reasons that were perfectly open to her.  It is quite  clear  that  she
    was rejecting the core elements of the Appellant's case,  and  this  of
    course would have included the evidence of the witnesses.  There is  no
    error in relation to her failure to specifically  state  that  she  was
    rejecting all aspects of Mr R's own evidence.

22. Eighth,  I  conclude  that  the  perversity  challenge  fails  by  some
    distance.  In paragraph 43  the  judge  deals  with  all  the  relevant
    evidence and provides sustainable  reasons  as  to  why  this  did  not
    significantly advance the Appellant's  case.   She  correctly  directed
    herself to the need to view all  of  the  supporting  evidence  in  the
    round.  She explains that the photographs did not  even  of  themselves
    show that the Appellant was gay and gives a perfectly  adequate  reason
    for why the Bart's NHS letter was also of no  particular  significance.
    Whether in respect of this documentary evidence or in relation  to  the
    evidence as a  whole,  it  simply  cannot  be  said  that  the  judge's
    findings, reasons and conclusions were perverse, having regard  to  the
    elevated threshold that applies to such challenges.

23. Ninth, in my view the summary of findings and conclusions  set  out  in
    paragraph 44 were all open to the judge.  This paragraph shows that she
    had directed herself correctly in law and  had  made  findings  on  the
    relevant core aspects of the Appellant's case.

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal therefore stands.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  any  material
errors of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore dismissed.



Signed                                  Date: 22 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date: 22 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

