
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/10568/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 8th August 2019                   |On 12th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   Mrs H M
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Jessica Pacey, promulgated on 18th July 2017, following a hearing
    at Birmingham on 26th June  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant claims to be a  citizen  of  Eritrea,  was  born  on  8th
    February 1988, and is a female.  She appealed against a decision of the
    Respondent rejecting her claim  for  protection  and  for  humanitarian
    protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395, in  a  decision  dated
    21st September 2016.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim  is  that  she  is  a  Pentecostal
    Christian.  However,  she  did  not  attend  church  in  Eritrea.   She
    practised her religion from home.  She left Eritrea for Sudan  in  2002
    where she was raped.  She remained in Sudan until 2008.  She  travelled
    to Turkey and from there to Greece.  She has a daughter.  The  daughter
    was born to her in Greece on 1st September 2009 as a result of the rape
    in Sudan.  She did claim asylum in  Greece  on  31st  July  2007.   She
    arrived in the UK on 29th October 2015.  She  claimed  asylum  in  this
    country on 29th October 2015.  She married in  2010  but  separated  in
    2012.  She cannot now return to her home country because she would  not
    be able to practise her religion and would be imprisoned or killed.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The first question before the  judge  was  whether  the  Appellant  was
    indeed, as she claimed, a national of Eritrea.  For  reasons  that  the
    judge gave at length, she  concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    citizen  of  Eritrea.   The  judge  then  proceeded  to  consider   the
    Appellant's particular aspects of her claim and rejected those outright
    as well.  She simply did not find the Appellant to be credible  in  any
    respect or form.  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application raise a number of issues, alleging that  the
    decision of the judge fell into error for failing to consider the claim
    in a fair and proportionate manner.  However, permission to appeal  was
    only granted on the question that the judge did not make a  finding  on
    Article 8 issues.  The decision of the judge was silent on the issue of
    paragraph 276ADE.  It was silent on Article 8.  This  was  despite  the
    judge noting (at paragraph 3) that the ECHR was part of the Appellant's
    case.  The skeleton argument from the Appellant's side also raised  the
    point.   The  Records  of  Proceedings  noted  that   the   Appellant's
    representative relied upon the skeleton argument.  Therefore, the judge
    ought to have made some reference to  Article  8  considerations.   For
    this reason, on 14th January 2019 permission to appeal was  granted  by
    the Tribunal.

Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me on 8th August 2019, Mr  Howard,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, relied upon the one ground, namely  Ground  5,
    of the Appellant's Grounds of Appeal, explaining that this was a ground
    upon which permission had been granted, in that there was no  reference
    at all by the judge to Article  8  considerations,  although  this  was
    pleaded and relied upon in the skeleton argument.   The  Appellant  had
    children.  Moreover, the Appellant's bundle (at page 26) refers to  the
    private life in the UK of the children.

 7. Secondly, although  permission  had  only  been  granted  on  this  one
    particular  ground,  Mr  Howard  also  wished   to   state   that   the
    determination of nationality was wrongly arrived at  because  there  is
    well established case law that one begins with first  looking  at  what
    the nationality of the parents was, because if  the  parents  could  be
    shown to be Eritrean, then it would follow that the children would also
    be Eritrean.   In  this  case  the  Appellant's  nationality  had  only
    assessed on the basis of what she said.

 8. At this point, Mr McVeety interrupted to say that  permission  had  not
    been granted  on  the  nationality  question,  and  had  in  fact  been
    expressly rejected by the Tribunal granting permission,  and  that  the
    only focus of this appeal should be on the issue of Article 8.

 9. For his part, therefore, Mr McVeety dealt with the question of  Article
    8.  He said that there is no doubt that Article 8 was not referred  to.
    However, the error  was  not  material.   This  is  because  the  judge
    comprehensively rejected everything that the Appellant said  about  her
    claim (see paragraphs 30 to 50).

10. Second, although it is said that the Appellant's bundle itself referred
    to Article 8 considerations (at page  26),  nevertheless  there  is  no
    evidence here of what interests fell to be jeopardised if the Appellant
    was removed.  There are no letters  from  the  children's  schools,  no
    reference to potential risk  upon  return  to  their  country,  and  no
    further evidence about why it would be disproportionate to  expect  the
    children to accompany their Appellant mother upon her removal from this
    country.

11. Third, although it is said that there was a reference to  the  skeleton
    argument, which did  include  mention  of  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    rights, all this states is that "there will be significant  obstacles",
    if the Appellant is returned to "Eritrea".  Given that the  claim  that
    the Appellant was a national of Eritrea, to which  she  feared  return,
    had been rejected, it could not be said that there would be significant
    obstacles to the Appellant being returned to Eritrea.

12. In reply, Mr Howard submitted that the Appellant's daughter was 6 years
    old at the time of the hearing back in June 2017.  She was now 9  years
    of age.  There had since been the birth of a second child, who was just
    over 2 years of age.  These matters do now need further  consideration.
    The Article  8  claim  would  be  a  tenable  one  to  raise  in  these
    circumstances.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.  Notwithstanding Mr Howard's submissions to persuade me,  I
    find that, although there is an error in the judge not referring to the
    Article 8 issues, it is not a material error.  The judge states earlier
    on in the determination (paragraph 3) that, "she further  claimed  that
    the UK would be  in  breach  of  its  obligations  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights if she were returned to Eritrea".

14. However, it is for the Appellant to explain why this is the case.   The
    claim was simply not made out that removing the Appellant would  breach
    her Article 8 rights.  In this case, one assumes that these would be to
    "family and private life".  This is only an  assumption  that  one  can
    make because all that is said before the judge, as she makes clear  (at
    paragraph 3) is that removal from the UK "would be  in  breach  of  its
    obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights".  This could
    just as well be a breach of Articles 2 and 3.  In any event, the breach
    was alleged on the basis of her return to "Eritrea",  which  the  judge
    rejected, because the  judge  rejected  that  the  Appellant  was  from
    Eritrea as she claimed.

15. Second, the skeleton argument itself also only states that "there  will
    be significant obstacles" without setting out what these are.

16. Third, insofar as permission was granted before this  Tribunal  on  the
    question of Article 8, all that paragraph 5 of the  grounds  states  is
    that "the FtT Judge has failed to give reasoning as to why there  would
    not be very significant obstacles to  the  Appellant's  return  in  the
    light of his (sic) particular circumstances.  The FtT Judge has  failed
    to make findings under Article 8 of the ECHR" (see paragraph 5.1 of the
    grounds).  It is for the Appellant to  explain  exactly  what  findings
    need to be made in relation to Article 8.  Nothing appears to have been
    raised at all.  The very fact that  there  was  the  existence  of  the
    eldest child (because the youngest one had not been born then), at  the
    age of 6 years, did not automatically mean that removal of  the  parent
    would lead to the infringement of the Article 8 rights  of  the  child,
    given that it is well established that removal in such cases  would  be
    of the family unit as a whole.

17.  Finally,  as  against  that,  the  judge  does  give  very   extensive
    consideration to the nature of the claim and rejects it wholesale.  She
    explains how the Appellant had been  "singularly  inconsistent  in  her
    accounts" (paragraph 35).  She was inconsistent about her movements  in
    Greece (paragraph 36).  She claims that the older child  was  conceived
    as a result of her rape, but the judge stated that "this clearly cannot
    be so" given that the child's date of birth was 1st September 2009, but
    the Appellant had been in Greece in January 2007 (paragraph 37).

18. Thereafter, the Appellant claimed to have been confused in relation  to
    other details (see paragraphs 38 to 40)  but  the  judge  rejected  her
    explanations  in  this  regard.   The   Appellant   also   blamed   the
    interpreters (paragraph 42) but the judge was not  persuaded.   At  the
    hearing before the judge the Appellant's "lack of plausibility in  this
    claim was reinforced when in oral evidence  she  gave  two  conflicting
    statements ..." (paragraph 43).

19. The judge was not satisfied that the Appellant made a genuine effort to
    find her from the  Ethiopian  Embassy  whether  she  was  an  Ethiopian
    national or not (paragraph 50).




Notice of Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not amount to an  error  of
    law.  The decision shall stand.

21. An anonymity direction is made.

22. This appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th September 2019




