
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/10634/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 April 2019                 |On 30 April 2019                     |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     AR
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Rahman (counsel) instructed by Edward Alam &
                    Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. To preserve the  anonymity  order  deemed  necessary  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Brewer  promulgated  on  04/01/2019,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 15/02/1982 and is a national of Bangladesh.  On
23/09/2017 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Brewer ("the Judge") dismissed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 18/03/2019 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Dr
H H Storey granted permission to appeal stating

      It is arguable  that  the  Judge  did  not  fully  think  through  the
      implications of the positive findings made at para 24, 48, 49  and  55
      for his assessment of risk on return.  To  state  that  there  was  no
      evidence of any political motivation arguably overlooks that the first
      plaintiff on the criminal charge was  (said  to  be)  the  appellant's
      local rival Mr M Rahman.

The Hearing

6.(a) Mr Rahman, for the appellant, moved the grounds of appeal. He told  me
that the Judge's findings are not challenged, but this  appeal  is  directed
solely at the conclusion that the Judge reached. Mr Rahman told me that  the
Judge accepted that there are extant criminal charges against the  appellant
in Bangladesh, but concluded that those criminal charges are  not  political
in nature. He told me that that conclusion is unsafe and  that  the  Judge's
findings of fact should  have  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  criminal
charges are politically motivated because they are brought  by  a  specified
political rival. He told me that politically motivated criminal  charges  in
Bangladesh inevitably lead to persecution.

(b) Mr Rahman tendered two background reports  -  the  US  State  Department
report dated 23 March  2019  and  a  Human  Rights  Watch  Report  dated  22
December 2018. Neither of those reports were available to  the  Judge.  Each
of the reports has recently been prepared and speaks  to  the  situation  in
Bangladesh   since   the   elections   there   in   September   2018.   Both
representatives agreed that if I find that there  is  a  material  error  of
law, then I should consider those documents to see if I  can  substitute  my
own decision.

(c) Mr Rahman took me to [42] of the decision. He told me that  the  Judge's
findings there are based on assumption. In the sixth line of [42] the  Judge
says

      There is nothing in the papers to suggest political motivation for the
      case, nor that the appellant is specifically targeted.

He told me that the  Judge's  findings  indicated  the  contrary;  that  the
Judge's findings were clearly that this  is  a  politically  motivated  case
because the political opponent is named at [24]  of  the  decision,  and  at
[49] the  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant  was  injured  at  a  political
demonstration. He told me that the Judge's findings at  [24]  and  [49]  are
drawn from the third paragraph of the appellant's witness statement.

(d) Mr Rahman told me that the Judge's findings of fact  indicate  that  the
Judge accepts that the appellant has a political profile; he said  that  the
Judge should have gone on to accept that the charges which had been  brought
were politically motivated. He urged me to set the  decision  aside  and  to
substitute my own decision allowing the appellant's appeal.

7. For the respondent Mr Walker told me that the decision does  not  contain
errors of law. Told me  that  the  appellant's  appeal  had  been  dismissed
because the appellant was not found to be credible. He took me  to  [42]  of
the decision and told me that there the  Judge  makes  findings  which  were
clearly available to the Judge on the evidence presented.  He  urged  me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

8. At [24] of the decision  the  Judge  summarises  the  appellant's  asylum
claim, saying that the appellant was the  leader  of  the  student  wing  of
Chatra Dal, and his problems began in October 2013 when  a  criminal  charge
was filed against him.

9. The Judge makes findings of fact between  [47]  and  [57].  At  [48]  the
Judge finds that the appellant was the assistant general  secretary  of  the
Bangladesh Jatiyatabadi Chatra Dal in 2002. At [49]  the  Judge  finds  that
the  appellant  suffered  a  minor  injury  in  2006  during   a   political
demonstration, and at [55] the  Judge  finds  that  on  26  January  2016  a
criminal case was created in which the appellant was named as  the  accused,
even though the appellant has not been in Bangladesh since 2008.

10. The Judge's findings commence at [37]. Between [37] and [43]  the  Judge
considers the evidence. The grounds of appeal, and Mr Rahman's  submissions,
make it clear that there is  no  challenge  to  the  Judge's  findings.  The
challenge in this case is directed solely at the Judge's conclusion.

11.  In essence, the Judge finds that the appellant has been charged with  a
criminal offence but has an easily proved defence of alibi  because  he  has
been in the UK since 2008. At [58] the Judge finds that the criminal  charge
was brought in 2016 but there is no political motivation for that charge.

12. The background  materials  say  in  clear  and  unambiguous  terms  that
prosecutions on fabricated charges are  brought  for  political  reasons  in
Bangladesh. The Judge accepts that that between 2002 and 2006 the  appellant
had a history of involvement in student politics. The Judge finds  that  the
appellant has been in the UK since  2008,  but  that  in  January  2016  the
appellant's former political opponent was the complainer in  an  FIR  lodged
against the appellant.

13. The Judge properly takes account of the appellant's immigration  history
and consider section 8 of the Asylum & Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants
etc) Act 2004. The Judge considers all of the evidence before  finding  that
the appellant is not a credible witness. But  on  the  facts  as  the  Judge
finds them to be (relying on  Chiver  (10758))  the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant faces prosecution in Bangladesh.

14. The appellant's appeal was  heard  on  14  December  2018.  The  Judge's
decision was promulgated on 4 January 2019. General elections were  held  in
Bangladesh on 30 December 2018 to elect members of the Jatiya  Sangsad.  The
result was a landslide victory for the Awami League led  by  Sheikh  Hasina.
The  elections  were  marred  by  violence  and  claims  of  vote   rigging.
Opposition leader Kamal Hossain rejected the results, calling it  "farcical"
and demanding fresh elections to be held under  a  neutral  government.  The
Bangladesh Election Commission said  it  would  investigate  reported  vote-
rigging allegations from "across the country."

15. The background materials that have been  prepared  since  that  election
were not available to the Judge.  The  background  materials  indicate  that
fabricated charges for criminal prosecutions are used by  the  Awami  league
against the BNP in an attempt to reduce the number of  political  opponents.
The US State Department report  says  that  there  had  been  330,000  cases
issued against BNP members, including charges  brought  against  people  who
are out with Bangladesh, and even charges brought against  people  who  have
died.

16. The central question for the Judge was whether or  not  the  prosecution
of the appellant  is  politically  motivated.  The  Judge  gives  inadequate
reasons  for  finding  that  there  is  no  political   motivation.   Having
considered the appellant's overall  credibility  (a  finding  which  is  not
subject to challenge) the Judge concludes at [56]

      "There is no evidence of any political  motivation  for  the  criminal
charge"

17. The finding at [56] is not  properly  reasoned.  In  MK  (duty  to  give
reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was  held  that  (i)  It  was
axiomatic  that  a  determination  disclosed  clearly  the  reasons  for   a
tribunal's  decision.  (ii)  If  a  tribunal  found  oral  evidence  to   be
implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document to be  worth  no  weight
whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the  determination  and  for  such
findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness  was
not believed or that a document was  afforded  no  weight  was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

18. The Judge's decision does not contain  adequate  reasoning.  That  is  a
material error of law. I set the decision aside. I am  asked  to  substitute
my own decision




The Facts

19. I am asked to  preserve  the  Judge's  findings  of  fact.  The  central
findings of fact is that the appellant was involved in  politics  from  2002
to 2006. The appellant has been in the UK consistently since  2008,  and  in
January 2016 an FIR was lodged against the appellant by his  main  political
adversary. The appellant's main political  adversary  is  a  member  of  the
Awami league, who were returned to power in elections in December 2018.  The
Awami league have sought  to  consolidate  their  power  by  bringing  false
prosecutions against political opponents and have raise fabricated  criminal
proceedings against known BNP activists who are outwith Bangladesh.

Asylum

20. If the appellant faces non-politically motivated prosecution his  asylum
appeal cannot succeed. If  the  prosecution  is  politically  motivated  the
background materials indicate that he would be entitled to  asylum.  Between
the date of hearing and the date the  decision  was  promulgated  there  has
been a change in  circumstances;  the  determinative  question  is  probably
easier for me than was for the First-tier Tribunal.

21.  The  background   materials   indicate   that   politically   motivated
prosecutions are a weapon used by the Awami league to reduce the numbers  of
BNP members  and  supporters.  The  prosecution  that  the  appellant  faces
alleges a crime committed in 2013, yet the appellant  had  been  in  the  UK
since 2008. The US State  Department  report  and  the  Human  Rights  Watch
report produced earlier this year both say that since returning to power  in
December 2018 the Awami league has brought 330,000 prosecutions against  BNP
members, including several members who  have  not  been  in  Bangladesh  for
years.

22. The appellant's account is supported by  the  background  materials.  On
arrival in the Bangladesh the appellant faces arrest on a complaint  brought
by a political adversary. The nature of the complaint must be considered  in
the knowledge and it is not only brought by a political activist there,  but
that the gravamen of the charge libels criminal activity in Bangladesh  when
it was obvious that the appellant was in the UK.  The  realistic  conclusion
to draw is that the prosecution is politically motivated.

23. The current situation in Bangladesh must lead me to the conclusion  that
the  appellant  faces  a  politically  motivated  prosecution,   where   the
complainant is an  Awami  league  member  bringing  a  complaint  against  a
significant BNP member who has been out of the country for years;  there  is
a real risk that  the  appellant's  arrest  will  lead  to  treatment  which
crosses the threshold and becomes persecution.

24. Given these conclusions, I find that the Appellant  has  discharged  the
burden of proof to establish that he is a refugee. I come to the  conclusion
that the Appellant's removal would cause the United Kingdom to be in  breach
of its obligations under the 2006 Regulations.


Humanitarian protection

25. As I have found the appellant is a refugee, I  cannot  consider  whether
he qualifies for humanitarian protection.

26. Therefore, I  find  the  appellant  is  not  eligible  for  humanitarian
protection.

Human rights

Article 3

27. As I have found the appellant has established  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution, by analogy his claim engages article  3  of  the  Human  Rights
Convention because he  would  face  a  real  risk  of  torture,  inhuman  or
degrading treatment if he were returned to his country of origin.

Article 8

28.  Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that immigration  control  is  in
the public interest. In AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a  grant  of
leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  his
fluency in English, or the strength of his financial  resources.  In  Forman
(ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by   the
consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at  no
time been a financial burden on  the  state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is
likely to remain so indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these  factors  is
that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.

29. The appellant is single and has  no  dependents.  The  appellant  cannot
meet the requirements of appendix FM of the immigration rules.   Because  of
a combination of his age and the length of time the appellant  has  been  in
the  UK  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276
ADE(1)(i) to (v). To meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  the
appellant has to establish that there are very significant obstacles to  his
re-integration into Bangladeshi society.

30. I have found that the appellant cannot return to Bangladesh  because  he
establishes a well-founded fear of persecution for a  convention  reason.  I
have found that removal from the UK and return  to  Bangladesh  will  breach
the appellant's rights on article 3 ECHR grounds. No submissions  were  made
about article 8 ECHR, but as I find the appellant is a refugee  it  is  only
logical that I must find that there are very significant  obstacles  to  the
appellant's reintegration into Bangladeshi society. The appellant  therefore
meets the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) of the rules.



31. The appellant does not  claim  that  any  other  articles  of  the  1950
Convention are engaged.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  4  January  2019  is
tainted by material errors of law. I set it aside

I substitute my own decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds

The appeal is dismissed on Humanitarian Protection grounds

The appeal is allowed on article 3 & 8 ECHR grounds.






Signed
         Date: 24 April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

