








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10389/2017



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd November 2018                         |On 6th December 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                  Zahid [N]

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Shaw Counsel instructed by Cranbrook Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood   Senior Home Officer Presenting
Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Housego promulgated on the 22nd August 2018 whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant's protection claim on the grounds of
    asylum, humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 of  the  ECHR  and
    the appellant's human rights claim based on Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 1st October 2018. Thus the case appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

 4. Whilst the appellant had claimed asylum,  the  grounds  of  appeal  are
    concerned with the findings in respect  of  Article  8.  There  was  no
    challenge to the findings in respect of protection. Ms Shaw  on  behalf
    of the appellant accepted that the appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    concerned with Article 8 alone.

 5. The grounds raise the following issues: -

    a) The judge materially  erred  in  that  he  failed  to  consider  the
       appellant's Article 8 rights in the UK.

    b)  In considering whether insurmountable obstacles exist as defined in
       paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM) the judge failed to consider material
       evidence. which renders the findings of fact and decision flawed.

    c) The judge failed to consider  the  effect  of  the  removal  of  the
       appellant on his family who are British nationals.

    d) The grounds challenge the finding by the judge that the  appellant's
       status in the UK was precarious, on the basis that the appellant has
       had leave to be in the UK throughout and that  he  had  always  made
       applications in time to extend his leave.

 6. In paragraphs 10 and 11 of the grounds of appeal it  is  asserted  that
    the appellant's status in the United  Kingdom  is  not  precarious  and
    seeks to rely upon the case of Agyarko v SSHD [2017]  UKSC  11.  It  is
    suggested because the appellant has made applications for further leave
    his status in the UK was far from precarious. The  issue  has  recently
    been dealt with in the case of Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58 paragraph 44, in
    which Lord Wilson stated:-

         "44      The answer to the primary question posed  by  the  present
         appeal is therefore that everyone who, not being a UK  citizen,  is
         present in the UK and who has leave to reside here other than to do
         so indefinitely,  has  a  precarious  immigration  status  for  the
         purposes of section 117B(5)."

 7. The appellant did not have indefinite leave. The judge on the basis  of
    the guidance given was not in error by treating the appellant's  status
    as precarious for the purposes of Section 117B(5).

 8. The grounds challenge the judge's findings that there was and would  be
    no hostility to the appellant on account of his having married a  lady,
    who converted to Islam and his having failed to marry  according  to  a
    longstanding family engagement. The  finding  by  the  judge  that  the
    family would not face hostility on return is challenged  on  the  basis
    that there was evident hostility by the appellant's family in  Pakistan
    to his marriage.

 9. The grounds rely on the  fact  that  the  judge  at  paragraph  41  has
    accepted that the uncle of the appellant made an angry telephone  call,
    which  the  appellant's  spouse  answered.  Whilst  it  is  correct  to
    acknowledge that the judge has made a finding that that telephone  call
    was made, the judge in paragraph 45  has  concluded  that,  whilst  the
    uncle was angry at not being consulted about the appellant's  marriage,
    that was a long  way  from  presenting  a  risk  or  hostility  to  the
    appellant and his spouse otherwise. The judge has considered the nature
    of the telephone call and  has  made  findings  which  take  such  into
    account.

10. Further the judge noted that the appellant's  family  in  the  UK  were
    supporting the appellant and that,  although  the  appellant's  parents
    were dead, the appellant was on good terms with his siblings.

11. The judge also  noted  that  background  information  established  that
    whilst  former  Christian  men   marrying   Muslim   women   may   face
    discrimination and even hostility, the same did not apply to  Christian
    women converting to  Islam  and  marrying  Muslim  men.  There  was  no
    evidence of such women facing hostility or discrimination from  society
    in general.

12. In the circumstances the judge for the reasons set out in paragraph  45
    and paragraph 53.9 was entitled to conclude that there was no family or
    societal  hostility  or  none  of   significance.   Thereafter   having
    considered the facts the  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant and his spouse would have support in Pakistan  and  otherwise
    could settle in Pakistan. The judge was entitled to conclude  that  the
    appellant and his spouse could in any event relocate and the same would
    not be unduly harsh. The judge was entitle to come the conclusions that
    he did on the basis of the evidence.

13. The grounds of appeal also seek to argue the medical conditions of  the
    appellant's spouse. It is correct to say that the  judge  at  paragraph
    53.13 states that neither the appellant nor his spouse have any medical
    conditions. Thereafter the judge finds that there are no insurmountable
    obstacles to family  life  continuing  in  Pakistan,  a  factor  to  be
    considered under article 8  within  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under
    Section 117B.

14. There is in the documentation evidence that the spouse of the appellant
    had had a miscarriage some time previously and that she  was  suffering
    from anxiety and depression.

15. There is no evidence of any ongoing problems referred to with regard to
    the miscarriage.

16. With regard to the  depression  and  anxiety,  whilst  the  spouse  was
    receiving  prescription  medicines  and  there  is  reference  in   the
    documents to her having six one to one low level therapy sessions,  the
    depression and anxiety are triggered by the prospects of the  appellant
    being removed from the UK. No reference was made to any underlying long
    term or pre-existing condition.  The documents  further  refer  to  the
    spouse being referred for a more in-depth therapy session.

17. Whilst it has to be acknowledged that the judge has made  no  reference
    to the health conditions, the conditions have been brought about by the
    uncertainty of the appellant's position. One can  appreciate  the  fact
    that the spouse of the appellant is  concerned  about  the  immigration
    status of  the  appellant.  One  can  appreciate  that  those  concerns
    inevitably will lead to anxiety and depression.

18. There is however no evidence of long-term depression.

19. In the circumstances given the general background evidence  as  to  the
    availability of medical treatment in Pakistan, the conditions  referred
    would not come anywhere  near  constituting  insurmountable  obstacles.
    Whilst clearly adjustments would have to be made if the appellant  were
    returned to Pakistan and his spouse in order to  maintain  family  life
    had to travel to Pakistan to live with him, given that medical  support
    is available at a price in Pakistan, the conditions  described  by  the
    spouse can be helped by treatments in Pakistan itself.  The  conditions
    do not as such  constitute  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing in Pakistan.

20. Accordingly whilst it has to be acknowledged that the judge has  failed
    to refer to the  conditions,  that  failure  is  not  material  in  the
    circumstances and as such does not constitute a material error of  law.



21. There is accordingly no material error of law in the decision.

    Notice of Decision

22. I dismiss the appellant's appeal.

23. I do not make an anonymity direction








Signed

Date 30 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



