

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10178 /2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 August 2017                        |On 21 August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                   W k n s
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms A Seehra, of Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant challenges the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Scott-Baker dismissing his appeal  against  the  respondent's
         refusal on 14 September 2016 to grant him protection in the UK. The
         appeal was dismissed by way of a determination  promulgated  on  29
         November 2016 following a hearing at Taylor  House  on  26  October
         2016.


      2. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national of Sinhalese ethnicity  born
         on [ ] 1988 who arrived here with a  student  visa  on  24  January
         2011. His claim was that his father was suspected of assisting  the
         LTTE and in his absence (his father was said to be in the  UK)  the
         authorities had threatened to arrest the appellant.



      3.  The  grounds  make   numerous   complaints   about   the   judge's
         determination, which I shall deal with later on.  They  argue  that
         she misrepresented the facts,  made  flawed  credibility  findings,
         speculated  and  erred  in  her  assessment  of  risk  on   return.
         Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Allen  on  22  June
         2017.



      4. At the hearing on 14 August 2017,  I  heard  submissions  from  the
         parties. Ms Seehra relied on the grounds and argued that the  judge
         had been wrong to rely on  a  single  reference  to  the  appellant
         giving evidence to the LLRC whereas the entire thrust of  his  case
         was that he had not done so. She submitted that the respondent  had
         made a  mistake  in  her  decision  letter  about  the  appellant's
         father's reporting conditions but the judge had reproduced that  in
         her determination  which  meant  she  was  mistaken  about  certain
         aspects of the claim. She  argued  that  the  appellant's  mother's
         evidence of continuing interest in the appellant, his  brother  and
         his father was accepted when the latter's appeal was  heard.  Judge
         Scott-Baker had given no reasons for  departing  from  the  judge's
         findings at the time. She failed to refer correctly to the mother's
         evidence and had omitted parts of it in her consideration.



      5. Ms Seehra submitted that the judge's findings on the risk of return
         were limited and did not do  justice  to  the  appellant's  complex
         case. The arguments presented by Counsel at  the  hearing  had  not
         been properly addressed and there had been no engagement  with  the
         points highlighted in the skeleton argument. Given that  there  had
         been a previous acceptance of interest by the  authorities  in  the
         appellant's family, there should have been careful consideration of
         the claim and country guidance should have been properly applied.



      6. In response, Mr Armstrong submitted that the determination was well
         reasoned. The judge was entitled to refer to the representations of
         the appellant's representatives in which reference  to  him  giving
         evidence to the LLRC had been mentioned. There had been  no  letter
         stating that was a mistake by the solicitors. The complaints  about
         the evidence given in the appellant's  father's  appeal  were  just
         expressions of disagreement with the outcome of  this  appeal.  The
         judge noted that the appellant had been able  to  leave  Sri  Lanka
         using his own passport, that he plainly was not on a stop list  and
         that he waited five years to make an asylum application. The  judge
         found that no attempt had been made by the authorities to  issue  a
         warrant for the appellant's arrest despite his location being known
         to them. It was open to the judge  to  find  that  he  was  not  of
         interest and she was entitled to observe that  his  location  could
         have been traced through his college  registration.  The  appellant
         had no political profile either in Sri Lanka or in  the  UK.  There
         was no material error and the determination should stand.


      7. Ms Seehra replied. She stated that the appellant had used agents to
         leave the country. He had explained the delay in making  his  claim
         in his witness statement. The section  8  issue  was  addressed  at
         paragraphs 16-19 of the skeleton argument. The  appellant's  direct
         evidence was that he had not given evidence to the LLRC and id this
         was rejected, more reasons should have been given. The  appellant's
         family had been intimidated and harassed; that was his profile. The
         determination should be set aside and a fresh  decision  should  be
         made.



      8. At the conclusion of  the  hearing  I  reserved  my  determination.
         Thereafter I received a note from Ms Seehra to  say  that  she  had
         contacted  her  instructing  solicitors  who  confirmed  that   the
         reference in their representations to the appellant giving evidence
         to the LLRC had been a mistake.



         Findings and Conclusions




      9. The grounds are extremely lengthy and can be compared to a forensic
         dismemberment of the determination although taken as a whole it  is
         essentially the  appellant's  case  that  the  judge's  credibility
         findings and assessment of risk on return are flawed.


     10.  It  is  argued  that  the  judge  made  factual  errors   in   her
         determination. Paragraphs 35, 12 and 19 are singled out for  severe
         criticism. At paragraph 35 the judge referred to inconsistencies in
         the applicant's claim with regard to the giving of evidence to  the
         Lessons  Learned  and  Reconciliation  Commission  (LLRC).  It   is
         maintained that this was a factual error as the appellant had never
         made such a claim. The grounds fail  entirely  to  acknowledge  the
         representations made by the appellant's solicitors in which it  was
         maintained  that  he  had  given  such  evidence   (B2).   In   her
         submissions, Ms Seehra acknowledged this and submitted that all the
         papers were not before Counsel when the grounds were prepared.  She
         argued, nevertheless that as the appellant had  not  directly  made
         such a claim himself, the judge should not have  found  that  there
         was an inconsistency in his evidence. After the conclusion  of  the
         appeal hearing, she produced a note to say  that  her  instructions
         now were that the solicitors had made a mistake (although it is not
         explained how such an error occurred or why it  was  not  corrected
         earlier).



     11. I am not satisfied  that  the  judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
         appellant's  evidence  was  inconsistent  in  this   respect.   The
         representations made by  his  solicitors  were  presumably  on  his
         instructions and formed part of  the  evidence  before  the  judge.
         Given that Counsel was instructed by the same  representatives  and
         that this was  a  matter  highlighted  by  the  respondent  in  her
         decision letter, it cannot be argued that the author of the grounds
         was not privy to all the evidence. The  judge  would  have  had  no
         reason to suspect that the representations contained errors and the
         discrepancy being mentioned in the respondent's letter,  there  was
         no suggestion at that time that the inclusion of  that  information
         was an error. Nor was the judge under any obligation to  bring  the
         inconsistency to the appellant's attention at the hearing.  He  was
         represented by Counsel, the  discrepancy  was  highlighted  in  the
         respondent's decision letter, the evidence was available to all the
         parties and it was for the  appellant  to  resolve  the  discrepant
         information. I do not, therefore, find any merit whatsoever in this
         complaint. Moreover, the information now put forward by  Ms  Seehra
         was not before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and cannot now be used
         to argue that the judge erred in law.



     12. It is maintained that the judge also misrepresented the appellant's
         evidence (in paragraph 12) by stating that his  evidence  had  been
         that his father had not been placed on reporting conditions by  the
         authorities when in fact he had been. It is important to point  out
         at this stage that paragraphs 11-21 of the determination contain  a
         summary of the  way  in  which  the  respondent  has  set  out  the
         appellant's claim in the decision letter and the reasons given  for
         its rejection. This is made clear by the  judge  at  paragraph  11.
         Dealing then with the point about reporting conditions,  the  blame
         for any such confusion lies with the appellant and his  answers  at
         interview (at A4-5 he is  inconsistent  about  whether  there  were
         reporting conditions). It is relevant to point out,  however,  that
         the judge did not rely  on  this  inconsistency  as  a  reason  for
         dismissing the appeal. Indeed, apart from being set out as part  of
         the respondent's summary of the  appellant's  claim,  it  does  not
         feature elsewhere in the determination and  certainly  not  in  the
         judge's findings.






     13. The judge is criticised for failing to refer to the enquiries  made
         by the authorities of the appellant and his brother  (at  paragraph
         12 point 9). Again, as mentioned above, I would emphasise that this
         summary represents the respondent's take on the appellant's  claim.
         Further, whilst this may have been omitted from bullet point 9,  it
         is included at bullet point 6.



     14. It is maintained that the judge erred  with  respect  to  when  the
         appellant left Sri Lanka, that he did not leave in November 2009 as
         stated at paragraph 19 but in January 2011. Yet again, the judge is
         here setting out the respondent's summary of the appellant's claim.
         It is plain, however, from paragraphs 12 and 31, where the  correct
         date of departure is given, that the judge was aware  of  when  the
         appellant left Sri Lanka. The respondent's reference  to  2009  may
         have emanated from the date the passport was issued. This was  not,
         however, a finding by the judge and cannot be used to discredit her
         assessment of the claim.



     15.  Rather  than  the  judge  having  misrepresented  the  appellant's
         evidence, it would appear to me that the judge's determination  has
         been misrepresented. There is no merit at all in any  of  the  many
         points made in ground 1.



     16. The second ground takes issue with  the  judge's  approach  to  the
         determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Atreya who  allowed  the
         appellant's father's asylum appeal in June 2015. It  is  linked  to
         the third ground which focuses on the judge's assessment of risk on
         return. Much is made of the fact that the  appellant's  mother  had
         provided witness statements  for  that  appeal  in  which  she  had
         claimed that the authorities continued to show an interest  in  the
         family even after her husband had left in  2009.   In  fact,  Judge
         Atreya's findings and decision to allow the appeal focus largely on
         the medical evidence and the appellant's father's own account about
         the problems he faced. Judge  Atreya  noted  that  the  appellant's
         mother's evidence was "untested" and  that  "only  limited  weight"
         could be given to it.



     17. Reliance is placed on AA (Somalia) and AH (Iran)  [2007]  EWCA  Civ
         1040 for the proposition that a second judge should not depart from
         the findings of an earlier judge without good reason. Judge  Scott-
         Baker took note of the  earlier  determination.  It  does  not,  of
         course, relate to the appellant but to his father. She  noted  that
         the appellant's mother had provided  witness  statements  for  that
         appeal (at 27) but she noted that as  the  evidence  submitted  for
         that hearing had not been provided and limited details of the claim
         had been set out by Judge Atreya, she was unable to assess  whether
         the accounts given then and now were consistent.  Complaint is made
         to  the  absence  of  clear  findings  in  paragraph  23   of   her
         determination but that paragraph only confirms that  oral  evidence
         had been heard. It is unclear what the author of the grounds  means
         by this criticism.



     18. Judge Scott-Baker considered the appellant's mother's statements in
         detail at 27 and 32.  On  the  basis  of  the  evidence  summarised
         therein, the judge was entitled to note that  despite  the  threats
         made to arrest her son in 2007 (it is not clear whether the threats
         were in respect of appellant or his brother), no steps  were  taken
         to do so. The appellant's mother maintained that in 2010, 2014  and
         2015 the authorities came looking for her husband but there were no
         questions asked about the appellant but in 2016  they  asked  about
         both sons.



     19. The judge's assessment of risk on return is criticised  but  having
         considered the evidence, as set out above, the judge  was  entitled
         to note that despite apparently being interested in the appellant's
         father since 2007, no action had been taken by the  authorities  to
         arrest either of the sons in the ensuing years. She also took  note
         of the fact that the appellant was Singhalese and not  Tamil,  that
         he had been living in Colombo and had been able to  attend  college
         without any problems.  It was open to her to observe that he  could
         have been found through his college; indeed, he had been  found  in
         other administrative districts where he had lived. No  attempt  had
         ever been  made,  however,  to  arrest  him.  She  found  that  the
         appellant had no political profile as he had not been  involved  in
         politics either  in  Sri  Lanka  or  in  the  UK.  Essentially  the
         appellant is asking the Tribunal to accept him as a refugee  solely
         because his father had been of interest to the authorities  in  the
         past. Notwithstanding the successful  outcome  of  the  appellant's
         father's  appeal,  it  does  not  automatically  follow  that   the
         appellant would be at risk and for the reasons given by  the  judge
         (at 30-36) her conclusion that he  would  not  is  sustainable  and
         contains no errors of law.  Quite why  the  authorities  should  be
         interested in the appellant after all these years when they took no
         action against him when he was in Sri Lanka, is not  a  matter  the
         grounds  grapple  with  when  they  criticise  the   judge's   risk
         assessment.



     20. For all these reasons, therefore, I  conclude  that  there  are  no
         material errors in Judge Scott-Baker's determination such  that  it
         should be set aside.



     21. Decision


     22. The First-tier Tribunal made no errors of law and the  decision  to
         dismiss the appeal stands.



     23. Anonymity



     24. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.

    Signed



       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 18 August 2017


