
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10551/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 August 2019                    |On 5 September 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                    KSMM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Nadeem, legal representative, Kingswright
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge J L
    Bristow, promulgated on 7 May 2019. Permission to appeal was granted by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro on 10 June 2019.



Anonymity

   2. Such a direction has been made previously and  is  repeated  below  as
      this is a protection matter.

Background

 3. The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on  7  February  2018  as  a
    business visitor. On 12 August 2018, he applied for asylum.  The  basis
    of that claim was that  the  appellant  began  to  support  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood (MB) in 2011,  his  brothers  already  being  members.  The
    appellant demonstrated his support  of  MB  by  hanging  an  MB  banner
    outside of his home,  encouraging  others  to  join  and  attending  MB
    gatherings in  a  public  place.  During  2011,  the  appellant  became
    involved with an organisation supported by MB, called  the  Knights  or
    Future Warriors. The appellant and his family  members  began  to  have
    problems with the Egyptian authorities from late 2013 onwards which led
    to the death of his father; the detention of the appellant's nephew  as
    well as the detention and torture of the  appellant  during  2017.  The
    appellant avoided further problems after his release until he left  the
    country. Since arriving in the United Kingdom, the appellant  continued
    to support MB and took part in an anti-government  demonstration  on  1
    July 2018. He fears that he will be persecuted if he returns to Egypt.

 4. The asylum claim was refused by way of a letter dated 20  August  2018.
    The Secretary of State rejected the appellant's claimed involvement  as
    well as that of his family with MB because he failed to mention  it  in
    his screening interview. The respondent also considered the appellant's
    reasons for supporting MB were unclear and vague. It was  not  accepted
    that the Knights or Future Warriors were associated with MB owing to  a
    lack of evidence of this. There were  also  said  to  be  a  number  of
    inconsistencies within the appellant's account,  it  was  not  accepted
    that he would have been released from custody and  permitted  to  leave
    the country if he was of interest and it was said that he did not  know
    who the current leader of MB was.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  and  a
    witness Mr A  gave  evidence.  The  judge  considered  the  appellant's
    failure to mention  MB  during  his  screening  interview  damaged  the
    credibility of his subsequent account. He also made a number  of  other
    negative credibility findings. The judge found the documentary evidence
    of the deaths of the appellant's relatives to be unreliable and was not
    satisfied that the appellant was associated with MB or of  interest  to
    the Egyptian authorities. The appellant's Article 8 claim  outside  the
    Rules was also dismissed.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal made the following points:

       . the judge's treatment of the screening interview was unfair and did
         not take into consideration the appellant's  mental  state  at  the
         time.

       . it was unfair of the judge not to  raise  his  concerns  about  the
         death  certificates  during  the  hearing,  regarding   which   the
         appellant had a plausible explanation.

       . there was no explanation as to why the appellant was  not  accepted
         to be a victim of torture.

       . the appellant was not given an opportunity to explain  why  he  had
         not left Egypt promptly after his visa was issued.

       . the judge had not taken into consideration the complete  report  in
         the CPIN which indicated that some wanted persons had been able  to
         leave Egypt without incident.

       . the judge failed to consider the risk to the appellant as a  result
         of the very high-profile  activities  of  his  brother  in  Turkey,
         evidence of which was contained in the appellant's bundle.

       . the judge failed to deal with the appellant's sur place claim  when
         assessing risk on return.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 8. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 2 July  2018,  indicated
    that the appeal  was  opposed.   The  judge's  findings  were  robustly
    defended. Furthermore, it was argued that there was no sur place  claim
    before the judge.

The hearing

 9. Mr Nadeem was invited to make his submissions, however he  declined  to
    do so stating that he had nothing to add to the grounds.

10. Mr Melvin relied on the respondent's Rule 24 response.  Addressing  the
    appellant's lack of mention of his claimed affiliation with MB  at  the
    screening interview, he emphasised that this was not an interview which
    took place just after an arrest but where the  appellant  had  attended
    the screening centre some weeks after his arrival. The appellant was  a
    well-educated man who could articulate his  claim  and  the  judge  was
    entitled to look at this omission. Regarding the mention in the grounds
    of psychological issues which  were  said  to  affect  the  appellant's
    concentration, the judge had noted a lack of expert medical evidence of
    PTSD or other mental  health  issues.   In  relation  to  the  evidence
    regarding the appellant's nephew, Mr Melvin contended that at [40]  the
    judge did not make a credibility  finding  but  an  assessment  of  the
    evidence and it was difficult to see what turned on this point.

11. Mr Melvin addressed paragraph 5 of the grounds, arguing that the  judge
    had made detailed adverse findings regarding the death certificates  of
    the appellant's three brothers at [41-43] which were open  to  him.  He
    asked me to note that there was no expert evidence as to provenance  of
    those documents and  there  was  no  skeleton  argument,  statement  or
    submissions on file. He argued the judge was entitled to make  findings
    on the translated documents. A key issue noted by the  judge  was  that
    the appellant's mother had three different dates of birth in the  death
    certificates. Mr Melvin asked me to  note  that  the  grounds  did  not
    highlight a plausible explanation and there  was  no  evidence  of  any
    explanation being made to the judge.

12. Addressing paragraph 7 of the grounds, Mr Melvin submitted  that  there
    was no acceptance by the judge at [45] that the appellant was a  victim
    of torture as claimed. There was no expert evidence before  the  judge,
    who was entitled to find that the appellant was  depressed  because  he
    was separated from his family and that he was  suffering  from  medical
    problems.

13. Mr Melvin argued that  the  judge's  findings  at  [46]  regarding  the
    appellant's delay in departure  was  an  obvious  point  which  he  was
    entitled to rely on.

14. On paragraph 9 of the grounds, which criticised the judge's findings as
    to the ease with which the appellant left Egypt, Mr Melvin  noted  that
    this was a point also raised in the decision letter. He argued that the
    appellant had produced no evidence to support  his  assertion  that  he
    would be sought by the Egyptian authorities.

15. Taking paragraphs 10 and 11 of the grounds together, Mr  Melvin  argued
    that there was no evidence before the judge that the appellant's family
    in Egypt, extended or immediate, have recently suffered adversely  from
    his brother's criticism of the Egyptian authorities. He contended  that
    this spoke volumes about whether the appellant would be  at  risk.  Nor
    was there any harassment of the appellant's family  owing  to  his  own
    association  with  MB  or  claimed  sur  place  activities.  Mr  Melvin
    described the evidence of the appellant's claimed sur place  activities
    contained  at  pages  61-73  of  the  appellant's  bundle   as   merely
    photographs of the appellant and others standing outside of a branch of
    Waterstones with banners. He argued that,  otherwise,  there  was  very
    little in the evidence, no attendance  by  a  witness  of  any  of  the
    organisations the appellant claimed to be associated with  and  nothing
    in the evidence to show that Egyptians were being  monitored  by  their
    embassy. He asked me to uphold the judge's decision.

16. In response, Mr Nadeem  argued  that  the  presenting  officer  at  the
    hearing raised no concerns regarding the death certificates,  asked  no
    questions relating to  them  and  neither  had  the  judge  raised  any
    concerns. The documents had not been before the  respondent  previously
    and as such there were no concerns raised in the decision  letter.   He
    was not willing to indicate what the appellant's explanation might  be,
    as this was a matter of evidence. The error was  material  because  the
    death certificates went to the core  of  the  appellant's  claim,  that
    being that his brothers were killed owing to their  membership  of  MB.
    Similarly, the judge relied on the issue of the  appellant's  delay  in
    leaving Egypt but no questions had been asked regarding this and  there
    were no submissions on this point. The appellant had no opportunity  to
    explain. Mr Nadeem argued that a further material error was the judge's
    treatment of the appellant's ability to leave Egypt on his own passport
    which took no account of the objective evidence (the respondent's CPIN)
    to which he referred the judge during the  hearing.  Those  submissions
    were that the respondent was selective in the parts of the CPIN  relied
    upon and that not every opponent of the Egyptian regime was  put  on  a
    wanted list.

17. Mr Nadeem argued that the appellant's brother, M  departed  for  Turkey
    and had since become a high-profile opponent of the Egyptian government
    on his YouTube channel. Referring to  pages  8-64  of  the  appellant's
    second subjective bundle, Mr Nadeem argued that there was a failure  by
    the judge to state whether he accepted this evidence. Despite  claiming
    to have made detailed submissions to the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Nadeem
    was unable to point me to any evidence indicating  whether  the  family
    members of opponents are  targeted  by  the  Egyptian  authorities  nor
    whether the Egyptian  government  monitors  Egyptian  citizens  in  the
    diaspora.

18. Mr Nadeem turned to the medical evidence which  was  before  the  judge
    which consisted of a GP's patient summary. He  argued  that  the  judge
    accepted the appellant was suffering from depression on  the  basis  of
    this document, however this evidence  also  pointed  to  the  appellant
    being a victim of torture. Mr Nadeem added that a full  medical  report
    had not been obtained because the appellant was unwilling  to  continue
    to talk about the torture he suffered and had struggled with this  part
    of his evidence during the hearing.  The evidence  of  the  appellant's
    mental state mitigated his failure  to  mention  MB  at  his  screening
    interview.

19. Mr Melvin reiterated that the  judge  was  entitled  to  expect  expert
    evidence of scarring and PTSD. In response, Mr Nadeem  emphasised  that
    the summary described the appellant as a victim  of  torture  and  that
    there was no assessment of this.

20. I reserved my decision at the end of the hearing as I was  not  content
    to proceed without having had an opportunity to go through the evidence
    which was before the judge in more detail.  I  would  add  that  I  was
    unimpressed with Mr Nadeem's submissions and his unwillingness to point
    me to relevant evidence or indicate if it did not exist.

Decision on error of law

21. The first issue raised in the grounds was the judge's consideration  of
    the appellant's failure to mention MB during his  screening  interview.
    The grounds are correct in stating that there was no  consideration  of
    the appellant's mental state at the time. Having perused the  screening
    interview, it is correct to state that MB was not mentioned in response
    to the question 5.5, "Have you ever been involved with any... groups?",
    however, as the appellant says in his witness statement,  he  otherwise
    gave an overview of his claim which was consistent with what  he  later
    stated, including that he is against what is happening in his  country,
    against the Egyptian government and that he  was  detained  because  of
    those views.  The screening interview took place on  23  February  2018
    and the appellant was assessed by his GP  on  18  April  2018  with  no
    interpreter.  That  assessment  included  a  physical  examination  and
    discussion of the appellant's claim to be a  victim  of  torture.   The
    appellant was seen again in July 2018, with an interpreter and  gave  a
    detailed account of his ill-treatment and  his  mental  state.  He  was
    observed to by hyperventilating and clenching his fists as he recounted
    his  problems.  The  doctor  recorded  that  the   appellant   reported
    experiencing a number of mental health symptoms  since  2017  including
    low mood  and  trouble  concentrating  on  things.  He  was  prescribed
    citalopram.  This  appointment  predated  the  appellant's  substantive
    asylum interview and the negative decision and was at a time  when  the
    appellant did not know that he would be criticised for  not  mentioning
    MB  during  his  screening  interview.   Given  that  the   appellant's
    attendance at his GP was not prompted by any major development  in  his
    asylum case and the mental health concerns predate his  departure  from
    Egypt, the judge ought to have considered  this  evidence  in  deciding
    whether the appellant's credibility was damaged and materially erred in
    not doing so.

22. The judge identified concerns as to the reliability of the three  death
    certificates which were said to relate to the appellant's brothers. The
    judge makes what appear to be sustainable  points  at  [41-43]  of  the
    decision. Yet, at [41] he states that he 'can find no other  reasonable
    interpretation of  this  document..."  Mr  Nadeem  bordered  on  giving
    evidence in stating that neither the presenting officer nor  the  judge
    raised any concerns with the death  certificates  during  the  hearing,
    however Mr Melvin did not refer me to any  evidence  to  the  contrary.
    Accepting that the respondent made  no  criticism  of  these  documents
    during the hearing, it was  unfair  of  the  judge  to  reach  negative
    findings  without  giving  the  appellant  or  his  representative   an
    opportunity to address his concerns. I am told that the appellant would
    have been able to plausibly do so.

23. As to the issue of whether the appellant was a victim of  torture,  the
    judge rightly notes the absence of an expert report on the same.  After
    making many credibility findings, both positive and  negative  [34-44],
    the judge turned his attention to  the  medical  records,  noting  that
    reference was made to "severe torture." At [45],  the  judge  does  not
    assess that evidence and come to any conclusion about it either way. By
    contrast, the judge accepted the same GP records as evidence  that  the
    appellant suffered from depression.

24. The GP's notes record a detailed account of the torture  the  appellant
    stated he experienced, that account was given at his second appointment
    when he had access to  an  interpreter.  The  records  also  include  a
    diagram showing the sites of scarring, which was produced following the
    first appointment. In addition, the record of the doctor's  observation
    of the appellant's mental state when describing the  torture  paints  a
    vivid  picture.  While  a  detailed  medical  report  would  have  been
    preferable, the evidence of torture which  was  before  the  judge  was
    worthy of some assessment and that assessment ought to have taken place
    prior to the judge reaching his conclusion that the appellant's account
    of his arrest and his detention was not credible at [44].

25. The judge found against the appellant for not  leaving  Egypt  until  a
    month after his visa was issued [46]. This was a point not taken in the
    decision letter and I am told that this point  was  not  taken  by  the
    presenting officer or raised by the judge during the hearing. Mr Melvin
    did not submit otherwise. In these circumstances, it was unfair for the
    judge to deprive the appellant of the opportunity to address the delay.



26. The judge found that it was not credible that the appellant would  have
    been able to leave Egypt if he was of adverse interest and suspected of
    supporting MB. Mr Nadeem argued that extracts of the  Egypt  CPIN  were
    referred to the judge. I am satisfied that this material, which can  be
    found in the appellant's bundle of objective evidence, was  before  the
    judge. Of particular relevance is 8.1.1 - where it is stated  that  not
    all those wanted have their names placed on the  list  and  that  there
    have been "numerous cases where a person facing trial had  had  his  or
    her name removed from  the  list,  and  subsequently  travelled  abroad
    without incident."  The judge erred in reaching the conclusion he  did,
    without any assessment of the relevant parts of the CPIN.

27. The appellant submitted a second bundle of subjective material for  his
    appeal which consisted of his witness statement as well as over seventy
    pages of material mainly relating to the activities of his  brother,  M
    who lives in  Turkey.  At  this  juncture,  it  is  relevant  that  the
    appellant's  witness,  Mr  A,  confirmed  the  high  profile   of   the
    appellant's brother in MB and that there were photographs and  identity
    documents of the witness, the appellant's brother and evidence  of  the
    relationship between the appellant and his brother in  the  form  of  a
    family book. I could find no assessment by the judge  of  the  evidence
    relating to the appellant's brother or indeed of the evidence of  Mr  A
    regarding the brother. The  appellant's  fear  of  ill-treatment  as  a
    result of his brother's activities is a significant aspect of his  case
    and this is a clear error. Mr Nadeem did not point me to  any  evidence
    that the relatives of MB members could be at risk.  Given  the  anxious
    scrutiny which protection cases are due, I have examined  the  evidence
    for myself. There are references to tens of thousands of MB  supporters
    being detained at any one time and particularly at 6..2.21 of the  CPIN
    on the Muslim Brotherhood the following is recorded from a DFAT  report
    2017, "...those with family links to members face a lower risk of being
    targeted for arrest, but may be  subject  to  arbitrary  arrest  during
    wider security actions.  They  are  likely  to  come  under  the  close
    attention of authorities and be subject to surveillance and  monitoring
    of their  activities."  The  latter  quote  is  also  relevant  to  the
    appellant's claimed sur place activities, about  which  there  were  no
    findings by the judge. Given the background evidence of the risk to and
    surveillance of  relatives  of  MB  members,  the  judge's  failure  to
    consider whether the appellant would be at risk of persecution on  this
    basis or owing to his sur  place  activities,  evidence  of  which  was
    before the judge, also amounted to material errors of law.

28. In view of the foregoing material errors of law, the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is set aside in its entirety.

29. While mindful  of  Statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate  consideration  of  important  aspects  of  his
    protection claim at the First-tier Tribunal and it would be  unfair  to
    deprive him of such  consideration.  Therefore,  this  matter  will  be
    remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing,  with  no
    findings preserved.

30. Owing to the standard of  the  appellant's  representation  before  the
    Upper  Tribunal,  I  would  urge  Kingswright  Solicitors  to  consider
    instructing counsel to review the evidence, provide an opinion  and  to
    represent the appellant at the de novo hearing of this appeal.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Birmingham IAC, with a time estimate of  one  day  by  any  judge  except
First-tier Tribunal Judge Bristow.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 05 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

