
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/10928/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 01st May 2018                          |On 11th May 2018                    |
|                                          |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     GHH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. G. Lee, Counsel, instructed by Liberty & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cary, promulgated on  18  December  2017,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.


 2. As this is an asylum appeal I make an anonymity direction.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The material faxed after the hearing appears to have reached the  file
    on 1 December, before the judge signed his decision on the 4th: however
    nothing seems to have been done to bring it  to  his  attention  before
    that went out on the 18th.  It is wholly unsatisfactory for a judge  to
    be expected to deal with material filed after the hearing, which he has
    neither invited nor had an opportunity  to  consider.   However,  since
    this was the factual situation in at least one of the cases in  E  &  R
    [2004] EWCA  Civ  49,  arguably  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  have  an
    opportunity to consider what should be done in such circumstances,  and
    permission is granted on this point only."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Error of Law


 5. I was referred by both representatives to the case of SD (treatment  of
    post-hearing evidence) Russia [2008] UKAIT 00037.  The headnote states:


    "In the rare case where an immigration judge, prior to the promulgation
    of a determination,  receives  a  submission  of  late  evidence,  then
    consideration must first be given to the principles in Ladd v  Marshall
    [1954] 1 WLR 1489.  Under those, a tribunal should not  normally  admit
    fresh evidence unless it could not have been previously  obtained  with
    due diligence for  use  at  the  trial,  would  probably  have  had  an
    important influence on the result and  was  apparently  credible.   If,
    applying that test, the judge was satisfied there was a risk of serious
    injustice because of something which had gone wrong at the  hearing  or
    this was evidence that had been overlooked, then it was  likely  to  be
    material.  In those circumstances,  it  will  be  necessary  either  to
    reconvene the hearing or to obtain the written submissions of the other
    side in relation to the matters included in the late submission."


 6.  However,  I  find  that  the  circumstances   of   this   appeal   are
    distinguishable from SD.   SD considers  circumstances  where  a  judge
    receives a submission of late evidence.  In those circumstances he  has
    then to consider the principles in Ladd v Marshall.


 7. The chronology of this appeal is as follows.  The hearing took place on
    24 November 2017.  Mr. Lee referred to the note of the hearing produced
    by Ms Revill who represented the Appellant in the First-tier  Tribunal.
    In the post-hearing conference the Appellant produced some untranslated
    documents.  Ms Revill instructed the  Appellant's  solicitors  to  have
    them translated in order to establish if they were  of  any  relevance.
    If they were, they could be sent to the Judge.  On 1 December 2017  the
    translated  documents  were  sent  to  the  Tribunal,  marked  for  the
    attention of Judge Cary, and marked as extremely urgent.


 8. The decision was prepared on 4 December 2017 but  was  not  promulgated
    until 18 December 2017.  Where this appeal is distinguishable  from  SD
    is that it does not appear that the documents sent to the Tribunal on 1
    December 2017 were ever sent to Judge Cary.  Having  been  received  by
    the Tribunal by fax on 1 December 2017, they  were  received  prior  to
    Judge Cary writing his decision, albeit by only a matter of three days.
     They were  received  seventeen  days  prior  to  that  decision  being
    promulgated.  During this period they were not sent to Judge Cary.


 9. I find therefore that  there  was  no  judicial  consideration  of  the
    principles in Ladd v  Marshall  as  the  evidence  received  after  the
    hearing was not sent to the Judge and he was in ignorance that  it  had
    ever been provided.  As submitted by Mr. Clarke, it is  not  ideal  for
    evidence  to  be  submitted  after  a  hearing.   He  referred  to  the
    directions which stated that all evidence  to  be  relied  on  must  be
    provided five days in advance of the hearing.  However,  this  evidence
    was provided to the Tribunal while the Judge still had to determine the
    appeal.  It is established in caselaw that a judge is still  seized  of
    the matter until the determination is promulgated.


10. Had the judge received these documents  prior  to  the  preparation  or
    promulgation of his decision, he would  have  been  in  a  position  to
    decide whether it was necessary to reconvene the hearing  in  order  to
    consider this further evidence.  This did not happen.  Over  two  weeks
    elapsed between the submission of the evidence and the promulgation  of
    the decision.  I find, as submitted by  Mr.  Lee,  that  there  was  no
    "turning of the judicial mind" to this material prior  to  promulgation
    of the decision.  This  appeal  is  not  brought  against  the  Judge's
    decision not to admit late evidence, but is brought due to the systemic
    failure which resulted in there being no judicial consideration of  the
    late evidence.  Consequently I find that the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal was not made on the totality of the evidence which was  within
    the Tribunal's possession.  This is not the Judge's fault, but  I  find
    that this procedural irregularity has resulted in a material  error  of
    law.


11. It is clear that  the  documents  are  relevant  and  material  to  the
    Appellant's appeal.  Document GH7 goes to the findings  at  [38].   The
    Judge found that there was no evidence that there was  ever  a  strike,
    and further that the  Appellant  had  produced  no  evidence  that  the
    company actually existed.  The  document  provided  at  GH7  names  the
    company and states the date of the strike.  At [34] and [36] the  Judge
    addressed the issue of the three men who had founded the Lao Dong  Viet
    association, see [10] of the Appellant's witness statement.  At  GH3(i)
    there is a document which refers to the founder of the Lao  Dong  Viet,
    the same name as  the  Appellant  gave.   Further,  they  are  publicly
    available documents from news websites, not documents produced for  the
    purposes of the appeal.


12. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In the circumstances, given the procedural nature
    of the error, and the extent of the fact-finding  necessary  to  enable
    this appeal to be remade, having regard to the overriding objective,  I
    find that it is appropriate  to  remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.






Notice of Decision


13. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.


14. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


15. The appeal is not to be heard by Judge Cary.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
   Date 10 May 2018



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

