
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10259/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 27th May 2021 via Teams       |On the 21st June 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                XP (Albania)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R. Jesurum, Counsel, instructed by Central
                    Chambers Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.


The documents that I was referred to were primarily the  grounds  of  appeal
to the Upper Tribunal and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
contents of which I have recorded.


The order made is described at the end of these reasons.


The parties said  this  about  the  process:  they  were  content  that  the
proceedings had been conducted fairly.


 1. In a decision promulgated on  11  December  2019,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Chana dismissed an appeal of the appellant brought under  section
    82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  against  a
    decision of the respondent dated 1 October 2019  to  refuse  his  fresh
    claim for asylum.  The appellant now appeals against that decision with
    the permission of Upper Tribunal Judge Finch.  The appellant claimed to
    be at risk from a blood feud in Albania.

 2. The primary ground of appeal is that it was procedurally unfair for the
    judge to refuse an application for an adjournment made at the outset of
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant had recently
    changed  solicitors,  and  his  then  new  representatives  sought   an
    adjournment to obtain an expert report addressing the circumstances  of
    his claimed blood feud in Albania.  The judge  refused.   She  said  at
    [22] that the appellant had been in the country since 2014,  and  there
    had been sufficient time, once he had attained the age of majority, "to
    ensure  proper  representation".   There  was   sufficient   background
    evidence in EH (blood feuds) Albania CG  [2012]  UKUT  00348  (IAC)  to
    decide the case without an expert report, she held.

 3. It was common ground at the hearing before me that the judge erred when
    refusing the adjournment request. Very fairly, Mr Walker accepted  that
    the  reasons  given  by  the  judge,  namely  that  the  appellant  had
    sufficient time  to  obtain  an  expert  report,  could  not  withstand
    scrutiny, in light of the fact he had changed solicitors on 28  October
    2019, only three weeks before the hearing before the judge, which  took
    place on 22 November 2019.

 4. That was an appropriate concession to make. As set out in  the  grounds
    of appeal, the judge applied a test of reasonableness to  the  question
    of whether an adjournment was necessary, rather than  focusing  on  the
    question of whether the  appellant  could  receive  a  fair  trial.  In
    Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC), it was held:

         "Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, it
         is important to recognise that the question for the Upper  Tribunal
         is not whether the FtT acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be
         applied is that of fairness:  was  there  any  deprivation  of  the
         affected party's right to a fair hearing? See  SH  (Afghanistan)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

 5. While the judge purported to  consider  the  question  of  fairness  by
    reference to EH (Albania), she did not engage with the extent to  which
    a bespoke expert report could provide the appellant - and the  tribunal
    - with more assistance than a country guidance case of some nine  years
    vintage.  That is not to say that  all  adjournment  requests  in  such
    circumstances should be granted.  However, in order to give  sufficient
    reasons for refusing an adjournment request to obtain an expert report,
    at least some reasoned analysis would be required to  demonstrate  that
    why an  expert  report  would  add  nothing  to  any  country  guidance
    authorities available to the tribunal.  This the judge failed to do.

 6. It follows that the hearing  before  the  judge  was  unfair,  and  the
    decision must be set aside, with no findings of fact preserved.

 7. There are two further  grounds  of  appeal,  relating  to  the  judge's
    reliance on her  own  subjective  views  of  the  plausibility  of  the
    appellant's case, and a general failure to give sufficient reasons.  In
    light of my findings, and the common  ground,  concerning  the  judge's
    approach to  the  adjournment  application,  it  is  not  necessary  to
    consider those grounds.

 8. I set aside the decision of  Judge  Chana  with  no  findings  of  fact
    preserved.  As the appellant has been deprived of a fair  hearing,  the
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh  by  a
    different judge.

 9. Although Judge Chana did not make an order  for  anonymity,  given  the
    appellant's appeal against the refusal of his fresh asylum claim is yet
    to be finally determined, I consider that an  order  for  anonymity  is
    appropriate.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

The decision of Judge Chana involved the making of an error of law.

I set aside the decision of Judge Chana with no findings of fact  preserved.
 The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
different judge.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Stephen H Smith                       Date 28 May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


