
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10602/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 February 2019             |On 25 February 2019             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ADEBAYO [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Jafar, Counsel (Direct access)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant (The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department)
         appealed with permission granted by Deputy  Upper  Tribunal   Judge
         Saffer on 22 January 2019 against the decision and reasons of First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese who  had  dismissed  the  Respondent's
         protection appeal but had allowed the Respondent's Article  8  ECHR
         family life appeal. The decision and reasons was promulgated on  26
         November 2018.

    2.     The Respondent is a national of Nigeria, born on  6  June  1980.
         His full immigration history is set out at  [4]  to  [6]  of  Judge
         Abebrese's determination.  He  was  an  overstayer  from  2013  who
         resorted to the use of false documents and who  claimed  asylum  on
         spurious grounds on 31 January 2018 just as  he  was  about  to  be
         removed from the United Kingdom.   There was no challenge to  Judge
         Abebrese's decision to dismiss that spurious protection appeal.

    3.     The Respondent had also relied on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  Judge
         Abebrese dismissed the private life  element  of  the  appeal,  but
         allowed the family life element on the basis  of  the  Respondent's
         relationship with his 11 year old son.  The son has ILR  and  lives
         with his mother.  The Respondent saw his  son  once  a  week.   The
         judge found that the son was a "qualifying  child"  within  section
         117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
         amended) and that it would not be reasonable for the son  to  leave
         the United Kingdom.  It should be pointed out immediately  that  it
         was obvious that the son was not removable and there  was  no  need
         for  him  to  leave  the   United   Kingdom   identified   in   the
         determination.

    4.     Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department because in summary it was  considered  arguable
         that the judge had erred by treating the son as a qualifying  child
         without referring to any supporting evidence.




    Submissions

    5.     Ms Cunha for the  Appellant  submitted  that  the  decision  and
         reasons could not stand.  Ms Cunha relied on the  grounds  and  the
         grant.  No evidence had been identified to support the finding that
         the son was a qualifying child.  The Appellant had been absent from
         his son's life for some seven years.  The public  interest  in  the
         Appellant's removal had not been sufficiently considered.   In  any
         event the son did not have to leave the United Kingdom as he  lived
         with his mother.  The basis for the finding of  exceptionality  had
         not been reasoned, all of which  were  material  misdirections.  KO
         (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC  53  had  not  been  followed.   The  child's
         situation was that he was not going anywhere.  The  onwards  appeal
         should be allowed.  It was appropriate for the appeal to be reheard
         in the First-tier Tribunal.

    6.     Mr  Jafar  for  the  Respondent  took  great  exception  to  the
         submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of State for  the  Home
         Department.  He  contended  that  they  far  exceeded  the  grounds
         submitted and the terms of the grant.   He  declined  to  make  any
         further submissions, although when pressed  by  tribunal  contended
         that the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  should  seek
         leave to amend the grounds.  He declined  the  opportunity  for  an
         adjournment if he felt disadvantaged.  He then  submitted  that  it
         was not reasonable for the child to go to Nigeria and  the  child's
         length of residence made the child a qualifying  child  within  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended),  section
         117B(6).  He  then  returned  to  his  initial  position  that  the
         tribunal in effect had no jurisdiction because the submissions made
         fell outside the terms of the grant.  He then left the hearing.

    7.     In reply, Ms Cunha submitted that the grounds were apt to  cover
         her submissions, as material  misdirection  in  law  had  been  the
         substance of the application and had been granted.  The grounds had
         contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  findings  were  not
         supported by any relevant evidence identified.




    Material error of law finding

    8.     The tribunal accepts the submissions of Ms Cunha.  Mr Jafar  had
         not served any rule 24 notice indicating the  basis  on  which  the
         appeal was resisted, no was there any skeleton argument.  While the
         Secretary of State for the Home Department's grounds of appeal  may
         be categorised as less than ideal, Ms Cunha's development  of  them
         did not involve any novel points of law or any  other  point  which
         was not obvious from examination of the determination.   It  was  a
         fact that the judge did not state how he had arrived at the child's
         qualifying length  of  residence.   Some  leeway  was  appropriate,
         especially as Ms Cunha had not settled the grounds and  stepped  in
         at the last moment.  In the tribunal's view, Mr Jafar was not being
         asked to meet a new case and his approach  was  of  no  assistance.
         Some judges might consider Mr Jafar's attitude petulant as well  as
         disappointing in an  experienced  practitioner.   The  tribunal  is
         satisfied that it has jurisdiction and that it was fair and just to
         the Respondent to proceed.

    9.     This was an appeal at first instance which  the  Respondent  had
         unwisely sought to complicate by persisting with a wholly  spurious
         asylum claim, which the First-tier Tribunal Judge had to examine in
         detail.  The judge had no hesitation in  finding  that  the  asylum
         claim was fabricated,  which  is  a  serious  matter.   As  already
         indicated, there has been no attempt to challenge the dismissal  of
         the asylum claim.

    10.    That claim, apart from wasting the tribunal's time, was  perhaps
         an unfortunate distraction from what the judge perceived  to  be  a
         potentially  strong  Article  8  ECHR  claim,  notwithstanding  the
         Respondent's past deceit and dishonesty: see, e.g., [4] and [5]  of
         the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  and   the   fabrication
         finding.

    11.    When the judge came to explain  his  Article  8  ECHR  decision,
         however, there are several difficulties, of which the first is  the
         failure to identify the evidence to  support  the  judge's  finding
         that the Respondent's  son  was  a  "qualifying"  child.  There  is
         nothing which shows the child's length of residence in  the  United
         Kingdom, such as to lead to qualification.  Section  117B(6)  makes
         no express reference to children holding ILR.  Such  children  must
         plainly hold some nationality other than British, so have potential
         freedom to move without difficulty to their country of nationality,
         as with  other  non-British  Citizen  children.   Their  length  of
         residence is surely an essential finding to be  made.   These  were
         issues for the judge to notice in some form but he did not  in  any
         clear manner.

    12.    As noted above, the Respondent's son lives with his mother.  The
         son holds ILR and so  cannot  be  compelled  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom.  His ILR would  have  to  be  revoked  and  there  was  no
         suggestion that the Secretary of State for the Home Department  has
         any such plans. Nor has the son's mother indicated any wish for her
         son  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,  with  or  without  her.  The
         Respondent has  limited  access  rights.   There  was  no  evidence
         identified in the determination that the Respondent  is  supporting
         his son financially, which is not surprising as the Respondent  has
         never had the right to work in the United Kingdom.  The judge erred
         by considering the reasonableness of the son's departure  from  the
         United Kingdom without seeing that the son is not leaving.  This on
         its face was a fundamental oversight.

    13.    The question was whether the  Respondent's  removal  would  have
         such serious consequences for his  son  as  to  make  such  removal
         disproportionate.  The judge stated  that  there  were  exceptional
         circumstances (see [22] of  the  determination)  but  exactly  what
         those exceptional circumstances were are not identified.  There  is
         no link to any finding beyond the fact stated that  the  Respondent
         sees his son every weekend when he takes him to football.  How that
         is different from the activities of other similar  parents  who  no
         longer live with their child was  not  explained,  let  alone  what
         makes the activity exceptional.

    14.    Mr Jafar, while insisting that he would not participate  in  the
         hearing, made mention of  "accepted  facts"  concerning  the  child
         (briefly, special needs), however Mr Jafar  failed  to  assist  the
         tribunal by pointing out any finding of fact to such effect in  the
         determination.  The tribunal could see none.

    15.    In the tribunal's view, the judge's proportionality analysis  as
         recited   in   the   determination   proceeded   without   adequate
         explanation.  It was not shown why the child  was  "qualifying"  on
         the basis of residence.  As the child was not facing removal, since
         the child's presence was not determined by or  dependent  upon  the
         father's presence, the issue of "reasonableness" (see KO  (Nigeria)
         [2018] UKSC 53) did not obviously arise.  The  public  interest  in
         the Respondent's removal attracts substantial weight,  particularly
         where there has been an abusive immigration history with  a  recent
         finding of a fabricated  claim.   The  decision  and  reasons  must
         accordingly be set aside for material error of law.

    16.     Ms  Cunha's  submission  that  the  appeal  should   in   those
         circumstances be reheard is plainly right,  as  there  are  further
         findings of fact needed before the Article 8  ECHR  proportionality
         balancing exercise can be conducted.




    DECISION

    The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of  a  material
    error on a point of law. The  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  is  set
    aside, and the original appeal must be heard again before another First-
    tier Tribunal Judge apart from First-tier Tribunal Ababrese.




    Signed Dated 21 February 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


