
                                    [pic]


    Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10299/2019




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




    |Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st December 2020                 |On 8th March 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |




                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between


                                     PA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Mr S Kumar, Agent for Optimus Law
    For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS

An anonymity direction was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT").   As
this a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made.  Unless
and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, PA  is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or
any member of his family.  This direction  applies  amongst  others  to  all
parties. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.





Introduction


 1. The hearing before me on 1st December 2020 took the form  of  a  remote
    hearing  using  skype  for  business.  Neither  party  objected.    The
    appellant did not join,  but  I  was  assured  by  Mr  Kumar  that  the
    appellant is aware of the hearing and is content  for  the  hearing  to
    proceed in his absence. I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre. I
    was addressed by the representatives in the same way as  I  would  have
    been  if  the  parties  had  attended  the  hearing  together.   I  was
    satisfied: that no party has been  prejudiced;  and  that,  insofar  as
    there has been any restriction on a right or interest, it is  justified
    as necessary and proportionate.  I was satisfied that  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice and in accordance with the overriding objective to
    proceed with a remote hearing because  of  the  present  need  to  take
    precautions against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I  was
    satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure the matter is  dealt  with
    fairly and justly in a way that is proportionate to the  importance  of
    the case, the complexity of the issues that arise, and the  anticipated
    costs and resources of the parties.  At the end of the  hearing  I  was
    satisfied that both parties had been able to participate fully  in  the
    proceedings.


Background


 2. The appellant claims that he was born in Iran on 14th April  1994.   He
    claims that he left Iran in 2000, aged 6, and travelled to  Iraq  where
    he stayed for 17 years. He claims he left Iraq in April 2017 and having
    travelled through a number of countries, arrived in the UK on  24th  of
    August 2017. On that day he was encountered in the back of a lorry, and
    he claimed asylum. The claim was refused by the respondent for  reasons
    set out in a decision dated 11 October 2019.


 3. The respondent noted the claim made by the appellant that he  was  born
    in Iran, and that he claims to be a national of Iran.   The  respondent
    noted the appellant had  initially  claimed  that  his  father  was  an
    Iranian national and his  mother  was  an  Iraqi  national,  but  later
    claimed that both his parents were born in Iran.  The appellant claimed
    that in 2000 following the death of  his  father,  the  appellant,  his
    mother and his maternal uncle went to live in Sulaymaniyah, in the IKR.
     The appellant left Iraq in June 2017 and arrived in the United Kingdom
    on 24 August 2017.  On  arrival,  he  made  a  claim  for  asylum.  The
    respondent concluded that there was insufficient  evidence  to  support
    the appellant's claim to be a national of Iran and concluded  that  the
    appellant is a national of Iraq.   The  respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity and that he was born  and  raised  in
    the Islamic faith. The respondent did not accept the  appellant  has  a
    genuine subjective fear on return to Iraq and in any  event,  concluded
    that the fear is not objectively well-founded, and the appellant  would
    not be at risk upon return to Iraq. The appellant's appeal against that
    decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe ("Judge Broe")
    for reasons set out in a decision dated 20th January 2020.


 4. The background to the appellant's claim for international protection is
    set out in paragraphs  [9]  to  [14]  of  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Broe.   The appellant gave evidence at  the  hearing  of
    his appeal and his evidence is set out at paragraphs [19]  to  [22]  of
    the decision.  Judge Broe's findings and conclusions  are  set  out  at
    paragraphs [25] to [40] of  the  decision.   There  were  plainly  very
    significant concerns as to the credibility of the  appellant,  and  the
    way in which his claim for international protection had evolved.  Judge
    Roe referred in particular to a witness statement dated 3rd July  2018,
    that appeared to have been signed by the  appellant  and  sent  to  the
    respondent by the appellant's former representatives in support of  the
    claim for international protection.  He noted the statement  bears  the
    appellant's correct name and date of birth. He noted the  statement  is
    also endorsed with confirmation from an interpreter that the content of
    the statement has  been  truthfully  and  faithfully  interpreted  from
    English  to  Kurdish  Sorani  to  the  appellant,  and  the   appellant
    understood the content.


 5. Judge Broe noted the appellant had at the outset of an  interview  with
    the respondent on 25th July 2019 said that the  statement  provided  to
    the respondent on 3rd July 2018 was not correct, and he did not wish to
    rely on the content of that statement.  It was nevertheless relevant to
    an  assessment  of  the  appellant's  credibility.   Having   carefully
    considered the account relied upon by the appellant when he arrived  in
    the UK and the account advanced by the appellant at the hearing of  his
    appeal, Judge  Broe  was  satisfied  that  the  account  given  by  the
    appellant to  his  previous  solicitors,  is  irreconcilable  with  the
    account he gave at interview, and upon which he now relies. He said:


         "33. ... I note that at his screening interview he made no  mention
         of his involvement  with  the  secret  group.  I  acknowledge  that
         claimants are not expected to give a full account  at  that  stage,
         but I note that he said he could not  return  to  Iraq  because  he
         would be threatened by his stepfather. The answers he gave  at  the
         screening interview were more consistent with the account  he  gave
         to his first solicitors than the account on which he now relies.


         34.  What is clear is that the two accounts cannot  both  be  true.
         The appellant has lied in one or both of them. He  is  prepared  to
         lie in an attempt to remain in this country and I find him to  lack
         any credibility. I do not accept his account of the events which he
         says caused him to leave Iraq. I do not accept his  claim  to  have
         abandoned Islam. He has not satisfied me even to the  low  standard
         of proof applicable that he has a genuine fear of persecution.


         35.  I am bound to note that even if I  had  been  considering  his
         latest account in isolation I would not have  found  him  credible.
         There are many inconsistencies but in particular I have  noted  the
         different accounts of how he suffered the injury to his hand. I  do
         not find it credible that [D] would  have  invited  the  son  of  a
         mullah to the meetings in such a casual way or that  the  appellant
         would have invited [S]. There would have been enormous risk to both
         of them.


         36.  He will be returned to Iraq as a failed asylum  seeker.  As  a
         Kurd he will be returned to the IKR. It is against that  background
         that I have considered what risk if any he may face on return."


 6. Judge Broe went on to consider the country guidance set out  in  SMO  &
    Others (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG  [2019]  UKUT  00400
    (IAC).  He noted that, in headnote [10], the Upper  Tribunal  confirmed
    that once at the IKR border, an individual would  normally  be  granted
    entry to the territory. Subject to security screening, and  registering
    presence with the local Mukhtar, an individual would  be  permitted  to
    enter and reside in the  IKR  with  no  further  legal  impediments  or
    requirements. There  are  no  sponsorship  requirements  for  entry  or
    residence in any of the three IKR Governorates for Kurds.  At paragraph
    [38] of his decision, Judge Boe concluded that he  was  satisfied  that
    the appellant can safely be returned to the IKR.





The appeal before me


 7. The  appellant  advanced  eight  grounds  of  appeal  set  out  in  the
    'permission to appeal grounds' dated 27th April  2020.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 23rd May 2020.  She
    noted:


         "First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe failed to address and decide  on  a
         core issue in dispute between the parties, which  was  whether  the
         appellant was an Iraqi or Iranian national. This was a  fundamental
         question which should have underpinned  any  decision  on  risk  on
         return to the IKR.


         The judge also gave insufficient consideration to  the  explanation
         given by the appellant about the contents of his first statement in
         circumstances in which he had instructed new solicitors even before
         he attended his substantive asylum interview.


         The other grounds may be arguable in the context of the two grounds
         referred to above."


 8. Before me, Mr Kumar confirmed that he does not pursue grounds 4  and  8
    of the grounds of appeal.  He confirmed grounds  1,  2  and  3  of  the
    grounds of appeal can be taken together and  all  concern  the  judge's
    consideration of the statement made by the  appellant  dated  3rd  July
    2018 and the extent to which the Judge had regard to  the  matters  set
    out in that witness statement when considering the credibility  of  the
    appellant and the core of his account.  He confirmed grounds  5  and  7
    can be taken together.  He  submits  Judge  Broe  should  have  made  a
    finding as to  the  appellant's  nationality  and  where  he  would  be
    returned to, and that  finding  should  have  informed  the  Tribunal's
    consideration as to whether the appellant would be at risk upon  return
    to the IKR.  Finally, the appellant continues to rely  upon  ground  6,
    and claims Judge Broe failed to  apply  the  country  guidance  to  the
    appellant's particular circumstances having regard to  the  appellant's
    characteristics,  such  as  his  Kurdish  ethnicity,  when  considering
    whether internal relocation would be unduly harsh.


 9. Mr Kumar adopted the further submissions settled by Optimus  Law  dated
    24th July 2020.  The further submissions have been filed and served  in
    accordance with directions previously  made  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Kopieczek dated 6th July 2020.  The appellant claims  he  will  not  be
    able to return to Iraq.  He maintains that he  was  born  in  Iran  and
    moved to Iraq after his mother remarried when  the  appellant  was  six
    years old.  He claims he has never had any formal papers or an Iraqi ID
    or CSID, that would allow him to be returned to Iraq, or to live in the
    IKR. The appellant claims that he has no living relatives in  Iraq  who
    could assist him in redocumenting himself and to obtain  a  replacement
    CSID from within the UK or in Iraq.   The appellant claims that in  any
    event, even if he is an Iraqi national, Judge Broe failed  to  consider
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate.


10. Mr Kumar submits that in  essence,  the  appellant  claims  Judge  Broe
    failed to have adequate regard to the appellant's nationality, and that
    has infected the Judge's consideration of the appeal  and  analysis  of
    the risk upon return.   Mr  Kumar  submits  the  appellant  has  always
    claimed to be a national of Iran and his  nationality  will  inevitably
    have an impact upon his ability to  live  in  Iran  or  Iraq,  and  the
    assessment of the risk upon return.


11. In reply, Mrs Aboni relied upon the respondent's  written  reply  dated
    14th July 2020.  The respondent submits Judge Broe was entitled to have
    regard to the  witness  statement  that  his  previous  representatives
    submitted  in  support  of  the  appellant's  claim  for  international
    protection, and to make an adverse credibility finding based  upon  the
    fundamental differences in the accounts by the appellant. The judge was
    entitled to have regard to the internal inconsistencies and to  include
    the appellant is not a credible witness. The respondent draws attention
    to paragraphs [1] and [18] of the decision in which Judge Broe  records
    that it was agreed that  the  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Iraq.  The
    respondent submits it was conceded at the hearing that the appellant is
    in fact an Iraqi citizen and, as Judge Broe noted  at  paragraph  [18],
    the appellant will be returned to the  IKR.   Mrs  Aboni  submits  that
    although Judge Broe did not consider whether the appellant could obtain
    the necessary ID documents, that is immaterial.  It was  conceded  that
    the appellant was an Iraqi national and she submits, it was open to the
    Judge to conclude that the  appellant  can  return  to  the  IKR.   The
    appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity and he had said in his interview that
    he had lived in Sulaymaniyah between 2006 and  2017.   Judge  Broe  had
    rejected the core  of  the  appellant's  account.  No  particular  risk
    factors were identified, and it was open to Judge Broe to  dismiss  the
    appeal for the reasons set out in the decision.


Discussion


12. It is convenient to begin my consideration of this appeal by  reference
    to the seventh ground of appeal which is  that  Judge  Broe  failed  to
    address whether the appellant is an Iraqi or an Iranian national, since
    the appellant's nationality underpins any decision as to the risk  upon
    return.


13. The respondent considered the  appellant's  nationality  at  paragraphs
    [31] to [36] of her decision.  She noted the appellant's claim that  he
    was born in Fajr hospital in Marivan, Iran, and his claim to have  left
    Iran at the age of six.  She noted the appellant had previously claimed
    in his witness statement of 3rd July 2018 that his father was  born  in
    Iran and his mother was born in Iraq, but later,  when  interviewed  on
    25th July 2019, claimed  both  his  parents  were  born  in  Iran.   At
    paragraph [36] of her  decision  the  respondent  said  that  there  is
    insufficient evidence to support the appellant's claim to be a national
    of Iran.  At paragraph [92] of her decision, the  respondent  confirmed
    that it is not accepted that the appellant is a national of Iran.   The
    respondent considered the appellant's claim that he had lived  in  Iraq
    for 17 years without registration.  The respondent said:


         "93. ... When asked about your status [in Iraq] you stated that you
         were never registered in Iraq (AIR Q28-29).  You  stated  that  you
         worked as a window manufacturer in Iraq (SCR Q1.14). You were asked
         how you were able to live and work in Iraq  if  you  did  not  have
         status  there.  You  stated  that  because  you  were   with   your
         stepfather, you did not attend formal places and because you  spoke
         Kurdish no one asked you for any ID (AIR Q32).  It is not plausible
         that you were able to attend an Islamic school  and  work  in  Iraq
         without any form of Iraqi  ID.  This  is  supported  by  background
         information that states that ID documents are required in  Iraq  to
         move around the country and access services  including  registering
         at a school, opening a bank account, obtaining medical treatment or
         obtaining employment...."


14. At paragraph [97] of her decision the  respondent  concluded  that  the
    appellant is a national of Iraq. The respondent went on to address  the
    appellant's fear that he will be killed by his stepfather on return  to
    Iraq.  At paragraph [100 at page 23 of 38], the respondent stated:


         "As it has been established above, you are from Sulemaniyah. Taking
         the above into consideration, you will be returned to Erbil ..."


15.  I accept, as the respondent submits, that at paragraphs [1]  and  [18]
    of his decision, Judge Broe records that at the hearing of  the  appeal
    it was agreed that the appellant is an Iraqi national and that he  will
    be returned to the IKR.  At paragraph [1] of his decision,  Judge  Broe
    said:


         "... It is agreed that he is a citizen of Iraq ..."


     At paragraph [18] he said:


         "at the hearing it was agreed  that  the  appellant  was  an  Iraqi
         national of Kurdish ethnic origin who had been born and raised as a
         Sunni Muslim.  He would be returned to the IKR."


16. The appellant was represented at the hearing of his appeal before Judge
    Broe.  He does not claim in his  grounds  of  appeal  that  Judge  Broe
    erroneously proceeds  on  the  premise  that  it  is  agreed  that  the
    appellant is a citizen of Iraq, or that no such concession was made  on
    behalf of the appellant at the hearing of  his  appeal.   At  paragraph
    [11] of the appellant's grounds of appeal it is said  that  Judge  Broe
    ".. Has not made a finding on whether the appellant is  a  national  of
    Iran or not given that the RFRL and the SSHD's  argument  is  that  the
    appellant is not an Iranian, but the appellant's position  is  that  he
    is.".  It having been conceded that the appellant is a national of Iraq
    and that he will be returned to the IKR, Judge Broe was not required to
    make a finding as to whether the appellant is a national  of  Iran.  It
    had been conceded and was  not  an  issue,  that  the  appellant  is  a
    national of Iraq.  I referred Mr Kumar to the concession that had  been
    made on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the  appellant  is  an  Iraqi
    national, and invited him to draw my attention to anything  before  the
    Tribunal capable of establishing that no such concession had been made.
    He was unable to say anything about that  concession  and  he  accepted
    that there is nothing before me to undermine what is said by Judge Broe
    at paragraphs [1] and [18] of the decision.


17. Mr Kumar submits that in any event, the appellant has always maintained
    that he had no ID documents in Iraq and the First-tier Tribunal  should
    therefore have carried  out  a  careful  analysis  as  to  whether  the
    appellant would be able to acquire the  necessary  documents  within  a
    reasonable time.  Mr Kumar submits the appellant would simply be unable
    to obtain the relevant documents because individuals  are  required  to
    establish  an  entitlement  to  ID  documents  that  proceeds  upon   a
    patriarchal assessment based on male lineage.


18. In SMO & Others (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG, the  Upper
    Tribunal confirmed that in the light of the Court of Appeal's  judgment
    in HF (Iraq) and Others v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1276, an international protection claim cannot  succeed
    by reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence  of  a
    current or expired Iraqi passport or a Laissez passer, if the  Tribunal
    finds that the person's return is not currently feasible on account  of
    a lack of any of those documents.  The simple fact that  the  appellant
    does not have an Iraqi passport is therefore insufficient to  establish
    that he is entitled to international protection.


19. In SMO & Others (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG, the  Upper
    Tribunal confirmed (headnote 20) that  there  are  now  regular  direct
    flights from the UK to the Iraqi Kurdish Region and returns might be to
    Baghdad or to that region.  It is for the respondent to  state  whether
    she intends to remove to Baghdad, Erbil or Sulaymaniyah.  Here, as  set
    out in the respondent's decision and  in  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Broe, the respondent proposes to return the appellant to
    Erbil in the IKR.


20. I do however accept that Judge Broe failed to  consider  and  make  any
    findings as to whether the appellant has a CSID (or INID) or  would  be
    able to obtain one within a reasonable  time  frame.   As  the  country
    guidance establishes, a CSID (or INID) is necessary for  an  individual
    in order to live and travel within Iraq without encountering  treatment
    or conditions which are contrary to Article 3 ECHR.


21. Furthermore, the First-tier  Tribunal  was  required  to  consider  the
    circumstances that the appellant will find himself in, upon  return  to
    the IKR.  Although it is clear that Judge Broe rejected the appellant's
    account of the events which he says  caused  him  to  leave  Iraq,  and
    rejected his claim that he has  abandoned Islam,  there  are  no  clear
    findings in the  decision  as  to  whether  it  is  accepted  that  the
    appellant's father was killed, his mother died in 2005, or  as  to  the
    family connections that the appellant has in the  IKR,  including  with
    his maternal grandparents and uncle.  Although the  appellant  here  is
    returning to his home area in the Sulaymaniyah Governorate and  so  the
    question of internal relocation does not arise, the connections that he
    has to the IKR are all matters that are relevant to  the  support  that
    will be available to the appellant upon return to the IKR. In  headnote
    [27] of the country guidance set out in SMO &  Others  (Article  15(c);
    identity documents) Iraq CG, the Upper Tribunal noted  that  for  Kurds
    without the assistance of family in the IKR, the accommodation  options
    are limited and in headnote [28] noted that an individual  cannot  work
    without a CSID or INID.


22. In my judgement the judge's failure to address the issue of whether the
    appellant will be able to obtain a CSID (or INID) within  a  reasonable
    time and his failure to consider whether the appellant  has  family  in
    the IKR or elsewhere in Iraq from whom he may receive some  support  is
    material to the assessment of the risk on return. It follows that in my
    judgement, the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe  is  vitiated
    by a material error of law and must be set aside. In the  circumstances
    I do not need to consider  the  remaining  grounds  of  appeal.  It  is
    sufficient to say that although the appellant seeks to distance himself
    from his earlier statement dated 3rd July 2018 sent to  the  respondent
    by his previous representatives, it was undoubtedly open to  the  judge
    to have regard to the content of that statement, and the  circumstances
    in which it had been made and sent to the respondent, when  considering
    the overall credibility of the account of events  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant.


23. As to disposal, I have decided that it is  appropriate  to  remit  this
    appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal, having considered paragraph 7.2
    of the Senior President's Practice Statement of  25th  September  2012.
    In my view, in determining the appeal, the nature  and  extent  of  any
    judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.   Given  the  issues
    that arise in this appeal and in particular the ambiguity as to whether
    the appellant concedes  that  he  is  a  national  of  Iraq,  the  most
    appropriate course is for the decision to be set aside with no findings
    preserved.


24. The parties will be advised of the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


25. The appeal is allowed and the decision of FtT Judge Broe is set aside.


26. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh  hearing  of  the  appeal
    with no findings preserved.


27. I make an anonymity direction.


    V. Mandalia                         Date     22nd February 2021


    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia






