
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10425/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd March 2019                            |On 3rd April 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     AD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Khan of Counsel instructed by Aman Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  Judge  Brookfield  (the
    judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 4th December
    2018.

 2. The Appellant is an Iranian citizen born 22nd June 1992.   He  made  an
    asylum and human rights application in the UK on 27th January 2016.  He
    feared persecution and ill-treatment if returned to Iran because he  is
    of Kurdish ethnicity and he had been recruited in  Iran  to  carry  out
    KDPI activities.  He distributed leaflets between June  2014  and  27th
    September 2015 when he left Iran.  He had joined the KDPI in the UK.

 3. The application was refused on 3rd October 2017 and the appeal heard by
    the FtT on 21st May 2018 and 26th November 2018.

 4. The judge found, as had been  accepted  by  the  Respondent,  that  the
    Appellant is an Iranian national of Kurdish ethnicity.  The judge found
    that the Appellant was not a genuine supporter or member of  the  KDPI.
    Sur place activities undertaken in the UK would not  be  known  to  the
    Iranian authorities, and the Appellant would be returned to Iran  as  a
    failed asylum seeker with no political or other  profile.   The  appeal
    was dismissed on all grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 5. Four Grounds of Appeal were relied upon.  Ground 1  contends  that  the
    judge erred in failing to have regard to objective evidence.  Reference
    was made to paragraph 11(iv) in which the judge found  the  Appellant's
    account of his recruitment  to  the  KDP  to  be  neither  reliable  or
    credible.  The judge did not find  it  credible  that  the  KDPI  would
    recruit any supporter or member  in  Iran  without  thoroughly  vetting
    them.  The Appellant relied upon the Respondent's  Country  Information
    and Guidance Version 2.0 published July 2016 and  referred  to  section
    8.2 and submitted that there was no evidence that the  KDPI  thoroughly
    vets new people, but relies  upon  pre-existing  members  to  recommend
    people who are reliable.

 6.  The  Appellant  contended  that  the  same  applied  to  the   judge's
    conclusions at paragraph 11(v) in which the judge found that it was not
    credible that the Appellant would be made aware of  the  identities  of
    three supporters or members of the KDPI within a short time of  meeting
    one of these members.

 7. The Appellant referred to paragraph 11(xxiii) in which the judge  found
    it was incredible that an individual said to be "in  charge  of  spies"
    for the KDPI would store and hand over bundles of leaflets at his place
    of employment, to supporters such as the Appellant.  It  was  submitted
    that the judge had erred by not taking into account that there  was  no
    objective evidence which states that members of the KDPI are restricted
    to only one role within the party or how the KDPI's spies operate.

 8. Ground 2 contends the judge erred in law by making a misdirection as to
    the evidence.  At paragraph 11(viii) the judge found that  the  failure
    by the Iranian authorities to detain the Appellant's family members, in
    the absence of the Appellant, was inconsistent with objective evidence.
     It was submitted that this was wrong in law, as the objective evidence
    indicated that family members were sometimes detained, not always.

 9. It was submitted that the judge erred at paragraph 11(xii)  by  finding
    the Appellant failed to mention in  his  witness  statement  dated  4th
    August 2017 that he had been fingerprinted in France.  It was submitted
    that the judge was wrong in law  to  suggest  that  the  Appellant  was
    trying to conceal details of his journey to the UK.  It  was  explained
    that the purpose of that statement was only to outline the reasons  why
    the Appellant was claiming  asylum,  and  the  statement  was  made  in
    response to the Preliminary Information Questionnaire provided  by  the
    Respondent, and the Appellant was not asked to provide details  of  his
    journey to the UK at that time.

10. Ground 3 contends that the judge erred in law by failing to follow  the
    principles in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.  At paragraph 11(xxx) the judge
    found that the Appellant could delete his  Facebook  account  or  posts
    which contain anti-Iranian regime material.  It was submitted that  the
    judge was wrong in law because this would involve the Appellant  taking
    steps to hide his own views and he could not be expected to  behave  in
    that way to avoid a risk of being persecuted.

11. Ground 4 makes reference to the country guidance decision  HB  Iran  CG
    [2018] UKUT 430 (IAC) which was promulgated on 12th December 2018.   It
    was accepted that this decision was promulgated after the FtT  decision
    was promulgated on 4th December 2018 but it was argued that  this  case
    was authority for the proposition that simply on the findings  made  by
    the judge, that the Appellant is an  Iranian  Kurd  and  has  posts  on
    Facebook that are anti-regime, his appeal ought  to  be  allowed.   The
    country guidance decision although promulgated after the FtT  decision,
    relied upon evidence  that  was  in  existence  up  to  May  2018,  and
    therefore that evidence existed at the date of the FtT hearing.

Permission to Appeal

12. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  Andrew  in  the  following
    terms;

         "2.  I am satisfied that in view of the guidance in HB (Kurds) Iran
             CG [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC) in view of the judge's findings the
             Appellant may be at risk on return to Iran".

13. Following the grant of  permission  the  Respondent  did  not  lodge  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  Directions were  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

14. At the oral hearing before me Miss Khan relied and  expanded  upon  the
    grounds contained within the application for permission to appeal.   Mr
    Tan argued that the FtT had not materially erred in law.

Ground 1

15. I do not accept that the judge  disregarded  background  evidence  when
    reaching the conclusions contained at paragraph 11(iv)  and  (v).   The
    CIG published in July 2016, referred to in the Grounds  of  Appeal,  at
    paragraph 8.2.1 which is at B75 of the  Appellant's  bundle,  indicates
    that a person who wants to become a KDPI Party member must  go  through
    two months of training in the party's training centre in  KRI.   During
    these two months aspirants are being taught about the  party  programme
    and ideology and they would also receive practical  military  training.
    They would receive physical training.

16. It is explained that the process of recruitment of new members in  Iran
    is that potential recruits are watched  by  the  party  members  for  a
    while.  If a person is assessed  to  be  a  qualified  and  trustworthy
    candidate, he will be approached by the party member watching  him  and
    asked if he is interested in  joining  the  party.   If  the  candidate
    accepts the invitation and the party finds it necessary he will be sent
    to KRI to receive training.  The profile of recruits is that  the  KDPI
    focuses  on  recruitment  of  young  people,  particularly   university
    students and educated men and women.

17. The judge did not find the Appellant's account credible that he  met  a
    KDPI member in June 2004 and in the  same  month  was  delivering  KDPI
    leaflets.  The judge found the Appellant's own evidence  suggested  the
    KDPI had very limited time to vet him before he was allowed  to  assist
    in their activities.  In my view the judge was entitled  to  find  that
    the Appellant's account was not reliable or credible, and did not  fail
    to take into account background evidence when reaching that conclusion.

18. I find that the same applies to the conclusions reached by the judge at
    paragraph 11(v) in  which  the  judge  found  it  incredible  that  the
    Appellant was  made  aware  of  the  identities  of  three  members  or
    supporters  of  the  KDPI  within  a  very  short  period   after   his
    introduction.

19. The judge found this was not credible, as the  Appellant's  loyalty  to
    the KDPI could not be  adequately  assessed  within  the  timeframe  he
    describes in meeting the KDPI members.  In my view this was  a  finding
    open to the judge to make, and is in line with the background  evidence
    referred to in the CIG of July 2016, relied upon by the Appellant.

20. With reference to paragraph 11(xxiii) it is contended that there is  no
    background evidence to state that members of the KDPI are restricted to
    any role within the party.  The judge does not find that  KDPI  members
    are restricted to one role within the party.  It is contended there  is
    no background evidence as to how the KDPI's spies operate and  that  is
    not disputed.  The judge did not find it credible  that  an  individual
    said to be in charge of  spies  for  the  KDP  would  keep  bundles  of
    leaflets that would incriminate him, at his  place  of  business.   The
    judge considered the evidence in the round and this was a finding  open
    to make on that evidence.

Ground 2

21. I find no error of law disclosed.  The complaint is that the judge  had
    made a finding inconsistent with objective evidence.  I will  refer  to
    that evidence as background evidence.

22. The evidence in question is the CIG published in July 2016  at  section
    11.1.1.  The judge has quoted from that section and has not stated that
    family members would always be detained in the absence of the  suspect.
    The judge  specifically  makes  reference  to  the  authorities  "would
    interrogate the family members and sometimes detain them  for  a  while
    and use torture to make them  confess  about  the  whereabouts  of  the
    wanted person".  I do not find that there is a misdirection as  to  the
    evidence.

23. With reference to paragraph 11(xii) the judge did note the  failure  by
    the Appellant to mention being fingerprinted in France in his statement
    dated 4th August 2017.  It  is  correct  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    mention this.  It is claimed that the judge was wrong in law to  do  so
    because the witness statement was made in response to  the  Preliminary
    Information Questionnaire and the Appellant was not  asked  to  provide
    details of his journey.  I do not find the judge was wrong in law.  The
    Appellant specifically mentioned his journey to the UK at paragraph  13
    of the witness statement, in which he described leaving  Iran  on  25th
    September 2015 with the help of an agent and he made his way to the  UK
    arriving on 27th January 2016.  Therefore, the Appellant did  refer  to
    his journey in his witness statement, and the  judge  was  entitled  to
    note that he had failed to record being fingerprinted.

Ground 3

24. I do not find that the judge erred in law  in  failing  to  follow  the
    principles in HJ (Iran).  This is because the judge made a finding that
    the Appellant is not  a  genuine  supporter  or  member  of  the  KDPI.
    Therefore, the Appellant in deleting his Facebook posts  would  not  be
    taking steps to hide his own views, because the judge  has  found  that
    those views are not genuinely held.  The  Appellant  is  therefore  not
    being asked to hide genuine views in order to avoid prosecution.

Ground 4

25. The judge cannot be criticised for failing to follow  country  guidance
    that had not been published.  I do not find that findings made  by  the
    judge would put the Appellant  at  risk,  having  considered  the  risk
    categories in HB Iran CG.  That guidance confirms that  Kurds  in  Iran
    face discrimination but such discrimination is not in general at such a
    level as to amount to persecution  or  Article  3  ill-treatment.   The
    Iranian authorities regard Kurds with suspicion and they are reasonably
    likely to be subjected  to  heightened  scrutiny  on  return  to  Iran.
    However, the mere fact of Kurdish ethnicity, without a valid  passport,
    even if combined with legal exit, does not create a risk of persecution
    or Article 3 ill-treatment.

26. Kurdish ethnicity is a factor of particular significance when assessing
    risks.  One of the relevant factors is a period of residence in the KRI
    which is not the case with  the  Appellant.   Another  risk  factor  is
    whether the Appellant was  involved  in  Kurdish  political  groups  or
    activity and the  judge  found  that  not  to  be  the  case  with  the
    Appellant.  Low level political activity such as possession of leaflets
    or supporting Kurdish rights involves a risk of persecution.   However,
    the judge has  made  specific  findings  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    involved with the KDPI in Iran, he has joined the KDPI  in  the  UK  to
    enhance his asylum claim and he is not  a  genuine  KDPI  supporter  or
    member.  The judge found that  the  Appellant's  sur  place  activities
    would not be known to the Iranian authorities and gave adequate reasons
    for this finding.

27. In conclusion, I find that the judge has comprehensively considered the
    Appellant's account, has not made any findings which could be described
    as perverse or irrational, and has considered  all  material  evidence.
    The judge has made findings which were open to make on the evidence and
    given adequate reasons for those findings.

28. The grounds upon which permission to appeal  was  granted,  disclose  a
    disagreement with the conclusions reached by the  judge,  but  they  do
    not, in my view, disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a material error  of  law.   I  do
not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date         29th March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date         29th March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
