
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10234/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7 January 2019                       |On 4 February 2019                  |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                    M n a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sajid, Legal Representative of Shehzad Law
                    Chambers Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on 25 March
    1990.  He is appealing against the decision of Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Robertson promulgated on 24 October 2018 to dismiss his appeal
    against the respondent's decision dated 2 August 2018 to refuse his
    protection and human rights claim.





Background

 2. The appellant entered the UK in 2007 and applied for asylum shortly
    thereafter.  He claimed to be at risk because of a feud where his
    father was suspected of arranging the killing of a Taliban member.  The
    application was refused and subsequent appeal dismissed.   However,
    that decision was set aside and on 15 July 2010 the Upper Tribunal
    allowed the appellant's appeal to the limited extent of directing the
    respondent to grant a period of leave, taking into account AA
    (Afghanistan) [2007] EWCA Civ 12.

 3. On 6 February 2013 the appellant applied for further leave and this was
    refused.  The appellant's appeal of that decision was heard by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Snape who, in a decision promulgated on 24 July
    2013, found the appellant's account to not be credible.  The decision
    of Judge Snape was not successfully appealed.

 4. On 19 July 2018 the appellant made further submissions.  He repeated
    his claim that he would be at risk because of his father being
    suspected of killing a Taliban leader.  He also claimed to be at risk
    from indiscriminate violence such that Article 15(c) of the
    Qualification Directive would be breached by returning him to
    Afghanistan.

 5. The respondent rejected the asylum claim because the appellant's
    account had already been found not credible by Judge Snape.

 6. With respect to Article 15(c) the respondent, following the Country
    Information and Guidance - Afghanistan: Security and humanitarian
    protection issued April 2018, along with the Country Guidance cases of
    AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) and AS
    (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118 (IAC), found that
    there was no general Article 15(c) risk in Kabul and that it was
    neither unsafe nor unreasonable for the appellant to relocate within
    Kabul.

 7. The respondent also rejected the appellant's claim that removing him
    from the UK would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR.  The respondent's
    position was that the appellant was unable to satisfy any of the routes
    to leave to remain under the Immigration Rules and there were not
    exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain under
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. Applying Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702, the judge rejected the
    appellant's asylum claim on the basis that there was nothing before him
    relevant to the alleged blood feud that was not before Judge Snape.

 9. Having rejected the appellant's asylum claim, the judge proceeded to
    assess the appellant's fear of indiscriminate violence.  The judge
    stated that he was guided by AS which confirmed that the security
    situation in Kabul is not at such a level as to render internal
    relocation unreasonable or unduly harsh.

10. In respect of the appellant's Article 8 claim, the judge found that the
    requirements of Appendix FM and of Paragraph 276ADE were not met.  He
    found that the appellant would not face very significant obstacles to
    integration in Afghanistan as he had spent his formative years in that
    country.  The judge also found that the appellant was in a relationship
    with a partner in the UK but that they were unmarried and there was
    little supportive evidence of them living together akin to marriage.

11. The judge also found that the appellant does not speak English, is not
    financially independent and that any family life he has established in
    the UK has been whilst his status was precarious.

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

12. The first argument advanced in the grounds of appeal is that the judge
    misapplied Devaseelan by taking the 2013 decision of Judge Snape as a
    starting point rather than the 2010 Upper Tribunal decision referred to
    above in paragraph 2.

13. The second argument in the grounds of appeal is that the judge failed
    to address the fact that following the 2010 Upper Tribunal decision the
    appellant was granted a six month period of leave which was not in line
    with the Home Office policy at that time.  The grounds contend that the
    appellant suffered so many legal wrongs from the respondent he should
    be granted indefinite leave on the basis of policies pertaining to the
    remedy for injustice caused by past illegality.

14. A further argument made in the grounds is that the judge followed AS
    without having regard to the appellant's argument that it should be
    departed from in light of a UNHCR Report dated 30 August 2018 ("the
    2018 UNHCR Report") which concluded that internal relocation is
    generally not appropriate in Kabul given the current situation.  The
    grounds note that the panel in AS relied on an earlier UNHCR Report
    ("the 2016 UNHCR Report") which has now been superseded by the 2018
    UNHCR Report.

15. At the error of law hearing Mr Sajid submitted that the judge had not
    dealt with all of the submissions made at the First-tier Tribunal
    hearing and had failed to appreciate that the compelling circumstances
    of the appeal meant that it should be allowed outside the Immigration
    Rules.  He highlighted that the appellant had mistakenly been treated
    as an adult when he entered the UK in 2007 and maintained that there
    had been a litany of mistakes in the treatment of the appellant by the
    respondent.  He also argued that the judge erred by following on the
    decision of Judge Snape given that the position had materially changed.



16. With regard to Article 8 ECHR, Mr Sajid contended that the judge had
    failed to appreciate that the little weight provision under Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 requires, in
    accordance with Rhuppiah, a flexible approach and that, following
    Agyarko, where circumstances are sufficiently compelling, a precarious
    family life can outweigh the public interest in removal.  He also
    argued that the judge had erred by finding the appellant could not
    speak English when there was evidence in the bundle that he had passed
    a test in respect of the English language.  He also contended that the
    judge erred by finding that the appellant was not financially
    independent given that he had worked from time to time earning 'cash in
    hand'.

17. Mr Sajid took the position that Judge Snape's decision was not the
    relevant starting point and repeated the contention made in the grounds
    of appeal that the starting point should have been the 2010 Upper
    Tribunal decision.  Mr Sajid also argued that the judge had failed to
    acknowledge the appellant's vulnerability and that even if Judge
    Snape's decision could reasonably have been treated as a starting point
    it should not have been treated as the end point.

18. Mr Sajid also argued that the judge fell into error by failing to
    consider the 2018 UNHCR Report which reached a different conclusion on
    the viability of internal relocation and Article 15(c) risk to that in
    the 2016 UNHCR Report, which had been given substantial weight in AS.

19. Mr Tarlow maintained that the decision does not contain an error of
    law.  He argued that AS had been promulgated only six months before
    this case was heard and that the analysis contained within the 2018
    UNHCR Report was not sufficient to depart from it.

Analysis

20. The applicable Country Guidance case on the issue of risk of
    indiscriminate violence in Afghanistan is AK, where it was concluded
    that the level of indiscriminate violence in Kabul did not meet the
    Article 15(c) threshold.  Although AK is over six years old, it was
    recently affirmed as still applicable in the 2018 country guidance case
    of AS, where the safety of Kabul was considered in the context of
    internal relocation. AS determined that the security situation in Kabul
    is not at such a level as to render internal relocation unreasonable or
    unduly harsh for a single adult made in good health.

21. As they are Country Guidance cases, the judge was required to follow AK
    and AS -and therefore find that the risk from indiscriminate violence
    in Kabul does not meet the Article 15(c) threshold - unless there were
    strong grounds supported by cogent evidence to justify not doing so.
    The appellant contends that the 2018 UNHCR report, which was published
    after AS, is the necessary cogent evidence to justify such a departure.



22. The 2018 UNHCR report, which supersedes the 2016 UNHCR report that was
    taken into account in AS, considers at pages 103 and 104 eligibility
    for subsidiary protection under the Qualification Directive.  It states
    that in light of the ongoing armed conflict applicants originating
    from, or previously residing in, conflict affected areas may, depending
    on the individual circumstances of the case, be in need of subsidiary
    protection under Article 15(c).

23. The 2018 UNHCR report also addresses the issue of internal flight and
    relocation to Kabul, concluding on page 114 that given the current
    security, human rights and humanitarian situation, internal relocation
    to Kabul is "generally not available".  This conclusion is reached on
    the basis, inter alia, that there has been a negative trend in the
    security situation for civilians with 993 civilian casualties in Kabul
    province reported in the first six months of 2018 by UNAMA, and it is
    noted that civilians who partake in day to day economic and social
    activities in Kabul are exposed to a risk of falling victim to the
    generalised violence in the city.

24. The 2018 UNHCR report is evidence that post dates both AK and AS that
    is relevant to the assessment of whether the violence in Kabul reaches
    the Article 15(c) threshold.  It was therefore incumbent upon the judge
    to consider it alongside the Country Guidance cases. His failure to do
    so was an error of law.  However, I am satisfied, having carefully
    reviewed the 2018 UNHCR report, that the error was not material.

25. The threshold for Article 15(c) is high. In order for it to be met the
    degree of indiscriminate violence must be such that substantial grounds
    are shown for believing that the appellant, upon being returned to
    Kabul, would face a real risk of violence solely on account of his
    presence.  The purpose of the Article is to prevent the return of
    unsuccessful asylum seekers to war zones and situations of armed
    anarchy where there is a serious threat of real harm from
    indiscriminate violence.

26. It is clear from AS and AK that as of mid 2018 this threshold was not
    met in Kabul.

27. The 2018 UNHCR report describes Kabul as a city where there is violence
    and poverty. But the description of Kabul, in terms of the risk of
    violence faced by civilians purely as a consequence of being present
    within the city, does not differ markedly from that in AS or AK. I
    acknowledge that the 2018 UNHCR report states that there has been a
    deterioration in the circumstances in Kabul. However, in my view, there
    is nothing within the substance of the report which warrants the
    conclusion that the risk of indiscriminate violence has increased such
    that the Article 15(c) threshold is now met.  The 2018 UNHCR report,
    therefore, is not, of itself, evidence that justifies a departure from
    the Country Guidance case law.

28. Mr Sajid argued that it would be unreasonable to expect the appellant
    to relocate to Kabul.  The difficulty with this argument is that the
    appellant originates from the Kabul province and therefore the issue of
    internal relocation does not arise. The issue before the first-tier
    Tribunal was indiscriminate violence in, not the reasonableness of
    relocating to, Kabul.

29. I now turn to consider the appellant's arguments that the judge
    misapplied Devaseelan.

30. Devaseelan is a starred decision which sets out guidelines on how a
    judge should approach the decision of a judge who previously heard an
    appeal by the same appellant.  It requires that the first judge's
    decision should always be a starting point and that it is "the
    authoritative assessment of the appellant's status at the time it was
    made."

31. In his decision promulgated on 24 July 2013 Judge Snape considered the
    details of the appellant's asylum claim and his account of a family
    feud.  Judge Snape rejected the appellant's account and found it not
    credible.  This represents the authoritative assessment of the
    appellant's status at that time.  There was no new evidence in relation
    to the appellant's account before the First-tier Tribunal and no new
    facts had arisen since Judge Snape's decision that were relevant to the
    claimed blood feud.   In these circumstances it was consistent with
    Devaseelan for the judge to treat as authoritative the conclusions of
    Judge Snape in respect of the credibility of the appellant's account.

32. Mr Sajid argued that rather than follow the findings of Judge Snape,
    the judge ought to have applied the findings of the 2010 Upper Tribunal
    decision.  However, the 2010 decision did not contain any consideration
    of the appellant's account of being at risk in Afghanistan.  It is
    therefore not relevant to the judge's assessment of the credibility of
    the appellant's account.

33. Mr Sajid's claim that the appeal should be allowed because of the
    respondent's procedural errors is unable to succeed. The appellant
    appealed under section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 on the basis that his removal from the UK would breach the
    UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention and would be unlawful
    under section 6 of the human rights act 1998 (with reference to Article
    8 of the ECHR). The appeal was not brought - and could not be brought -
    on the basis that the respondent had acted unlawfully. Mr Sajid has not
    explained how the claimed procedural errors are relevant to whether the
    violence in Kabul meets the Article 15(c) threshold or whether the
    appellant is eligible for asylum. Nor has he established a link between
    the claimed procedural errors and the appellant's Article 8 claim.
    Moreover, even if the judge ought to have given weight to the claimed
    procedural errors in the Article 8 proportionality assessment, the
    outcome of that assessment would not have changed.

34. The judge applied Section 117B of the 2002 Act and found that the
    appellant does not speak English, is not financially independent, and
    established his private life in the UK when his status was precarious.
    The judge also found that there was little supportive evidence of the
    appellant living together with his partner and that in any event they
    had only been living together since December 2016. The judge also found
    that the appellant spent his formative years in Afghanistan would be
    able to establish a life for himself on return. Given these findings,
    it was clearly open to the judge to find that removal of the appellant
    would not be disproportionate.

35. Mr Sajid argued that the judge was wrong to find the appellant does not
    speak English. I disagree. The burden of proof lies with the appellant.
    The appellant gave evidence through a translator. Given that the only
    evidence of English language ability produced by the appellant was a
    single certificate showing that he had passed an English language test,
    the judge was entitled to conclude that he does not speak English for
    the purposes of Section 117B. Mr Sajid also argued that the judge
    should not have found that the appellant was not financially
    independent. There was no evidence of financial independence and I can
    see no basis in the evidence for the judge finding other than that the
    appellant is not financially independent.

36. For the reasons I have given, I am satisfied that the decision does not
    contain a material error of law and should stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material error
of law and stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  31 January 2019      |














