
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10551/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 October 2020                   |On 21 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                   k s m m
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of his family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms M Bayoumi, Counsel, instructed by Ferial
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is  the  remaking  of  the  decision  in  the  appellant's  appeal
    following my previous conclusion that the First-tier Tribunal had erred
    in law and that its decision should be set aside.   The  error  of  law
    component of my decision is appended to this remake  decision.   Whilst
    the First-tier Tribunal rejected the appellant's credibility,  none  of
    those findings of fact have been preserved.

 2. The appellant is an Egyptian citizen, born in April 1978.   He  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 7 February 2018 and made  a  protection  claim
    soon thereafter.  This claim was based on his support  for  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood ("MB") and what was said to be the significant  connections
    of his family members to this organisation.  He claimed that  following
    the coup against the government of Mr Morsi in 2013, he and his  family
    were targeted  by  the  authorities.   Three  brothers  were  detained,
    tortured, and died as a result.  Another brother fled Egypt and went to
    live in Turkey.  A nephew was  detained  and  sentenced  to  a  lengthy
    period of imprisonment but was taken out of the country  by  relatives.
    The appellant states that he was detained, interrogated,  and  tortured
    in 2017.  In addition to this history,  he  claims  that  he  has  been
    attending anti-government events in the United  Kingdom.   He  believes
    that the authorities would come to know of his activities here and that
    this would add to  his  problems.   In  essence,  he  asserts  that  if
    returned to Egypt, he would be of significant adverse interest  to  the
    authorities and would be at risk of detention and persecutory treatment
    and serious harm as a result.

 3. The respondent does not accept any material aspect of  the  appellant's
    claim.

The evidence

 4. In compliance with directions, the appellant  produced  a  consolidated
    bundle, indexed and paginated 1-347.  Amongst other items,  the  bundle
    includes three witness statements for the  appellant;  statements  from
    the brother who currently resides in Turkey; supporting letters from  a
    number of individuals connected to the MB; death certificates and other
    documentation  relating  to  the  appellant's  family  members;  expert
    reports from Dr Rebwar  Fatah  (on  the  country  situation)  and  Prof
    Ibrahim Ahmed (in respect of the authenticity  of  the  documents  from
    Egypt).

 5. On 7 October 2020, the appellant filed and  served  witness  statements
    for Prof Diaa Elmoghazhy and Mr Yasser Aly.

 6. The appellant gave oral evidence  with  the  assistance  of  an  Arabic
    interpreter.  Prof Elmoghazhy and Mr Aly were also called.  A full note
    of the oral evidence is contained within my Record of Proceedings and I
    do not propose to set this evidence out at this  stage.   I  will  deal
    with relevant aspects of it when stating my findings of fact, below.

 7. I was provided with evidence (in the form of an  email  and  a  letter)
    from  two  potential  witnesses,  Dr  N  Abosaif  and  Dr  F  Messahel,
    explaining their inability to attend the  hearing.   The  former  is  a
    Consultant at University Hospital Birmingham  and  was  on  call.   The
    latter is currently an inpatient at  another  hospital  in  that  city.
    There has been no challenge as to the validity of the reasons for  non-
    attendance.

 8. Both representatives agreed that I  should  have  regard  to  the  most
    recent CPIN on Egypt, published in July 2020.

The issues in this appeal

 9. At the outset of the hearing Ms Cunha confirmed that the respondent was
    not seeking to the issue of exclusion under Article 1F of  the  Refugee
    Convention.  On the evidence before me, there was no proper basis  upon
    which I should raise this matter of my own volition.   Thus,  exclusion
    has no part to play in this case.

10. The first core issue is  that  of  the  appellant's  credibility.   The
    second is whether, if his account is true,  he  would  be  at  risk  on
    return.  A third issue is whether, even if the appellant has fabricated
    his claim, he would nonetheless be at risk on return as a failed asylum-
    applicant.  Article 8 has not been pursued before me.

Submissions

11. Ms Cunha relied on the reasons for refusal letter dated 20 August  2018
    and made additional oral submissions.  The appellant had been vague  in
    his evidence in relation to the policies of the MB and  had  not  shown
    that either he or his family had been supporters and/or members of that
    organisation.  She submitted that the family's middle-class  background
    and economic activity was inconsistent with the MB's principles.  Given
    that the appellant was well-educated,  he  should  have  been  able  to
    provide more detailed  information.   It  was  not  accepted  that  the
    appellant had been detained in 2017.  If, as claimed, he  had  provided
    information, it  was  not  plausible  that  he  would  then  have  been
    tortured.  Even if he had been detained, he was released and  had  been
    able to get through the airport on his own passport, indicating a  lack
    of interest on the  part of the authorities.  It was  also  significant
    that none of the family's assets in Egypt had been seized.

12. The sur place activities added very little to the appellant's case.  In
    respect of Prof Elmoghazy's  evidence,  it  was  hearsay  and  did  not
    assist.   The  research  said  to  have  been  undertaken  as  to   the
    appellant's background was not reliable.

13. Ms Bayoumi relied on her skeleton argument.   She  submitted  that  the
    evidence, when taken as a whole, was  consistent  and  plausible.   The
    appellant had been candid as to his level of involvement with  the  MB.
    It was plausible that the hospital in Egypt  would  not  have  provided
    confirmation of his  injuries  and/or  treatment.   The  issue  of  the
    appellant's own political beliefs had to be viewed in  the  context  of
    his family's committed support for the MB.  The  activities  undertaken
    in the United Kingdom were not  opportunistic.   Ms  Bayoumi  submitted
    that Prof Elmoghazy's evidence was impressive.  He had given it not  as
    a friend, but as a senior figure in the political opposition  based  in
    United Kingdom.  The release of the appellant from  detention  and  his
    ability to get through the airport  were  both  plausible  in  all  the
    circumstances, as was the fact that the family's assets  had  not  been
    seized.  The appellant would be at risk at the point of return or  soon
    thereafter.  He will also be risk in light of the principles set out in
    HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31; [2011] 1 AC 596 and RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC
    38; [2013] 1 AC 152.  Finally, she asked me to consider whether,  given
    the appellant's relatively affluent background in Egypt, he would  have
    come to the United Kingdom  and  fabricated  a  protection  claim;  the
    implication being that he simply would not have taken  this  course  of
    action.

Findings of fact

14. I have considered the evidence before me as a  whole  and  applied  the
    lower standard of proof to it.  A failure  to  refer  to  a  particular
    aspect of the evidence is in no way an indication that I have  left  it
    out of account when reaching my findings.

15. For the reasons set out below, I find that the appellant has provided a
    truthful  and  reliable  account  of  past  events  and   his   current
    circumstances in the United Kingdom.

16. It is right that the appellant did not specifically mention support for
    the MB in his screening interview.  That has been relied  upon  by  the
    respondent and, seen in isolation, it might be damaging to his  overall
    credibility.  However, he did state  in  terms  that  his  problems  in
    Egypt, including a detention of which he gives a precise date, was  due
    to his opposition  to  the  government.   Further,  I  have  of  course
    considered screening interview in the context  of  a  large  amount  of
    evidence that has been provided thereafter,  ranging  from  the  asylum
    interview to supporting witnesses.

17. The appellant did display in his asylum interview what  the  respondent
    acknowledged to be generally consistent  evidence  about  the  MB.   In
    respect of his oral evidence, it is  right  that  he  did  not  provide
    particularly detailed information about specific MB policies.  However,
    I agree with Ms Bayoumi's submission that he has been candid about  his
    level of involvement with that organisation; he differentiated his role
    as simply a supporter from that of others, including his brothers,  who
    were members.  It is not wholly implausible that one member of a family
    would not necessarily have the  same  level  of  knowledge  as  others.
    Nothing that I have  seen  in  the  appellant's  evidence  is  in  fact
    contradictory to the principles and aims of the MB.

18. Following on from the above, Ms Cunha's submission  that  the  family's
    support and/or membership of the MB was inconsistent with their  status
    as relatively affluent traders is misconceived.  I have  been  provided
    with  no  evidence  to  indicate  that  there   is   some   fundamental
    incompatibility between the principles  of  the  MB  on  one  hand  and
    engagement in economic activity on the other.  Putting it  bluntly,  it
    would have taken cogent evidence from the respondent to have made  good
    this particular point.

19. I accept the appellant's explanation that  he  tried,  and  failed,  to
    obtain documentation from the hospital in Egypt where he found  himself
    following release from detention.  The whole tenor of  the  expert  and
    country evidence on Egypt quite clearly shows that there  is  virtually
    no tolerance of any political dissent in that  country,  and  that  the
    authorities have taken and continue to  take  an  extremely  hard  line
    approach to those known or perceived to be in opposition to the  regime
    (see, for example section 4 of the CPIN).  Dr Fatah's report, which has
    not been expressly challenged by the respondent and which I find to  be
    deserving of significant weight, paints an equally bleak picture of the
    political landscape (see paragraphs 66 onwards).  It is in my  judgment
    at least reasonably likely that a hospital  in  Egypt  would  not  have
    wished to issue an individual who had been detained and ill-treated  by
    the authorities with a document confirming either  the  nature  of  any
    injuries sustained  and/or  their  presence  as  an  in-patient.   Such
    unwillingness would, I find, be predicated  on  the  desire  for  self-
    preservation and to avoid  attracting  the  adverse  attention  of  the
    authorities.

20. Ms Bayoumi was correct to identify patient records from the appellant's
    GP in the United Kingdom as providing some  corroborative  evidence  of
    his past detention and ill-treatment (166 of the bundle).  The  details
    provided in the entry dated 23 July 2018 are consistent with  what  the
    appellant has told the respondent throughout his claim.

21. The appellant's claim to have been detained and tortured is entirely in
    keeping with the expert and country evidence (see the references stated
    in paragraph 19, above).  The same body of evidence also  supports  the
    appellant's claim that political opponents of the  regime  have,  since
    the coup in 2013, been systematically targeted,  arbitrarily  detained,
    and ill-treated.  The "Assessment" section of  the  CPIN  provides  the
    respondent's own view of the country evidence and  makes  it  extremely
    difficult for her to assert that  the  appellant's  claim  is  anything
    other than generally consistent with what we know of the  situation  in
    Egypt.

22. The fact that assets belonging to the family have not  apparently  been
    seized by the Egyptian authorities  does  not,  when  the  evidence  is
    viewed as a whole, materially detract from the appellant's credibility.
     The country information certainly does suggest  that  assets  seizures
    occur.  It does not follow that the absence of  such  is  incapable  of
    belief, on the lower standard.  Further, the  appellant  said  in  oral
    evidence that the personal business of one of his brothers, Ahmed,  had
    in fact been confiscated, although this was not  part  of  the  general
    family inheritance.   As  regards  the  position  of  another  brother,
    Altuhami, it was apparent from the evidence that he was  both  disabled
    and not in any way an active supporter of the MB.  It is plausible that
    he has not been the subject of targeting by the authorities.

23. There is nothing  inherently  implausible  about  the  appellant  being
    released from detention and being able to depart through the airport on
    his own  passport.   In  respect  of  the  former  event,  the  country
    information indicates that detention is frequently carried  out  on  an
    arbitrary basis.  Thus, there is no  reason  to  suppose  that  release
    would not also  be  effected  on  a  similar  basis.   It  is  entirely
    misconceived to suggest that the Egyptian authorities  would  not  ill-
    treat a detainee  simply  because  the  individual  had  provided  some
    information.  Such a submission runs contrary to the  country  evidence
    on Egypt and indeed the evidence relating to the attitudes  of  regimes
    which employ brutality detention the world over.

24. As regards the airport, the appellant has  never  stated  that  he  was
    subject to formal legal proceedings.  It is reasonably likely  that  he
    was not on any sort of a stop list and  was  able  to  leave  Egypt  in
    possession of his passport and a valid visa for the United Kingdom.

25. When the appellant was asked what he might do about his political views
    if returned to Egypt, his answer was clear enough: "under  this  regime
    no one can have any political views".   I  find  as  a  fact  that  the
    appellant is fully  aware  of  the  consequences  of  expressing  anti-
    government views in Egypt, and that this would be a, if not the, reason
    for him concealing his opinions.

26. I turn to the corroborative evidence, which in my view is  significant.
    I have already mentioned Dr Fatah's report, which provides  support  to
    the appellant's account of past events and his claim to be at  risk  on
    return.  There is then the brief report from Prof Ahmed (174-175 of the
    bundle).  This has not been challenged in any way.  I am satisfied that
    the author is suitably qualified  to  provide  expert  opinion  on  the
    authenticity and reliability of the relevant documents that he has been
    provided with.  I accept that the author caused enquiries to be made by
    colleagues,  and  that  these  enquiries   reliably   established   the
    provenance and accuracy of the death  and  birth  certificates  of  the
    various family members listed in the report and contained elsewhere  in
    the bundle.  In turn, these documents provide  solid  corroboration  of
    the appellant's claim that his father and three of  his  brothers  died
    and that his nephew was the subject of prosecution by  the  authorities
    and that this was publicised on social media.

27. Although Dr Messahel and Dr Abosaif were unable to attend  the  hearing
    and were therefore not tested in cross-examination.  I nonetheless give
    at least some weight to their witness statements, the contents of which
    have not been expressly challenged by the respondent.  Both  attest  to
    the involvement of the appellant in certain political activities in the
    United  Kingdom.   I  accept   that   this   evidence   provides   some
    corroboration of the appellant's own account on this issue.

28. I find that the appellant's brother,  Mahmoud  Saber,  does  reside  in
    Turkey and that his evidence is supportive of the  appellant's  on  the
    issue of the family connections to the MB and the  problems  that  this
    has caused.  I accept that this brother has been vocal in his criticism
    of the Egyptian authorities, as evidenced not only in his statement but
    the media articles contained in the bundle.   The  country  information
    indicates that the regime monitors the Internet and social  media.   It
    is reasonably likely that the brother's activities will be known about.

29. I  agree  with  Ms  Bayoumi's  description  of  Prof  Elmoghazy  as  an
    "impressive"  witness.   I  found  his  oral  evidence  to  be  candid,
    straightforward, and  indicative  of  an  individual  who  treated  his
    appearance as a witness with all due seriousness.  I have no reason  to
    doubt his explanation that he has been asked to appear as a witness  on
    many occasions, but has been very selective when accepting.  He told me
    that it was a policy of the MB, and his own personal position, that  he
    would need to be "100%" that a person was connected to the organisation
    before he would agree to give evidence on their behalf.  I accept  that
    to be the case.

30. I find that Prof Elmoghazy has held senior roles  in  the  Freedom  and
    Justice Party, as well as being an active member on behalf of  the  MB.
    I accept that he was recognised as a refugee in this  country  and  was
    granted naturalisation as a British citizen in September of this  year.
    It is quite clear to me that he attended the hearing not as a friend of
    the appellant, but as someone who could speak to his political  beliefs
    and activities in this country, as well as the profile  of  his  family
    within Egypt.  As to the former, I accept his evidence that he has  met
    the appellant on a number of occasions at events held in Birmingham and
    London and that these events  were  manifestly  in  opposition  to  the
    Egyptian regime.

31. Perhaps more importantly, he provided compelling evidence as to how  he
    had satisfied himself that the appellant is who he says he  is,  as  it
    were, and that the family profile in Egypt is as claimed.  He explained
    that he had made enquiries with the MB internal structures, who had put
    him in touch with two individuals, one living in Turkey and  the  other
    in Qatar, who had held senior positions in the appellant's  local  area
    in Egypt (they were described as being on the  executive  committee  of
    the MB in this district).  As to the place of residence  of  these  two
    individuals, it is of note that the CPIN indicates that many members of
    the MB fled Turkey to live in Turkey and  Qatar.   I  accept  that  the
    witness made contact with these two named  individuals  and  that  they
    were able to confirm that the appellant and his family were  supporters
    and, in the case of most of the siblings, members, of the MB, and  that
    the entire family was well-known.  He described some of  the  appellant
    siblings as being "very active", and that the brother now living Turkey
    was  a  "high  rank"  member.   The  witness  explained  that  the  two
    individuals he had spoken to had left Egypt in 2014, but had maintained
    contacts in  the  relevant  district  in  Egypt.   They  were  able  to
    communicate from Turkey and Qatar with colleagues in Turkey using,  for
    example, WhatsApp, a social media platform that, I note, has end-to-end
    encryption, thus making it a relatively secure method.

32. Prof Elmoghazy's provides powerful support for the  central  underlying
    plank of the appellant's claim, namely that  he  comes  from  a  family
    which has been, and is to an extent still, active on behalf of  the  MB
    and that this is known to the Egyptian authorities.

33. Mr Aly's evidence was less significant in content, but  it  nonetheless
    provided some support to the  appellant's  claimed  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom.

34. I have of course considered the specific points raised in  the  reasons
    for refusal letter.  Some  of  these  I  have  already  addressed.   In
    respect of others, including the issue of the  appellant  seeking  work
    (paragraph 30-31) and specifics concerning targeting  by  the  Egyptian
    authorities (paragraph 48-63), the evidence as it now stands and  taken
    in the round significantly undermines any force that these  potentially
    adverse matters may have held.  In short, nothing in the account is  so
    contradictory or implausible as to materially  damage  the  appellant's
    overall credibility.

35. In light of the above, I make the following findings of fact:

      i. the appellant comes from a family of  committed  active  supporters
         and/or members of the MB;

     ii. the appellant  himself  is  a  genuine  supporter  of  the  MB,  is
         committed to its principles, and is opposed to the current regime;

    iii. the appellant's profile and that of his family as a whole is  known
         by the Egyptian authorities;

     iv. three of the appellant's brothers and a nephew were detained by the
         Egyptian authorities, as  claimed.   The  three  brothers  died  as
         result of their detentions;

      v. the appellant was detained in 2017 on suspicion of being an  active
         supporter of the MB, as claimed.  He was tortured and then released
         without charge;

     vi. he was able to leave the country on his own passport, but this  was
         not an indication of a lack of interest on the part of the Egyptian
         authorities;

    vii. the appellant has attended a number of anti-regime  events  in  the
         United Kingdom;

   viii. the appellant's brother in Turkey has an anti-regime media  profile
         and this is known to the authorities;

     ix. if returned to Egypt, the  appellant  would  wish  to  express  his
         political views, but would not do so in order to avoid the risk  of
         being detained and ill-treated once again.

Conclusions

36. I now apply the factual matrix set out above to the issue  of  risk  on
    return.

37. For the reasons set out below, I  conclude  that  the  appellant  would
    clearly be at risk of further detention and persecutory  treatment  and
    serious harm if returned to Egypt.

38.  First,  applying  paragraph  339K  of  the  Immigration   Rules,   the
    appellant's past persecution is indicative of future risk.

39. Second, the respondent's own assessment of the country evidence, as set
    out in section 2 of the CPIN, is strongly indicative of  an  acceptance
    on her part that, in light of the facts I  have  found,  the  appellant
    would indeed be at risk:

         "2.4.2. . Political parties face arbitrary  restrictions  on  their
         work. Political activists have  also  been  targeted  and  arrested
         during large scale protests, such as in  September  2019,  some  of
         whom have faced prosecution on national security charges. Activists
         and those criticising the government also face prison terms,  death
         sentences,  extrajudicial  violence,  enforced  disappearences  and
         other forms of pressure. The US State Department reported  that  at
         the end of 2019 there  may  have  been  between  20,000  to  60,000
         political prisoners - persons detained because of  their  political
         belief - although the government denies this.

         ...

         2.4.8. a person who is or is perceived to be openly critical of the
         government  may  face  a  risk  of  treatment   that   amounts   to
         persecution. Whether they face a risk of persecution will depend on
         factors such as  the  group,  their  profile  and  activities,  and
         whether they are likely to be  known  by  the  government  and  are
         considered  a  threat  to  its  control.  Factors  to  consider  in
         establishing if a person is at risk include:

         .    the organisation to which the person belongs, its legal status
           and activities;

         .    the person's role, profile and actions

         .     whether  the  person  has  come  to  the  attention  of   the
           authorities previously, in what context, why and  what  was  the
           outcome

         .    the profile and activities of family members who are perceived
           to be critical to the government

40. Here, the appellant has  an  adverse  history  of  association  with  a
    proscribed terrorist organisation (under Egyptian law), the MB; he  has
    been detained and tortured as a result; and his family as a whole  have
    a particularly adverse profile,  including  current  criticism  by  the
    brother in Turkey.

41. Turning to the country evidence itself, the  CPIN  makes  reference  to
    multiple sources, all pointing  in  the  same  direction:  no  form  of
    meaningful political dissent is tolerated, and those who express  anti-
    regime views and/or are known or suspected to have connections with the
    MB will face very serious problems indeed:

         "3.1.7 .  The authorities  have  maintained  a  constant  crackdown
         against  dissent,  which  initially  was  aimed   at   the   Muslim
         Brotherhood but  has  evolved  to  encompass  a  broader  range  of
         political speech, encompassing anyone criticizing the government.

         ...

         4.2.3. DFAT assessed '... that the ability of Egyptian citizens  to
         protest peacefully against the government  or  express  dissent  is
         severely restricted, and is continuing to narrow. Those who come to
         the attention of authorities for attempting to protest  are  highly
         likely to face arrest and prosecution on national security charges.

         ...

         4.2.5. Freedom House in its report covering events in 2019 observed
         'meaningful  political  opposition  is  virtually  nonexistent,  as
         expressions  of  dissent  can   draw   criminal   prosecution   and
         imprisonment.' The source also noted: '... in practice there are no
         political parties that offer meaningful opposition to the incumbent
         leadership.... Activists, parties,  and  political  movements  that
         criticize the government continued to face  arrests,  harsh  prison
         terms, death sentences, extrajudicial violence, and other forms  of
         pressure during 2019. Following  a  series  of  small  protests  in
         September 2019,  the  regime  carried  out  thousands  of  arrests,
         targeting not only protesters  but  also  political  activists  and
         politicians, among others.

         ...

         4.2.7. Amnesty International (AI) in its report covering events  in
         2019 noted the government's reactions to protests during the  year:
         'The authorities resorted to a range of repressive measures against
         protesters   and   perceived   dissidents,    including    enforced
         disappearance,  mass  arrests,  torture  and  other  ill-treatment,
         excessive use of force and severe probation measures,  particularly
         after protests against the President on 20 September...

         ...

         4.4.2. HRW in its report on events in 2019 noted: 'The  police  and
         National Security Agency routinely carry  out  systematic  enforced
         disappearances and torture with impunity.  Torture  practices  have
         also affected well-known activists such as Alaa  Abdel  Fattah  and
         Israa Abdel Fattah. Authorities  keep  thousands  of  prisoners  in
         abysmal conditions, where  overcrowding  and  insufficient  medical
         care  have  been  systematic  and  may  have  contributed  to   the
         deteriorating health and deaths of scores of detainees.

         ...

         4.4.2 (the numbering repeats itself).  The  USSD  report  for  2019
         noted:  'According  to  domestic  and  international  human  rights
         organizations, police and prison  guards  resorted  to  torture  to
         extract information  from  detainees,  including  minors.  Reported
         techniques included beatings with fists, whips,  rifle  butts,  and
         other objects; prolonged suspension by the limbs from a ceiling  or
         door; electric shocks; sexual assault;  and  attacks  by  dogs.  On
         March 12, Human Rights  Watch  (HRW)  stated  that  torture  was  a
         systematic practice in the country."

42. It is highly likely that on return the appellant's history will come to
    light either at the point of return or where  ever  he  might  seek  to
    reside.  Bearing in mind that the appellant cannot be expected  to  lie
    in response to any questions put to him  by  the  authorities,  on  the
    basis of his particular profile and the country information, there is a
    high chance of him being detained and tortured.  On this  basis  alone,
    the appellant is a refugee and a person whose removal would expose  him
    to treatment contrary to Article 3.

43. In addition, it is abundantly clear  that  if  the  appellant  were  to
    return to Egypt and express his anti-regime views  in  accordance  with
    his genuinely held beliefs, he  would  be  at  risk  of  detention  and
    persecutory treatment and serious harm.  In order to avoid  this  risk,
    of which he is fully aware, he  would  be  compelled  to  suppress  the
    expression of his genuinely held beliefs.  Therefore,  he  succeeds  on
    the HJ (Iran)/RT (Zimbabwe) basis as well.

44. It is unnecessary for me to determine whether the appellant would be at
    risk simply as a failed asylum-applicant.

Anonymity

45. I maintain the anonymity direction made by the First-Tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

46. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error of law and it has been set aside.

47. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor    Date: 15 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor    Date: 15 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW COMPONENT OF MY DECISION

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10551/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 March 2020                      |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                   K S M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D James, Counsel, instructed by Ferial Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the appeal of the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fox ("the judge"), promulgated on 9  December  2019,  by
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    refusal of his protection and human rights claims.  Those  claims  were
    made on 12 February 2018 and the refusal is dated 20 August 2018.

 2. In essence, the Appellant's case has  always  been  predicated  on  his
    claimed involvement with the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt  and  that  of
    family members.  It is said that this has caused him to  have  suffered
    harm in the past and this, combined with activities he  has  undertaken
    in the United Kingdom together with those of  his  brother  in  Turkey,
    will present a real risk  of  persecution  and  treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3 ECHR upon return to Egypt.

 3. In refusing  the  claims,  the  Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant had ever been involved with the Muslim Brotherhood,  nor  was
    it was accepted that he had been the subject of  adverse  attention  by
    the Egyptian authorities.  The Appellant's initial appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bristow  in  a
    decision promulgated on 7 May 2019.  This was  successfully  challenged
    in the Upper Tribunal. By a decision promulgated on 5  September  2019,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara concluded that Judge Bristow had materially
    erred in law, that his decision had to  be  set  aside,  and  that  the
    appeal would be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  complete
    rehearing.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. Having set out the evidence and submissions  of  the  parties  in  some
    detail, the judge's findings begin at [73].  He notes the existence  of
    an expert report from Dr Fatah and that the conclusions reached in that
    report had been dependent upon the account provided by  the  Appellant.
    At [76] to [79] the judge notes the absence of  what  is  described  as
    "reliable" medical evidence relating to claimed past  ill-treatment  of
    the Appellant.  The judge was of the view that a medical  report  could
    reasonably have been obtained in the United Kingdom and/or that medical
    records from Egypt could have been obtained.

 5. At [81] and [82] the  judge  notes  the  Appellant's  failure  to  have
    provided certain information in his screening interview.   At  [83]  to
    [84] the judge commented  on  the  absence  of  any  evidence  from  an
    individual, described as a "friend", to whom  the  Appellant  had  made
    reference in his oral evidence.

 6. [85]-[91] relate to the Appellant's evidence concerning  his  wife  and
    her circumstances in Egypt.  The judge was of  the  view  that  it  was
    "reasonable  to  expect"  (a  phrase  used  repeatedly  throughout  the
    decision) that the Appellant could have  provided  further  information
    about this issue.  The claimed sur  place  activities  dealt  with  the
    single paragraph ([100]).  The judge stated that it was:

         "... an usual feature of the available evidence that the  appellant
         should claim to believe that the authorities are aware of  his  sur
         place  activities  whilst  making  simultaneous  claims  that   the
         authorities  had  pursued  his  wife  for  information  about   his
         whereabouts."

 7. In addressing  the  evidence  concerning  the  Appellant's  brother  in
    Turkey, the judge concluded  that  the  Appellant  had  not  "[availed]
    himself of the opportunity to provide corroborative evidence  available
    with relative ease to demonstrate the brother's alleged public  profile
    in Turkey."  Three letters of support from individuals claiming to have
    knowledge of the Appellant's family's circumstances in Egypt are  dealt
    with at [103], this evidence was deemed to be "vague".  The evidence of
    two live witnesses  at  the  hearing  dealt  at  [96]-[97]  and  [109].
    Shortcomings in their evidence is referred to and it  would  appear  as
    though little weight was attached to it.   The  Appellant  had  claimed
    that two nephews had been killed as a result of their association  with
    the Muslim Brotherhood. The judge  deals  with  this  issue  in  [110],
    stating that the documentary evidence (that  being  death  certificates
    for the two individuals  concerned)  was  of  limited  probative  value
    because the Appellant had obtained false information for use in his own
    entry clearance application.  Therefore, on the judge's reasoning,  the
    death certificates were deemed to be unreliable.  In light  of  judge's
    analysis, he concluded that the "core of the claim is fatally  flawed."
    There was said to be no risk on return, the protection and human rights
    claims were duly rejected, and the appeal dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 8. The grounds of appeal essentially make the  following  points.   It  is
    said that:

      i. the judge failed to consider material  evidence  adequately  or  at
         all;

     ii. the judge failed to make findings on material matters;

    iii. the cumulative effect of these omissions was to render the decision
         as a whole unsound.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on
    17 January 2020.

The hearing

10. At the hearing Mr James relied on the grounds and  expanded  on  these.
    He helpfully provided me with references  to  the  various  sources  of
    evidence upon which the judge was basing  his  conclusions  at  various
    points in his decision.  The general thrust of  Mr  James'  submissions
    was that the judge had  failed  to  consider  certain  aspects  of  the
    evidence, had failed to make findings  of  fact,  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons in certain respects, and had  not  sufficiently  dealt
    with the issue of prospective risk on return.

11. Mr Kandola submitted that when the judge's decision was read as a whole
    the conclusions reached were all sustainable.  The references  to  what
    the judge deemed it "reasonable  to  expect"  from  the  Appellant  was
    permissible with reference to TK (Burundi) [2009]  EWCA  Civ  40.   The
    judge was not requiring corroborative evidence of the Appellant.

Error of law component of the decision in this appeal

12. As I announced to the parties at the hearing, I conclude that the judge
    has materially erred in law when the decision is  viewed  holistically,
    and the grounds of appeal are considered on a cumulative basis.  In  no
    particular order I conclude that the errors committed are as follows.

13. In respect of the sur place aspect of the claim, this  was  clearly  an
    issue relied on by the Appellant at the appeal.  It is dealt with in  a
    single paragraph by the judge, which has been quoted in full, above. In
    my judgment, what is said here is inadequate.  On one reading it may be
    said that the judge  was  rejecting  any  and  all  claimed  sur  place
    activities on the basis  that  this  aspect  of  the  evidence  was  in
    conflict with what the Appellant had said about the authorities  asking
    after his whereabouts in Egypt.  Another reading might be that  he  was
    only rejecting the evidence  relating  to  the  authorities'  enquiries
    because it conflicted with the sur place activities.   It  is  possible
    that all of this evidence was being rejected.  However, as I  read  the
    papers it does not appear as though the fact of  sur  place  activities
    had been disputed by the Respondent. There are no findings by the judge
    as to what, if anything, the Appellant had in fact been doing whilst in
    the United Kingdom.  There was evidence of such activities and  in  all
    the circumstances it was incumbent upon him to make clear  findings  on
    the issue.

14. This first error is material because there was country information  and
    expert  evidence  before  the  judge  to  indicate  that  the  Egyptian
    authorities do monitor activities carried on abroad and that sur  place
    activities were capable of  presenting  a  risk  to  an  individual  in
    certain circumstances.  Therefore, the judge's error could have  had  a
    material effect on the outcome of the appeal.

15. The second error concerns the three "other letters" referred to by  the
    judge at [103].  On a cumulative basis these three letters do state  in
    terms that the authors were aware of problems faced by the  Appellant's
    family in Egypt.  It is right that they were not particularly detailed,
    but it cannot properly be said that they were so vague as to be  of  no
    possible probative value whatsoever.  In addition, the  judge's  reason
    that little if any weight  should  be  placed  upon  them  because  the
    Appellant's credibility had been "damaged" indicates that they have not
    been considered in the round:  in  other  words  that  the  Appellant's
    credibility had not been assessed with reference to  what  the  authors
    said, and vice versa.  These letters were capable of bearing  relevance
    as to the Appellant's  overall  account  of  adverse  interest  by  the
    Egyptian authorities.

16. I turn now to the medical evidence.  It is  right  that  there  was  no
    medico-legal report obtained in the United Kingdom.   It  is  also  the
    case that the Appellant had not obtained medical records from Egypt (if
    they indeed existed).   On  the  assumption  that  the  judge  was  not
    actually requiring corroborative evidence of the Appellant, he may have
    been entitled to form  an  adverse  view  of  the  absence  of  medical
    evidence. However, the judge was obliged to engage  with  the  evidence
    that was before him.   This  included  not  only  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence, but GP patient records contained in the bundle which at least
    made reference to previous torture and injuries sustained as  a  result
    thereof.  Whilst [76] of the judge's decision contains a  reference  to
    page 238 of the Appellant's bundle, there is  no  engagement  with  the
    potentially supportive value of this evidence.

17.  The  question  of  the  brother's  claimed  activities  in  Turkey  is
    inadequately dealt with in [102].  The brother himself had not provided
    a witness statement.  However,  there  was  evidence  of  social  media
    activity contained in the Appellant's bundle and the live witnesses had
    provided evidence supporting these claimed activities.  The  judge  has
    failed to made findings of fact as  to  whether  the  brother  was  the
    author of the various posts, the  content  of  these  posts,  and  what
    potentially adverse view  might  be  taken  of  them  by  the  Egyptian
    authorities.  Further, there is an absence of analysis  as  to  whether
    any adverse view taken of this information would have had an impact  on
    the Appellant himself.  Therefore, even though the judge at  [106]  has
    purported to make an alternative finding on the basis that the  brother
    was politically active in Turkey, there is no adequate consideration of
    the prospective risk on return to the Appellant as a result (as opposed
    to a statement of whether there had in fact already  been  any  adverse
    consequences for the Appellant's  family  in  Egypt).   This  error  is
    material  because  Dr  Fattah's  report,  together  with  the   country
    information, indicated that activities abroad may  be  the  subject  of
    monitoring by the Egyptian authorities and that  this  could  create  a
    risk factor for a returnee.

18. In respect of  the  screening  interview,  it  is  the  case  that  the
    Appellant did not state in terms that he had been associated  with  the
    Muslim Brotherhood.   It  is,  however,  also  the  case  that  he  had
    confirmed that he had been detained because he was "against  government
    policies".  The date of the  detention  and  the  claimed  duration  is
    consistent with evidence provided thereafter.  The  Appellant  provided
    an explanation in his  witness  statement  for  the  omissions  in  the
    screening interview, and it was incumbent upon  the  judge  to  address
    these explanations and to consider the omissions in the interview  with
    what was in  fact  stated  therein,  bearing  in  mind  that  screening
    interviews are always considered to be relatively brief in nature.

19. Finally, I return to the repeated references to the phrase  "reasonable
    to expect"  contained  in  a  number  of  paragraphs.   Some  of  these
    references do relate to the absence of evidence that it may properly be
    said could, on the face of  it,  have  been  relatively  easy  for  the
    Appellant to have obtained (for example, a medico-legal report  in  the
    United Kingdom).  However, other references refer  to  the  actions  or
    views of the Egyptian authorities or the Appellant's wife.   Whether  a
    particular matter is "reasonable" to be expected from the viewpoint  of
    a decision-maker in the United Kingdom  is  a  matter  that  should  be
    treated with real caution when assessing  a  protection  claim  on  the
    lower standard of proof.  There is a  distinct  danger  that  either  a
    higher standard is  being  applied,  or  that  an  artificial  test  of
    "reasonableness" is in play.

20. On a cumulative basis, the credibility assessment and that of  risk  of
    return are flawed and the judge's decision must be set aside.



Disposal

21. Both representatives were agreed that if the judge's decision  were  to
    be set aside, this appeal should be retained in the Upper Tribunal  and
    set down for a resumed hearing in due course. I agree with that  course
    of action.  Although the remaking decision would involve extensive fact-
    finding, this can quite properly be done at a resumed hearing.

22. The remaking component of the decision in this appeal shall not involve
    any preserved findings of fact.

23. To progress this matter, I have set  out  directions  to  the  parties,
    below.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and I set  it
aside.

This appeal is adjourned for a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal in  due
course.

I maintain the anonymity direction.

Directions to the Parties

(1)  No later than 4pm 27 March 2020, the Secretary of State shall file  and
    serve written submissions on the issue of exclusion  from  the  Refugee
    Convention on the basis of the Appellant's case taken at its highest.

(2)  No later than 4pm on 17 April 2020 the Appellant shall file  and  serve
    a consolidated bundle of all  evidence  relied  on  (including  updated
    witness statements from the Appellant and his two witnesses, such  that
    they are capable of standing as examination-in-chief).

(3)  No later than 10 days prior to the resume hearing the  Appellant  shall
    file and serve a skeleton argument.



Signed   [pic]    Date: 13 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
