
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10139/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2019                            |On 29 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    m S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hussain of Raiyad Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born  on  16  November
    1990.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 28 March 2011 as  a  student
    with leave valid until  February  2014.   Thereafter,  he  was  refused
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant and subsequently under  Art
    8 of the ECHR.

 3. On 24 March 2017, the appellant claimed asylum on the basis that he  is
    gay and, if he returned to Bangladesh, he feared both his  family  (who
    have threatened him) and also other non-state actors.  He claimed  that
    he could not safely live openly as a gay man in Bangladesh.

 4. On 24 September 2017, the Secretary of State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.



The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Clemes and, in a determination promulgated  on  3  April
    2018, he dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  Although  he
    accepted the appellant's claim that he is gay, the judge found that  he
    would not be at real risk of persecution or  serious  ill-treatment  on
    return either from the Bangladesh authorities or from non-state actors.
     The judge found that the appellant would "choose to conceal aspects of
    his sexuality for reasons of responding to social pressure, not because
    he fears that he will be persecuted" (at [26]).

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds.

 7. First, the judge had failed properly to  apply  the  CPIN  "Bangladesh:
    Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity" (November 2017) which,  it  was
    contended, accepted that an LGBT person would be at risk of persecution
    or serious harm if they did not conceal their sexual  orientation  and,
    it was in order to avoid such harm, that LGBT  persons  were  not  open
    (see paras 2.3.16 and 2.3.17).

 8. Second, the grounds also rely upon  para  2.4.4  recognising  that  the
    state authorities are responsible for  arbitrary  arrests,  detentions,
    harassment and  discrimination  towards  LGBT  persons  and  there  are
    reports  of  the  police  physically  and  sexually   assaulting   such
    individuals and also para 2.4.2 which  states  that  whilst  the  state
    appears "able" to protect  LGBT  persons  it  is  "unwilling  to  offer
    effective protection".

 9. In addition, the grounds  contend  that  the  judge,  in  reaching  his
    factual findings in [26] that the appellant would choose to  avoid  any
    ill-treatment out of choice or social pressure,  failed  to  take  into
    account the appellant's evidence in his witness statement at paras  29-
    31 where the appellant said that,  in  effect,  he  hid  his  sexuality
    because of his fear of violence and  abuse  from  the  public  and  his
    family and also that he  would  be  subject  to  ill-treatment  by  the
    police.

10. Initially, the First-tier Tribunal refused the appellant permission  to
    appeal.  However, on 19 September 2018, the Upper Tribunal  (UTJ  Pitt)
    granted the appellant permission to appeal.

Discussion

11. At the outset of the hearing, having heard brief  submissions  from  Mr
    Hussain on behalf of  the  appellant,  Mr  Howells  indicated  that  he
    conceded on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law in reaching his adverse finding  in  [26]  that
    the appellant would  conceal  his  sexuality,  not  because  he  feared
    violence and abuse, but because of social pressure and out  of  choice.
    That, Mr Howells  accepted,  failed  to  take  into  account  what  the
    appellant had said in his witness statement, in particular at paras 29-
    31.

12. Mr Howells invited me to set aside the judge's decision on the basis of
    this material error of law.  He then invited me to allow the appeal  on
    asylum grounds on the basis  that  the  judge,  in  the  light  of  the
    appellant's evidence and the CPIN, could only have allowed the  appeal.
    Mr Howells invited me to allow the appeal for the following reasons.

13. First, as Judge Clemes had accepted, the appellant is gay.

14. Secondly, Mr Howells  acknowledged  that  the  judge  had,  in  effect,
    accepted  the  appellant's  credibility  and  I   should   accept   the
    appellant's evidence set out at paras 29-31 of  his  witness  statement
    that he would be discreet on return to Bangladesh in  relation  to  his
    sexuality but only because her feared violence, abuse and other serious
    ill-treatment.

15. Thirdly, Mr Howells invited me to find on the basis of the CPIN  report
    that the appellant would be at real risk of  persecution  by  non-state
    actors, including his family if he were openly to  express  his  sexual
    orientation.  He drew my attention to para 3.1.5  of  the  CPIN  report
    which states:

         "In general, an LGBT person  who  does  not  conceal  their  sexual
         orientation or gender identity may be at risk of  treatment,  which
         by its nature and repetition  amounts  to  persecution  or  serious
         harm.  The nature and degree of treatment  may  vary  according  to
         geography and socio-economic  status.   Gay  rights  activists  and
         bloggers may be at greater risks due to their profile.   Each  case
         must be considered on its facts and merits."

16. Mr Howells accepted that, in the case of the appellant, he would be  at
    real risk of persecution from  non-state  actors  and,  given  his  own
    history, including his family on return.

17. Fourthly, Mr Howells accepted that the appellant, as a gay man,  formed
    part of a particular social group.

18. Fifthly, Mr Howells accepted, in the light of para 3.1.6  of  the  CPIN
    report, that the Bangladesh state although "able" to provide protection
    would be "unwilling" to do so.

19. Finally, Mr Howells accepted that  there  was  no  internal  relocation
    option open to the appellant.

20. I accept Mr Howells concession, on the basis of the background evidence
    (in particular in the CPIN report) and the  appellant's  own  evidence,
    that he has established that he would be at real  risk  of  persecution
    for a Convention reason from non-state actors including his  family  if
    he were openly to express his sexuality in Bangladesh.  He would choose
    not to do so in  order  to  avoid  that  persecution  or  serious  ill-
    treatment.  The state would not  be  willing  to  provide  him  with  a
    sufficiency of protection.   Applying  the  approach  set  out  in  the
    Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) and Another v SSHD [2010] UKSC  31  at  [82]
    per Lord Rodger the appellant has, in my judgment, established that  he
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason  (namely
    as a member of a PSG).

Decision

21. For these reasons, therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    That decision is set aside.

22. I remake  the  decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             24 January 2019


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Mr Hussain invited me to make a  fee  award.   It  was  not  entirely  clear
whether the appellant had, in fact, paid a fee to bring his  asylum  appeal.
However, given my decision, I  am  content  to  make  a  fee  award  in  the
appellant's favour in respect of any fee paid  or  payable  in  relation  to
these appeal proceedings.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             24 January 2019
