
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/10647/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27 January 2020                    |On 4 February 2020               |
|                                      |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                     A M
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J Greer (counsel) instructed by Ison Harrison
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, because this is a protection claim.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Foudy promulgated on 17 September 2019, which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 08/03/1985 and is a national of Azerbaijan.  On
22/08/2018 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Foudy ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 5  November  2019  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Holmes granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "As set out in ground 1, it is  arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  to
      consider the weight that could be given to  the  corroboration  relied
      upon by the appellant. It is arguably unclear why the same  individual
      cannot  work  as  an  investigative  journalist  and   as   a   sports
      reporter/commentator at the same time in Azerbaijan - there  are  many
      examples of individuals holding such a  role  in  the  UK;  ground  2,
      grounds 3 and 4 also disclose arguable errors in the approach taken to
      credibility in the course of this short decision. The appellant's case
      was that he suffered head injuries in the mistreatment he received; it
      is not clear why they do not  amount  to  very  harsh  treatment,  or,
      indeed, whether the Judge's view of  the  evidence  that  no  credible
      claim to activism could be made by the individual  who  had  not  been
      badly mistreated. Ground 5 appears to add nothing to the  others,  the
      Judge  rejected  the  entirety  of  the  appellant's  account  as  not
      credible, without distinction."

The Hearing

5. As soon as this appeal called, Mr Tan told me that  he  could  no  longer
oppose the appeal. He told me that the decision contains material errors  of
law because no consideration has been  given  to  the  documentary  evidence
relied on by the appellant. He told me that the  Judge's  findings  of  fact
are inadequate.

6. Mr Greer asked me to set the decision aside. On joint motion I was  asked
to remit this case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  a  further  fact-
finding exercise is necessary.

Analysis

7. The Judges findings of fact are limited to [18] of  the  decision.  There
the Judge summarily deals with the evidence, but offers no  proper  analysis
of the evidence and  no  explanation  for  giving  some  weight  to  certain
matters and little weight to other matters. There is no  discussion  of  the
documentary evidence produced. The Judge gives some  reasons  for  rejecting
certain aspects of the appellant's account, but those reasons are too  brief
and do not adequately explain the conclusions that the Judge reaches.

8.  In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

9.  The decision is tainted by material errors of law. I  set  the  decision
aside. None of the findings of fact can stand. I cannot  substitute  my  own
decision because a further fact-finding exercise is necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

10. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

11. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

12. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Manchester  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Foudy.

Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by a  material  error
of law.

14. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 17 September  2019.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.




Signed
              Date 31 January 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


