
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10410/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 June 2017                               |On 22 June 2017               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     M R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Bayoumi instructed by Asylum Justice
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran.  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    on 31 May 2011 and was arrested  having  been  encountered  by  the  UK
    authorities leaving a lorry.  On 1 June  2011,  the  appellant  claimed
    asylum.  The basis of his claim was that his father was  involved  with
    the Komala Party in Iran.  In March 2011, the authorities had raided  a
    shop run by his father and another man.  They  were  arrested  although
    the appellant, who worked there too, avoided arrest.  He left Iran  two
    weeks later.  He claimed that his father and the other man  were  later
    executed by the Iranian authorities and  that  he  was  wanted  by  the
    authorities.

 3. On 14 September 2016, the Secretary of State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.   Judge  Fowell,  in
    rejecting the appellant's appeal on all  grounds,  concluded  that  the
    appellant had failed to establish that his father was  a  member  of  a
    political  party  and  had  been  executed.   The  appellant  was  not,
    therefore, at risk on return on account of his past  history  and  also
    would not be at risk as a failed asylum  seeker  applying  SSH  and  HR
    (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC).

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  two
    grounds.  First, the judge had erred in law in assessing the  evidence,
    in particular relying upon inconsistencies in the appellant's  account.
    Secondly, the judge had been wrong to take into account,  applying  the
    case of TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40, that the appellant  had
    failed  to  produce  documentary  evidence  of  his  father's   claimed
    execution and membership of the Komala party, in particular  by  making
    the assumption that the executions would  be  reported  in  the  public
    domain.

 6. Initially, the First-tier Tribunal refused permission  to  appeal.   On
    renewal, the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ  Chalkley)  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal on the second ground  but  refused  permission  to
    appeal on the first ground.

 7. On 5 April 2017, the Secretary  of  State  filed  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

Discussion

 8. Ms Bayoumi, who represented the appellant, acknowledged that  the  only
    ground of appeal was ground 2.  She sought to  rely  upon  the  pleaded
    ground and drew my attention to the evidence that the appellant's legal
    representatives had  sought  confirmation  of  his  father's  execution
    unsuccessfully.  She acknowledged, however, that it was the appellant's
    own evidence that his father's execution had been reported  in  the  TV
    news and newspaper reports which were publicly available.

 9. The  evidence  before  the  judge,  given  by  the  appellant  himself,
    concerning reports of his father's execution and what efforts were made
    to obtain supporting documentation is set out in  paras  20-22  of  the
    determination as follows:

         "20.     He was asked how [his aunt] and her family found out about
             his father's execution and he said that they knew through  the
             TV  news  and  newspaper  reports.   There  was,  he   agreed,
             publically available information about such  executions:   'if
             they execute anyone, they tell everyone, and they do not  give
             back the body.'

         21.  This led to an exploration both of why he  had  not  mentioned
             this before and why he had not obtained a copy of any of these
             public announcements.  He said that for a  long  time  he  was
             unable to make contact with his family, and only recently made
             contact again; then that his  family  in  Iran  could  not  do
             anything because they were afraid that someone was  monitoring
             him.

         22.  Asked if he had tried to get reports off the internet, he said
             that his solicitor had tried to contact the Komala Party,  who
             gave them a number in Paris, and they  in  turn  gave  them  a
             number in Iraq, but the solicitor was not happy  to  go  ahead
             with the call to Iraq.  (This appeared to be  a  reference  to
             emails in the bundle regarding attempts to  establish  whether
             the appellant's father was a member of the Komala party.)   He
             personally had not searched on the internet as he was not very
             familiar with it.  He conceded that he  had  a  mobile  phone,
             that he used it to go on Facebook and things like that but did
             not know how to search for things.  He  only  knows  a  little
             English.  His former girlfriend had helped  him  to  open  the
             Facebook account."

10. Having cited the case of TK (Burundi) at para 40 of his  determination,
    the judge went on to deal with the absence of  supporting  evidence  at
    paras 41-43 as follows:

         "41.     I bear in mind the appellant's age, and that he was  about
             16 at the time of these events, but he was rather  older  when
             he claims to have been told of his father's death, and it is a
             simple question of whether the information is true  or  false,
             not whether he has properly understood or  remembered  events.
             He has also had a long  time  to  try  to  get  hold  of  this
             information, and only recently have his  solicitors  made  the
             limited attempts described about to  confirm  his  account  of
             membership.  The fact of the executions  themselves  seems  to
             have gone entirely unexplored.

         42.  The most significant feature, it seems  to  me,  is  that  the
             appellant has not himself made any  effort  to  find  out  any
             information about his father's death.  I cannot accept,  given
             that he was able, with help, to open a  Facebook  account  and
             use it, that he could not either from his own knowledge or  by
             enlisting the help of others, have made some personal  attempt
             to find out details of his  father's  death  and  how  it  was
             reported.  Even if natural curiosity did not lead  him  to  do
             so, as I feel sure it would, his own asylum  appeal  has  long
             depended on establishing this fact.  I  therefore  find  as  a
             fact that the appellant's father, and  his  uncles,  have  not
             been executed.

         43.  This is central to the appellant's  account.   Shorn  of  that
             aspect, everything collapses.  It  must  follow  that  in  all
             probability his father  and  relatives  are  still  alive  and
             living in Iran, but in any  event,  having  put  forward  this
             false account of his  father's  death,  I  cannot  accept  his
             account as credible on other matters."

11. As Ms Bayoumi accepted, contrary to what is said in  the  grounds,  the
    judge did not make an assumption that his father's execution  would  be
    reported in the public domain.  Rather,  it  was  the  appellant's  own
    evidence that it had been reported and this was publicly  available  as
    that was the basis upon which he said that his  family  had  found  out
    about his father's execution.

12. In TK (Burundi) the Court of Appeal  recognised  that  the  absence  of
    independent supporting evidence could, where  it  would  be  ordinarily
    available, be relevant to assessing the credibility of an  individual's
    account.  At [20], Thomas LJ (as he then was) said this:

         "The importance of the evidence that emerged in this  Court  is  to
         demonstrate  how  important  it  is  in  cases  of  this  kind  for
         independent supporting evidence  to  be  provided  where  it  would
         ordinarily  be  available;  that  where  there   is   no   credible
         explanation for the failure to provide the supporting  evidence  it
         can be a very strong pointer that the account being  given  is  not
         credible."

13. Here, the judge considered  the  appellant's  evidence  concerning  the
    efforts made by his (then) legal  representatives  to  obtain  evidence
    both of his father's execution and also his father's membership of  the
    Komala Party.  But, as the judge noted, the "most significant  feature"
    was that the appellant himself had made  no  effort  to  find  out  any
    information about his father's death despite his use of  the  internet,
    including opening a Facebook account.  In my judgment, Judge Fowell was
    entitled to take into account that the appellant  had  made  no  effort
    himself to obtain that supporting documentation.

14. In addition, the judge was entitled to take into account that,  despite
    the attempt by the appellant's previous legal representatives to obtain
    evidence about his father's membership of the Komala  Party,  they  had
    not  been  fully  followed  through  which  "suggested  some  lack   of
    willingness by his solicitors to press  those  enquiries".   The  judge
    said this at paras 35-37.

         "35.     The Home Office's Country Information and Guidance  report
             on Kurdish political groups, at paragraph 9.4.1 (quoted in the
             refusal letter at paragraph 24) indicated, on the basis  of  a
             report from the Danish Refugee Council in 2013,  that  whether
             the appellant's father had been a member of the Komala  SKHKI,
             the Komala KZK or  the  Komala  Party  of  Iranian  Kurdistan,
             letters of recommendation could be solicited and sent  to  the
             relevant immigration authorities.   Paragraph  9.2.1  explains
             that the Komala SKHKI is the communist grouping.

         36.  This evidence has still not been obtained, despite the  emails
             in the appellant's bundle, showing attempts to follow this up.
              These comprise one sent as recently as 19  December  2016  to
             info@pdki.org, asking for details and, I note, stating 'We are
             instructed that there were press reports  of  the  execution.'
             Another email later that day was sent to a different group  in
             the same terms.  The PDKI responded promptly,  referring  them
             to the international  office  in  Paris  and  giving  a  phone
             number.  This was met with a query that this seemed to  be  an
             Iraqi number and asking whether it went to the  Paris  office.
             There the  flow  of  communications  start  and  finish.   The
             appellant's own evidence suggested some lack of willingness by
             his solicitors to press  these  enquiries,  but  whatever  the
             reason no evidence has been produced.

         37.  This is itself a significant failure, given that this was  the
             main issue identified in the refusal letter.  ..."

15. In addition, the  judge  identified  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence
    before him which, although challenged in the first ground, stand  since
    permission to appeal was refused on that ground.

16. I am satisfied that the judge's reasons for rejecting  the  appellant's
    account of his father's involvement  with  the  Komala  Party  and  his
    execution were sufficient and adequate and legally sustainable.   There
    is no other challenge to the judge's decision  and  his  findings  were
    plainly open to  him  on  the  evidence  and  were  not  irrational  or
    otherwise unlawful.

Decision

17. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal did not err  in  law  in
    dismissing the appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision stands.

18. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date:  21 June 2017




