
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10719/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 March 2019                      |On 20 March 2019                     |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                              SANJOY KUMAR SAHA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Swain, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal issued on 4 January 2019 dismissing  his  appeal  against
    the respondent's decision of 21 August 2018  refusing  him  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection.

Background.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 17 October 1981.   He
    arrived in the UK on 2 September 2009 as a Tier  4  (General)  student.
    He went back to Bangladesh for the funeral of his  father  in  November
    2011.  He returned to the UK on 3 September 2012  again  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) student and his leave was later extended to  30  April  2015.
    On 29 April 2015 he made an application under article 8  based  on  his
    private and family life.  This application was refused  on  6  November
    2015 with  an  out  of  country  right  of  appeal.   He  made  further
    submissions on 11 December 2015, but these were  rejected  on  5  April
    2016 with no right of appeal.  He claimed asylum on 21 February 2018.

3.    The basis of his claim was that he had been targeted and  attacked  by
    members of the Awami League (AL) in  Bangladesh  as  a  result  of  his
    activities with the Bangladesh National Party (BNP).  He said  that  he
    joined the student wing of the BNP in  2001,  organising  meetings  and
    attending demonstrations on behalf of the party.  He  claimed  that  he
    was attacked on 7 January 2007 while attending Bangla  College  and  at
    interview said this either happened because of his activities with  the
    BNP or because of his Hindu faith.

4.    He claimed that he was attacked again on 6 April 2012 at  his  village
    home by people supporting AK, a local  AL  politician.   The  appellant
    said that he had a dispute with this politician who wanted to take over
    his properties after his father's death.  He feared that  he  would  be
    targeted again if  he  returned  to  Bangladesh  because  he  had  been
    politically active with the BNP in the UK and he had  received  threats
    on Facebook.

5.    The respondent refused the claim  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the
    Reasons for Decision annexed to the decision letter of 21 August  2018.
    The respondent accepted that the appellant was a national of Bangladesh
    and a Hindu but not that he had been politically active for the BNP  or
    had had any difficulties because of any such activities.   It  was  not
    accepted that he would be of any adverse interest to the authorities in
    Bangladesh on return.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

6.    The appellant appealed  against  this  decision  and  at  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal the judge heard oral evidence  from  the
    appellant and from three further witnesses MB, AI and  AA.   The  judge
    found that the appellant did not have any  significant  profile  within
    the BNP or that he had a well-founded fear of persecution on return  to
    Bangladesh for a Convention reason [39].  He noted in  respect  of  the
    claimed incident in January 2007 that in his  interview  the  appellant
    stated that he was attacked either because of his involvement with  the
    BNP or because of his Hindu faith.

7.    The witness MB had stated at [6] of his witness statement that he  had
    come to know that the appellant was attacked but he did not  state  how
    this information came  to  him.   He  said  that  he  had  visited  the
    appellant's house and  he  told  him  that  he  had  been  attacked  by
    opposition party activists but in his evidence, he said that he did not
    see the appellant having problems in Bangladesh but had heard  that  he
    had had problems.  The judge attached limited weight this  evidence  as
    he provided no detailed evidence about where and how the appellant  was
    attacked in 2007.  She also commented on the fact after being asked  in
    re-examination about the attack in 2012, after a considerable pause, he
    added that the appellant had been attacked when they were both involved
    in politics in 2007 [27].

8.    The appellant gave evidence that between 2007  and  2009  he  had  had
    occasional threats when he visited his village,  but  the  judge  found
    that this was vague and unsubstantiated [28].  He also claimed that  he
    was attacked at his home in April 2012 by people who were supporters of
    the AL.  However, the judge noted that the appellant had  not  provided
    any telephone messages of the threats that  were  made  or  discussions
    they had about his father's properties [28].  She also noted  a  letter
    relied upon by the appellant from RU, a local president of the AL [29].
     She commented that if the appellant had a known profile in  Bangladesh
    as an activist for the BNP in his area, she did not  find  it  remotely
    credible that a local president of the  AL  would  write  a  letter  of
    support for him in his human rights application [30].

9.    The judge noted the appellant had produced a number of photographs  in
    relation to his attendance at demonstrations in London, but he had  not
    produced a single photograph of his claimed activities  in  Bangladesh,
    although he  had  claimed  that  he  had  attended  demonstrations  and
    organised meetings and was generally very active.  She attached limited
    weight to the evidence of the witnesses who attended the appeal hearing
    in support of the appellant's claim.  AI had only met the appellant  in
    2015 in the UK and any information  he  had  about  his  activities  in
    Bangladesh must have come from the appellant himself. AA stated that he
    knew the appellant from 2012 and that he had come  to  know  about  the
    appellant's involvement with the BNP in  Bangladesh,  but  he  had  not
    stated how he came to know that information [31].

10.    Further,  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant's  credibility  was
    significantly  damaged  under  s.  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 because he did not claim asylum
    either when he arrived in the UK in 2009, despite claiming he had  been
    attacked in 2007, nor did he claim when he returned from Bangladesh  in
    2012.  He said he had not claimed because he hoped  there  would  be  a
    power change in Bangladesh and that he could go back if the BNP came to
    power [32]  He had also stated that he was advised by his solicitor  to
    make an application on human rights grounds so that if his  party  came
    to power he could return to Bangladesh.  [33]

11.   The judge did not find that credible.  She found  that  the  appellant
    was an educated man who had previously made  applications  for  Tier  4
    student visas and was well aware that he could claim  asylum.   He  had
    only made his claim after being notified of a decision  to  refuse  his
    further submissions in relation to his human rights application and had
    waited until as late as 21 February 2018 to claim asylum [33].

The Grounds of Appeal.

12.   In the grounds of appeal it is argued  in  ground  1  that  the  judge
    failed to consider filed evidence of the appellant's political activism
    in Bangladesh and, in particular, failed give due weight to evidence at
    pages 68-73 of the appeal bundle, which had been  referred  to  in  the
    appellant's skeleton argument, and was evidence that the appellant  was
    an active, high-profile supporter of the BNP in Bangladesh.

13.   In ground 2 it is argued that the judge's analysis of  the  letter  of
    support from RU disclosed an inconsistent  approach  to  the  evidence.
    The judge had attached significant prejudicial weight to the letter  of
    7 December 2015 from RU, the president of a local AL branch, said to be
    a man sympathetic to the appellant who did not seek  to  persecute  him
    despite their different political views in 2015.  The judge in [30] had
    dismissed  that  letter  as  not  being  genuine  and  found  that  his
    credibility was significantly diminished.  That analysis, so the ground
    argues, was wholly at odds with the judge's subsequent finding at  [39]
    that the letter was genuine, showing that the appellant had friends  in
    the AL and was, therefore, not at risk of persecution.

14.   In ground 3 it is argued that there was an unreasonable assessment  of
    the evidence of MB  who  had  attended  the  hearing  as  a  supporting
    witness.  He was an active supporter of the BNP in Bangladesh  and  had
    been granted refugee status in the UK.  It is argued that the judge was
    wrong to place little weight on his evidence in the light of  the  fact
    that one answer  had  been  given  after  some  considerable  pause  in
    relation to whether the appellant had been attacked in 2007.  The judge
    had failed to give proper weight to MB's witness statement which  would
    confirm that, while he had not  seen  the  appellant  being  physically
    attacked in 2007, he had seen him shortly afterwards at  his  home  and
    had urged him to report the matter to the police.

15.   Further,  the  judge  had  been  wrong  to  find  that  there  was  an
    inconsistency in the evidence saying at [27] that  MB's  oral  evidence
    was that the appellant was attacked in 2012 by members of  the  Chhatra
    League despite the appellant himself not making that claim.  The ground
    argues that the judge  failed  to  afford  appropriate  weight  to  the
    evidence of MB.  In ground  5  (there  is  no  ground  4)  there  is  a
    challenge the  judge's  assessment  of  the  threats  received  by  the
    appellant on-line, but permission  was  not  granted  on  this  ground,
    permission only being granted on grounds 1-3.

Submissions.

16.   In his submissions, Mr Swain  adopted  these  grounds.   When  dealing
    with ground 1 he argued in substance the judge had failed to  take  all
    relevant evidence into account when considering whether  the  appellant
    had been a political activist for the BNP in Bangladesh.  The judge had
    referred to the appellant's lack of profile but, so he argued, she  had
    failed to take into account the evidence contained in  the  appellant's
    bundle particularly at pages 68 to 73, which  showed  that  he  was  an
    active high-profile supporter of  the  BNP  in  Bangladesh.   She  had,
    therefore, failed to take into account the  evidence  relating  to  the
    extent of the appellant's activities.

17.    So  far  as  the  ground  2  was   concerned,   he   submitted   that
    disproportionate attention  had  been  paid  to  the  letter  from  RU,
    provided in support of the human rights appeal  in  2015,  whereas  the
    judge had failed to give similar attention to the evidence  adduced  on
    behalf of the appellant.  In respect of ground 3, he argued that  undue
    weight was given to a perceived discrepancy in the evidence between the
    account given by the appellant and MB in  relation  to  the  attack  in
    2007.  The judge had not considered all the evidence and in  particular
    MB's account in his witness statement.   The  appellant's  account  was
    that he was attacked by young men who were supporters of the AL and  as
    such they would be members of the Chhatra League.

18.   Ms Isherwood submitted that the judge's findings  were  properly  open
    to him for the reasons he gave.  The letters the  appellant  sought  to
    rely on at pages 68 to 73 of the bundle were written in  general  terms
    and, in any event, the judge could not reasonably be expected to  refer
    to each and every item of evidence.  The judge was entitled to consider
    what inferences should be drawn from the fact that  the  appellant  had
    produced a letter from a local AL president in  support  of  his  human
    rights application in 2015, when he based his later asylum claim  on  a
    of the AL.  The judge's comments on this issue were  properly  open  to
    her.

Assessment of whether the judge erred in law.

19.   I must consider is whether the  judge  erred  in  law  such  that  her
    decision should be set aside.  Ground 1 argues that the judge failed to
    consider the evidence relating to the appellant's political activism in
    Bangladesh  and,  in  particular,  failed  to  attach  weight  to   the
    documentary evidence at pages 68 to 73.  These include a letter  at  68
    from the organisational secretary  of  the  Pabna  branch  of  the  BNP
    certifying that the  appellant  was  actively  involved  with  the  BNP
    student wing and that his family had been harassed  and  victimised  in
    different ways by militant Muslim  and  AL  leaders.   The  appellant's
    contribution  to  local  organisational  activities  was  described  as
    irreplaceable.

20.   At 70 there is a letter from the local president of the BNP  in  Pabna
    saying  that  the  appellant   actively   participated   in   different
    organisational activities, meetings and seminars and was involved  with
    the anti-AL  movement,  adding  that  because  of  different  types  of
    harassment by the government party and militant Muslims,  he  had  been
    bound to go back to the UK in 2012 after returning home because of  his
    father's death.

21.   There is no reason to believe  that  the  judge  did  not  take  these
    documents into account.  She said at [24]  that  she  took  fully  into
    consideration all the documents contained  in  the  appeal  file.   The
    appellant's bundle of documents was extensive  and  in  excess  of  400
    pages.  When the judge's decision is read as a whole, it is clear  that
    she  took  the  documentary  evidence  in  the  bundle   into   account
    specifically referring to a number of documents: she referred  in  [12]
    to page 409 showing the appellant in a photograph with the secretary of
    the BNP, to the Facebook  messages  at  [29]  and  to  the  photographs
    produced in relation to the appellant's attendance at demonstrations in
    [31], in this context commenting that he  had  not  produced  a  single
    photograph of his claimed activities in Bangladesh.  She also  referred
    at [17] to the newspaper reports in the bundle.

22.   I am not satisfied that the  failure  to  refer  specifically  to  the
    documents at pages 68-73  indicates  that  they  were  not  taken  into
    account.  The issue of the extent of the appellant's activities for the
    BNP was clearly before the judge and for the reasons she gave at  [25]-
    [35], she reached findings properly open to her that he had  failed  to
    show that he was anything other than a low-level activist at best [35].

23.   So far as ground 2 is  concerned,  the  argument  is  that  the  judge
    attached disproportionate weight to the letter from  RU  and  this  was
    inconsistent with the way that she treated other evidence. There is  no
    substance in this submission.  Issues of weight were for the  judge  to
    assess.  The grounds argue that the judge erred by finding at [30] that
    the letter was not genuine and is inconsistent with her comment at [39]
    that it demonstrated the appellant had friends within the AL.

24.   However, it was for the judge to decide what inferences to  draw  from
    the fact that this letter had been produced by the appellant in support
    of his application for leave to remain on human rights grounds in 2015.
     She was entitled to draw an adverse inference  from  his  reliance  on
    this letter, when the substance of his asylum claim was that  he  would
    be at risk from the AL because of his activities and  support  for  the
    BNP. There was no inconsistency in  the  way  the  judge  assessed  the
    evidence.  It was for her to decide what weight to give to each item of
    evidence in the context of the evidence as a whole.

25.   The third ground argues that the judge's assessment of  MB's  evidence
    was unreasonable.  However, this ground, like the other grounds, raises
    issues of fact rather than law.   When  assessing  MB's  evidence,  the
    judge was entitled to take into account the fact that he could not give
    direct evidence about the claimed attack in 2007 and the fact  that  in
    his interview the appellant had stated  that  he  was  attacked  either
    because of involvement with the BNP or  because  of  his  Hindu  faith.
    Similarly, the judge was entitled to note  that  according  to  MB  the
    appellant was attacked by members of the Chhatra League in 2012 whereas
    the appellant had not in fact said that himself,  simply  that  he  was
    attacked by supporters of the AL  at  the  instigation  of  AK.   I  am
    satisfied that the grounds are in substance an attempt  to  reopen  and
    reargue issues of fact where the judge reached findings  properly  open
    to her.

26.   In any event, the judge had to consider the evidence of the  witnesses
    in the context of the evidence  as  a  whole  and  when  assessing  the
    credibility of the appellant's account, she was entitled to  take  into
    account the long delay in claiming asylum.  He did not  claim  in  2009
    nor when he returned in 2012. He only  claimed  after  an  unsuccessful
    application for leave to remain on human rights  grounds  in  2015  and
    after his further submissions had been rejected  in  April  2015,  then
    only claiming asylum in February 2018.

27.   The judge was also entitled to reject the  appellant's  evidence  that
    he had been advised by a solicitor to make a human rights claim as,  if
    his party came to power, he could return to Bangladesh and, as  I  have
    already said, to draw an adverse on credibility from the fact that  the
    appellant had previously relied on a letter from a local  president  of
    the AL, but later claimed to be at risk from the AL.

28.   In summary, I am satisfied that the judge's findings  and  conclusions
    were properly open to her for the reasons she gave,  having  taken  all
    relevant evidence into account.  The grounds of appeal do  not  satisfy
    me that she erred in law.

Decision.

29.   The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and  it  follows  that  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed:     H J E Latter     Dated: 15 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
