

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10275/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11 December 2018                        |On 21 December 2018             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                    S I K
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Mark Schwenk, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
Hickmotts
                  Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Myroslav Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
The Upper Tribunal has made an anonymity order pursuant to Rule  14  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless  the  Upper  Tribunal
or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form  of
publication thereof shall identify the original appellant, whether  directly
or indirectly. This order applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision  to
   refuse  her  international  protection  under  the  Refugee   Convention,
   humanitarian protection, or leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
   human rights grounds.  The appellant is a citizen  of  Iraq,  of  Kurdish
   ethnicity.

Background

2. In 2012, the appellant became engaged to marry a  man  of  Iraqi  origin,
   who was settled in the United Kingdom.  He had been naturalised a British
   citizen the previous year after spending 15 years in the United  Kingdom.
   The appellant has siblings in Iraq, and cousins in the United Kingdom.

3. They married in Iraq in  April  2012  and  after  6  weeks,  the  husband
   returned to the United Kingdom to apply for entry clearance for his  wife
   to join him there.  He could not find suitable employment and  the  entry
   clearance application was not made.

4. The husband moved back to Iraq in January 2014.  From February 2014  they
   lived together in Iraq in a home  of  their  own.   In  April  2015,  the
   appellant gave birth to their son, a British citizen by birth because  of
   his father's nationality.   In September 2015, the  husband  returned  to
   the United Kingdom to renew his British passport.  He had not  felt  well
   in Iraq, so he also sought medical advice and was diagnosed with what  is
   described as 'blood cancer'.  He  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
   treatment, in hospital for 5 to 6 months, and in the spring  of  2016  he
   was in remission, so he was able to visit the appellant and  his  son  in
   Iraq, but only to stay for 20 days because treatment was  continuing  and
   he needed to be in the United Kingdom to receive it.

5. The appellant and their son remained in Iraq, living with  the  husband's
   uncle until September 2015, when the husband's health deteriorated again,
   and the uncle paid for the appellant and  the  child  to  travel  to  the
   United Kingdom to join him.  The child was desperate to see  his  father,
   and her husband wanted to see them both.

6. The appellant said that she had lost her Iraqi passport but was  able  to
   travel on a document which the uncle placed in  her  bag.   She  has  not
   sought to replace the passport, although there would be no risk to her in
   doing so in the United Kingdom.  The  appellant  arrived  in  the  United
   Kingdom on 20 September 2016 and claimed asylum on arrival.

7. A week later, the appellant heard from the uncle that her  brothers  were
   not happy that she  had  left  Iraq  to  be  with  her  husband  and  had
   threatened to kill the appellant.  It is her case that she has not  heard
   from her husband's uncle since then.

8. The husband has now recovered and is working again.   The  appellant  has
   remained in the United Kingdom.  Her immigration status has  always  been
   unlawful or precarious, but her son is a qualifying child.





First-tier Tribunal decision

9. The First-tier Judge was not satisfied that the claimed threat  from  the
   appellant's brother was  credible;  Iraqi  cultural  norms  required  the
   appellant to live with her husband's family, and she had done just  that,
   rejoining her husband in the United Kingdom when it was  possible  to  do
   so.  The Judge found that the threat part of  the  account  shifted  over
   time and was not credible, also that she claimed  asylum  on  arrival,  a
   week before the threat was said to have been made via the uncle.

10. The Judge accepted the limited evidence of  the  husband's  illness  and
   remission, the marriage in Iraq, and the husband's subsequent attempt  to
   obtain entry clearance for her as his  wife,  followed  by  their  living
   together in Iraq in their own home.

11. The Judge found that the family had originally planned to live  in  Iraq
   together and had even identified a family home in which to do so,  before
   the husband's illness.  The husband now being in  remission,  the  First-
   tier Judge considered  that  they  could  properly  return  to  Iraq  and
   continue with their planned life together.

12. The Judge did not consider that the best interests  of  the  appellant's
   child were such as to outweigh the  United  Kingdom's  right  to  control
   immigration. If the husband did not return to Iraq with his family,  then
   now that he could work again, an application could be  made  for  her  to
   come to the United Kingdom with entry  clearance  as  his  spouse.    The
   Judge considered the asylum claim to be 'a flagrant attempt to circumvent
   the Immigration Rules for entry clearance as a spouse'.  If the appellant
   was required to leave the United Kingdom, the appellant's  husband  could
   care for the British citizen child, who was not yet 4 years old.

13.  The  First-tier  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all  grounds.   The
   appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

14. Permission to appeal was granted, based on the  best  interests  of  the
   appellant's three year  old  son  and  on  a  challenge  to  the  Judge's
   reasoning on the asylum claim.    When  granting  permission  to  appeal,
   Judge Bird considered that the findings of fact were adequately  reasoned
   but did not expressly exclude the reasons challenge  from  the  grant  of
   permission.

15. The focus of the grant of permission was the appellant's child:

         "4.  ...It is arguable that the Judge has made an error of  law  in
         her consideration whether it would be unreasonable  to  expect  the
         appellant's British citizen child to relocate with her to  Iraq  or
         whether it would be in the  best  interests  of  the  child  to  be
         separated from his mother.  An arguable error of law has been  made
         in the  consideration  of  the  law  applicable  -  the  Judge  has
         considered whether there would be 'insurmountable obstacles' rather
         than the question of reasonableness."

16. The last point in [4] of the  grant  of  permission  is  erroneous:  the
   question of insurmountable obstacles was considered at [34] in the First-
   tier Tribunal decision, but the reasonableness  question  was  considered
   separately at [37].

Rule 24 Reply

17. The respondent filed a rather sparse Rule 24 Reply:

         "2.  The respondent opposes the appellant's  appeal.   In  summary,
         the respondent will submit inter alia that the Judge of the  First-
         tier Tribunal directed himself [sic] appropriately.  The Judge does
         in fact find [37]  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         appellant's child to leave the United Kingdom with her; the correct
         test is applied."

18. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

19. I heard oral submissions from Mr Schwenk and Mr Diwnycz.

20. For the appellant, Mr Schwenk relied on Safi [2018] UKUT 388  (IAC)  and
   Ferrer [2012] UKUT 00305 (IAC) to establish  that,  absent  any  specific
   limitation on the grounds of appeal all grounds were arguable.  I  accept
   that such is the correct approach.

21. Mr Schwenk relied on evidence about honour crimes in  Kurdistan,  to  be
   found in the respondent's Country Policy and Information Note on  Kurdish
   'Honour' Crimes of August 2017, in particular at 5.1.3,  7.2.1-7.2.4  and
   7.2.8, and on the Canadian IRB  Note  on  Honour-based  violence  in  the
   Kurdistan region; state protection  and  support  services  available  to
   victims of 15 February 2016. Women  in  Kurdistan  were  required  to  be
   obedient to social norms.

22. As regards the  situation  of  the  child,  Mr  Schwenk  relied  on  the
   decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary of  State
   for the Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53, handed  down  on  24
   October 2018, at [10]-[11]. The First-tier Judge had not had the  benefit
   of the guidance hterein given but Mr Schwenk argued that the reasons  for
   not placing determinative weight on the best interests of the appellant's
   British citizen child as expressed in the decision imported blame for his
   mother's  immigration  history  and  were  unlawful.    KO  was  arguable
   inconsistent with the 'powerful reasons' guidance given by the  Court  of
   Appeal in MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R (on the application of) v Upper Tribunal
   (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [44],  and
   in MT and ET (child's best interests; ex tempore  pilot)  Nigeria  [2018]
   UKUT 88(IAC) and the respondent's own instructions to caseworkers.

23. Mr Schwenk asked me to allow the appeal and to remit the appeal  to  the
   First-tier Tribunal for the proper test to be applied.

24. For the respondent, Mr Diwnycz  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  not
   simply followed the uncle's instructions.  In her  witness  statement  at
   [6] it was clear that she also wanted to come to the United Kingdom,  but
   the uncle had assisted her.  He asked me to agree with the observation in
   the grant of permission that the reasons challenge on the  asylum  appeal
   was unarguable  and  the  appellant's  evidence  concerning  the  claimed
   threats against her was lacking in credibility.

25. The appellant had embellished her account in  order  to  remain  in  the
   United Kingdom.  She could not meet the entry clearance requirements  for
   a spouse, and she knew it.  The decision of the First-tier Judge did  not
   blame the child and was KO (Nigeria) compliant.  The decision  should  be
   upheld.

26. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Analysis

27. I begin with the asylum claim.  I have  reviewed  the  passages  in  the
   UKBA and CIRB documents to which I was referred.  The sequence of  events
   was that the appellant claimed asylum before the alleged threats had even
   been made, and further, that in living with a  member  of  her  husband's
   family and then coming to  join  him  in  the  United  Kingdom,  she  was
   compliant with social norms in Kurdistan.  There is no  merit  whatsoever
   in the reasons challenge on the asylum claim.

28. As regards the challenge to the decision based on the best interests  of
   the appellant's child, I note that he is still very young.  In MT and ET,
   the Upper Tribunal held that:

         "1. A very young child, who has not started school or who has  only
         recently done so, will have difficulty  in  establishing  that  her
         Article 8 private and family life has  a  material  element,  which
         lies outside her need to live with her parent or parents,  wherever
         that may be. This position, however, changes over  time,  with  the
         result  that  an  assessment  of  best  interests  must   adopt   a
         correspondingly wider focus, examining the child's position in  the
         wider world, of which school will usually be an important part."

   That is precisely the situation of this child.

29. Nor can it be said that the Judge overlooked  the  reasonableness  test,
   or that he punished the child for the mother's immigration history.   The
   decision in this appeal is compliant with the KO (Nigeria)  'real  world'
   test.  The child is old  enough  to  live  with  either  parent  and  the
   appellant mother has no basis of stay in the United  Kingdom.   It  is  a
   matter for the appellant and her husband where they choose to make  their
   family life, and with which of them  the  child  lives.    The  'powerful
   reasons' test in MA (Pakistan) was expressly rejected in  that  decision:
   although at [44] Lord Justice Elias (with whom Lady Justice King and  Sir
   Stephen Richards agreed) indicated that for himself, he would  prefer  to
   apply the 'powerful reasons' approach, he recognised that in MM  (Uganda)
   & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Rev 1)  [2016]  EWCA
   Civ 617, another panel of the Court of Appeal had  reached  the  contrary
   conclusion and he did not seek to distinguish that  approach,  which  was
   approved in KO (Nigeria).

30. For all of the above reasons,  I  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  and
   uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



DECISION

31. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Date:         12 December 2018               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson




