
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10448/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2020                           |On 22 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Richard [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Iengar, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis and
Co



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. For ease of reference, I shall refer to the parties as they were before
    the First-tier Tribunal: the  Secretary  of  State  is  once  more  the
    Respondent and Mr [K] is the Appellant.   This  is  an  appeal  by  the
    Respondent, with permission, against the decision of Designated  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Shaerf ("the judge"), promulgated  on  31  December
    2019,  by  which  he  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal   against   the
    Respondent's refusal of his protection and human rights claims, made in
    the context of deportation proceedings.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago, born in March  1978.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002.  He then left voluntarily  in
    February 2005 and returned to this country in June of  that  year  with
    entry clearance as a visitor.  He has been in this  country  unlawfully
    since the expiry of that very limited leave.  He had had  a  number  of
    children, some of whom reside in the United Kingdom.

 3. On 11 April 2014, the Appellant and two co-defendants were convicted of
    robbery of a  bookmakers  (the  co-defendants  were  convicted  on  two
    additional counts of robbery relating to other  businesses).   A  month
    later they were sentenced to two and  half  years'  imprisonment.   The
    Appellant and his  co-defendants  sought  permission  to  appeal  their
    convictions  to  the  Court  of  Appeal.   This  had   the   additional
    consequence of the Attorney General making a reference to the Court  on
    the ground that  the  sentences  were  unduly  lenient  and  should  be
    increased.  In a judgment handed down on 3 October 2014, the  Court  of
    Appeal refused the Appellant and  his  co-defendants  leave  to  appeal
    against the conviction and increased  their  sentences  to  five  years
    ([2014] EWCA Crim 1918).

 4. Deportation action was subsequently instigated by  the  Respondent  and
    the Appellant responded to this by making protection and  human  rights
    claims.  In respect of the former, he asserted that his life  would  be
    in  danger  if  deported  to  Trinidad  and  Tobago  due  to   familial
    connections with drugs gangs in that country.  As regards Article 8, he
    stated that he had private  and  family  life  in  this  country,  with
    particular reference to a number of his children here and a partner, Ms
    Lewis.

 5. These claims were refused by a  decision  dated  3  October  2017.   In
    respect of the protection claim, the Respondent  issued  a  certificate
    under section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,
    as amended ("the 2002 Act"), which, if upheld on appeal,  excluded  the
    Appellant from the protection of the Refugee Convention. He was also to
    be excluded from Humanitarian Protection. The protection claim was then
    refused on its merits.  Article  8  was  then  considered  and  it  was
    concluded that he should not be granted leave to remain on the basis of
    any protected rights.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appeal came before the judge on 19  November  2019.   Evidence  was
    adduced relating to the protection and human rights claims.  The  judge
    made the following core findings:

      i) The Appellant could not satisfy Exception 1 or  Exception  2  under
         section 117C(4) and (5) of the,  as  amended.   Indeed,  the  judge
         found  that  there  was  no   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
         relationship with the relevant children in this country  (paragraph
         50);

     ii)  That  taking  account  of  the  relatively  brief  nature  of  his
         relationship with  Ms  Lewis  and  her  children  from  a  previous
         relationship, the Appellant's deportation would not have an  unduly
         harsh impact on them (paragraph 51);

    iii) That, in the context of the private and family life  considerations
         already referred to, there were no  very  compelling  circumstances
         over and above  the  two  exceptions,  with  reference  to  section
         117C(6) of the 2002 Act (paragraph 51);

     iv) That the certificate issued under section 72 of the 2002 Act should
         be upheld because  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  rebut  the  two
         statutory  presumptions  contained  therein.   As  a  result,   the
         Appellant  was  excluded  from  the  protection  of   the   Refugee
         Convention (paragraph 54);

      v) That the Appellant had made an application to  the  Criminal  Cases
         Review Commission ("the CCRC") at some unknown date and  that  this
         was still pending (paragraph 58);

     vi) That it would be "disproportionate" to deport  the  Appellant  "and
         that he should be able to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
         reasonable period of time so that the CCRC might make a finding  on
         his application" (paragraph 58);

    vii) That in light of the previous conclusion,  the  judge  declined  to
         reach any findings on the Article 3 aspect of the protection  claim
         (paragraph 60);

   viii) Under the sub-heading of "notice of decision" that: "The appeal  is
         allowed to the limited extent identified in paragraph 58 above."

 7. In its entirety, paragraph 58 reads as follows:

         "Given the length of time the Appellant  has  been  in  the  United
         Kingdom, albeit unlawfully, the long history between himself and Ms
         Lewis, and the basis on which the  Appellant  has  applied  to  the
         CCRC, I find it would be disproportionate at this stage  to  deport
         the Appellant and that he should be  permitted  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom for a reasonable period of time so that the CCRC the
         might make a finding on his application.  I was  informed  that  an
         application has been made but not when it had been made.  According
         to the CCRC the the average time taken to deal with applications in
         2017 was about 70 weeks.""

 8. Paragraph 59 goes on to state:




         "I have come to this  conclusion  after  taking  into  account  the
         public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals  and  the
         gravity, including the violent elements, of the offence  for  which
         the Appellant has been convicted as  well  as  the  length  of  his
         sentence.  If the conviction were to be set aside, the  Appellant's
         claim for leave to remain in the United Kingdom would be put on  an
         entirely different footing.  I note the lack  of  evidence  of  any
         offending or violent behaviour in the period since his  release  on
         11 November 2016 and conclude  that  permitting  the  Appellant  to
         remain  for  a  further  short  period  of  time   would   not   be
         disproportionate  to  any  of  the  legitimate  public   objectives
         identified in Article 8(2) of the European Convention or Part VA of
         the 2002 Act: see MS (Ivory Coast) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 133."




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 9. The Respondent's grounds essentially make three points: first, that the
    judge should not have accepted that the Appellant had in fact  made  an
    application to the CCRC; second, that the judge had  "no  jurisdiction"
    to allow the appeal to a limited extent, as he  had  purported  to  do;
    third, that his conclusion that the appeal should  be  allowed  on  the
    basis set out was perverse.

10. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Macdonald on 21 January 2020.

11. In advance of the hearing, Ms Iengar served a rule 24 response.



The hearing

12. At the outset of the hearing, I informed the parties that I  was  aware
    of guidance issued by the CCRC to applicants and legal representatives.
     In respect of the former, I referred to a document entitled "Questions
    and Answers", consisting of  10  pages.   In  respect  of  the  latter,
    reference was made  to  a  document  entitled  "Criminal  Cases  Review
    Commission Guidance for Legal Representatives.

13. At the hearing before me Ms Cunha relied on the first point  raised  in
    the grounds of appeal, submitting that  it  was  "bewildering"  of  the
    judge to have accepted the Appellant's evidence on the CCRC application
    at face value.  She accepted that the assertion in the grounds that the
    judge had "no jurisdiction" to have allowed the appeal as  he  did  was
    misconceived.  He had purportedly allowed it on Article 8  grounds  and
    it was the rationality of this, rather than any  jurisdictional  issue,
    which was put forward as the main thrust of the Respondent's challenge.



14. In respect of the perversity challenge, Ms Cunha  emphasised  the  very
    high threshold under  section  117C(6)  of  the  2002  Act.   She  made
    reference to the importance of the public interest  and  the  increased
    sentence imposed by the Court of Appeal.  In short, she submitted  that
    the conclusions set out in paragraph 58 did not constitute  a  rational
    basis for the judge's ultimate decision to allow the appeal.

15. Ms Iengar submitted that the judge had been entitled to  have  accepted
    the Appellant's evidence on the making of the CCRC application.  On the
    rationality issue, the judge had directed himself properly in  law  and
    had  taken  all  relevant  matters  into  account.   What  he  said  at
    paragraphs 58 and 59 should be looked at in the round and that reliance
    on the CCRC application was "one factor of many".  She  emphasised  the
    elevated threshold applicable to rationality challenges.




Decision on error of law

16. I conclude that the judge was entitled to have found as a fact that the
    Appellant had made an application to the CCRC.  Whilst it clearly would
    have been better for corroborating evidence to have been provided (I am
    somewhat puzzled as to why this was not the case),  there  was  nothing
    erroneous in law in the judge accepting  the  Appellant's  evidence  at
    face value.  This finding is to be seen in the context of paragraph 43,
    in which the judge notes that there had been no material  challenge  to
    the Appellant's credibility during the hearing, and also  paragraph  25
    where it is recorded that the Presenting Officer appeared  to  rely  on
    the existence of the CCRC application as a reason for  undermining  the
    Appellant's asserted remorse for his offending (the  point  being  that
    the application implied a profession of innocence).

17. Having said that, I conclude that the judge  reached  a  conclusion  on
    proportionality to which he was not rationally entitled, having  regard
    to  the  relevant  legal  framework  and  the  reasoning  provided   in
    paragraphs 58 and 59 of his decision.  In  saying  this,  I  take  full
    account of the elevated threshold applicable to rationality  challenges
    and, with respect, the experience of the judge concerned.

18. This was a case in which the Appellant could only succeed if  he  could
    show that there were very compelling circumstances, with  reference  to
    section 117C(6) of the 2002 Act and having regard to the considerations
    under the other sub-sections and those contained in section 117B.   The
    judge had already concluded that the Appellant  could  not  show  undue
    harshness or very compelling circumstances in respect  of  his  claimed
    family life in the United Kingdom.

19. On any sensible reading it is clear that the primary basis  upon  which
    the judge concluded that it was disproportionate (and by this  he  must
    have meant disproportionate in the  context  of  having  to  show  very
    compelling circumstances) was  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  an
    outstanding application with the CCRC.  I say that partly because  this
    application and the  (highly  speculative)   possible  outcome  of  the
    application is referred to at numerous other parts of the decision; but
    also because what immediately follows from his stated  conclusion  that
    it would be disproportionate to deport the Appellant is the observation
    that, "he [the Appellant] should be permitted to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom for a reasonable period of time] so that the CCRC might make  a
    finding on his application " (italics added).

20. Before examining that conclusion more closely,  I  consider  the  other
    factors included referred to in paragraph 58.  The first  of  these  is
    the length of time the Appellant has been in the United Kingdom.   That
    period was fairly significant,  although  the  judge  acknowledged  the
    unlawfulness of almost all of that residence.  If he  had  had  section
    117B(4) of the 2002 Act in mind as a mandatory consideration (as he was
    bound to), this had the effect of limiting the weight to be attached to
    the private life established during the period of residence (subject to
    any compelling features of the case, none of which  are  identified  in
    terms by the judge).  This factor, even  on  the  judge's  application,
    could only ever have been of limited value.

21. The second stated factor is what is  described  as  the  "long  history
    between [the Appellant] and Ms Lewis".  However, when one looks back at
    paragraph 51, the judge there referred  to  the  "brief  time  she  [Ms
    Lewis] and the Appellant have been together ...".  There is at the very
    least a tension here, if not an outright contradiction.  In any  event,
    the judge had also concluded that there was no undue harshness  in  the
    couple being separated (indeed there was no finding that Ms Lewis could
    not go with the Appellant to Trinidad and Tobago).

22. Thus, the additional factors which Ms Iengar has  emphasised  were,  on
    any rational view, of a very limited nature indeed.

23. Turning then to  the  CCRC  application  and  the  judge's  significant
    reliance  on  it  for  his  conclusion  that   deportation   would   be
    disproportionate.   I  have  already  mentioned  the  absence  of   any
    corroborative evidence relating to the application.  There was  clearly
    also an absence of any relevant materials relating to such applications
    to the CCRC in general.  This may well have been because the matter was
    only raised by the Appellant in evidence at the hearing.  In any event,
    the judge has given no consideration as to whether the Appellant  could
    pursue his application from outside  of  the  United  Kingdom,  whether
    legally represented (as he then was, and continues  to  be)  or  acting
    alone.  The guidance document  referred  to  in  paragraph  12,  above,
    states at page 9, under the heading "if the CCRC reviews my case,  will
    that stop my deportation?", the following:

             "There is no automatic  right  for  you  to  have  deportation
             proceedings suspended because you have applied  to  the  CCRC.
             If we refer your case for an appeal, then your deportation may
             be stopped until the appeal is finished.  If you are  deported
             after you have applied to the CCRC, we can  review  your  case
             even if you are in another country as long as you  provide  us
             with a contact address or email address."

24. There was, as I understand it, no evidence before the judge to indicate
    that the Appellant  would  not,  for  whatever  reason,  be  unable  to
    communicate with either legal representatives in this country or indeed
    the CCRC if he were deported to Trinidad and Tobago.

25. This lack of consideration of what was clearly a relevant  issue  given
    the centrality of the CCRC application to the judge's decision  had  to
    be coupled with the entirely  speculative  view  that  the  application
    might result in a positive outcome for the Appellant (namely a referral
    to the Court of Appeal).  Further, the judge  has  not  identified  any
    additional specific reasons as to why the application  could  not  have
    been pursued post-deportation.  If he had thought  that  the  Appellant
    would be left without an adequate remedy following outcome in the Court
    of Appeal, this would have been misconceived.  The Appellant  could  of
    course apply for a revocation of the deportation order from abroad  and
    would, in that hypothetical scenario, no doubt have strong grounds  for
    doing so.

26. What is said in paragraph 59 does not go to bolster the conclusion  set
    out in the preceding paragraph.  The judge does make reference  to  the
    public interest as well as the violent elements of the offence.  On the
    facts of this case and with reference to section 117C(1) and (2) of the
    2002 Act, the offending was very serious indeed, as  described  by  the
    Court of Appeal in its judgment:

             "57.   It  seems  to  us  that  the  evidence  on  account   1
             demonstrated  a  high  degree  of  involvement  by  the  three
             defendants....   they  were  intimately  concerned  with   the
             offence that was being perpetrated... their  individual  roles
             were substantial rather than peripheral.

             58.  ...  There was a significant degree  of  planning...  the
             incidents must have been terrifying given  the  violence  that
             was threatened and  used...[An  employee  of  the  bookmakers]
             suffered significantly as a result of her ordeal.

             ...

             60.    This  was  sophisticated  offending,  it  was  cleverly
             planned  and  it  was  executed  with   a   real   degree   of
             ruthlessness."

27.  That  very  strong  public  interest  simply  could  not   have   been
    sufficiently diminished or outweighed by the reasons  provided  by  the
    judge in paragraph 58 such that the Appellant was  rationally  entitled
    to succeed.

28. In light of the foregoing, the basis for the  judge's  conclusion  that
    deportation would be disproportionate was, on  the  reasoning  provided
    and with respect, incapable of rationally supporting the outcome.

29. Finally, I note  the  concluding  observation  in  paragraph  59  that:
    "permitting the Appellant to remain for a further short period of  time
    would  not  be  disproportionate  to  any  of  the  legitimate   public
    objectives identified in Article 8(2) of  the  European  Convention  or
    Part VA of the 2002 Act".  That appears  to  me  to  be  reversing  the
    equation.

30. For the reasons set out above, this is an example of a relatively  rare
    case in which a perversity challenge has been made out.

31. The judge's error of law is clearly material, and his decision must  be
    set aside.

32. Before turning to the issue of disposal  I  note  a  somewhat  puzzling
    aspect  of  the  judge's  decision.   Following   his   conclusion   on
    proportionality he states in paragraph 60 that it was not  "appropriate
    or practicable" to deal with the Appellant's protection  claim  insofar
    as it relied on Article 3.  For my part, I am not  entirely  clear  why
    the judge did not address  this  claim  in  detail  and  make  relevant
    findings of fact.  The section 72 certificate had no  bearing  on  this
    and  the  exercise  could  have  been  undertaken  notwithstanding  the
    existence of the CCRC application.




Disposal

33. I was initially inclined  to  the  view  that  this  appeal  should  be
    retained in the Upper Tribunal for  a  resumed  hearing  at  which  the
    Article 8 issue could be addressed.  However, not only does this matter
    have to be looked at again, but there is the absence  of  any  findings
    and conclusions on the Article 3 protection claim.  In my view it would
    not be right for the Appellant to be denied  the  opportunity  to  have
    this dealt with at first instance.   It  is  therefore  appropriate  to
    remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.

34. There are clearly a number of  conclusions  adverse  to  the  Appellant
    which have not been the subject of challenge by way of  a  cross-appeal
    or indeed the rule 24  response.   I  am  conscious  of  the  potential
    difficulties that can be caused in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  when  an
    appeal is remitted with preserved findings.

35. However, and having considered what is said in the recent  decision  of
    the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AB  (preserved   FtT   findings;   Wisniewski
    principles) Iraq [2020] UKUT 268 (IAC), it is appropriate  to  preserve
    the judge's findings on the following matters:

          i) the upholding of the section 72 certificate;




         ii) the exclusion from Humanitarian Protection;




        iii) the inability of the Appellant  to  meet  either  of  the  two
             Exceptions under section 117C of the 2002 Act;




         iv) the Appellant has a pending application with the CCRC.

36. These  findings  will  form  the  starting  point  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's consideration of the Appellant's appeal  on  remittal.   The
    Appellant is not precluded from adducing new evidence on these matters.



37. The First-tier Tribunal will in any event  address  Article  8  in  the
    context of section 117C(6) of the 2002 Act, together with the Article 3
    protection claim. The preserved findings will not in my view  create  a
    judicial straightjacket in respect of that exercise.

38. On a purely practical note, it would seem to me to  be  sensible  if  a
    case management hearing were held once it has gone back to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

39. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.

40. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

41. No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

   1) This appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Taylor  House
      hearing centre);



   2) The remitted hearing shall not be conducted by  Designated  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Shaerf;



   3) The remitted hearing shall be conducted in light of what  is  said  in
      this error of law decision.





Signed   H Norton-Taylor                Date: 8 December 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

