
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/10579/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2018                             |On 17th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Mr m.I.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Ahmad of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Kotak of Counsel

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    a First-tier Tribunal (Judge Row)  allowing  the  appeal  of  Mr.  M.I.
    against the Secretary of State's  decision  to  refuse  his  protection
    claim.

 2. For the sake of convenience, I shall throughout this decision, refer to
    the Secretary of State as "the Respondent" and  to  Mr.  M.I.  as  "the
    Appellant"; thereby reflecting their respective  positions  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant is a national of the Sudan (born [ ] 2000).  He  is  just
    short of 18years of age.  He entered the UK on 7th  April  2017  having
    travelled via Italy and France and claimed asylum on the following day.

 4. His application for asylum was refused by the Respondent.   His  claim,
    in summary, is that he is a member of the Tunjur clan and thus is a non-
    Arab Darfuri.  He claimed that he lived in Khartoum with  his  maternal
    aunt and uncle.  He said that his older brother was involved in a group
    opposed to the authorities in the Sudan.  As  a  result  of  this,  his
    uncle was arrested by the authorities, held for two days  and  tortured
    before being released. The Appellant's aunt arranged for him to go into
    hiding.  On being released, his uncle informed him that the authorities
    were looking for him and his brother.  He should  therefore  leave  the
    country.

 5. Travel was arranged for him.  He travelled via Egypt, spent  some  days
    in Italy, and then spent approximately eleven  months  in  France.   He
    made no claim to asylum in either Italy or France.  He entered  the  UK
    concealed in a lorry and claimed asylum on the day after he arrived.

 6. The Respondent disbelieved the Appellant's account of why he  had  left
    Khartoum.  She did accept however that he is a  non-Darfuri  member  of
    the Tunjur tribe.  The Respondent then considered whether  there  would
    be a risk on return to the Sudan on account  of  his  clan  membership.
    This was in view of the CG cases of AA (Non Arab Darfuris - relocation)
    Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM [2015] UKUT 10. However  relying  on
    written  evidence  that  the  situation  in  Sudan  had  improved,  the
    Respondent came to the view that there would be no  real  risk  to  the
    Appellant on return to Khartoum.  She therefore refused his claim.

 7. The Appellant's appeal came before the FtT.  In his decision, the judge
    noted both the Appellant's core claim and the Respondent's  case.   For
    the purposes of this decision the judge found that the  inconsistencies
    presented in the Appellant's account,  together  with  his  failure  to
    claim asylum in either Italy or France, led him to the conclusion  that
    the Appellant was not telling the truth about his reasons  for  leaving
    Sudan.  In fact the judge went so far as to make findings that  neither
    the Appellant nor any member of his family  had  come  to  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities in Sudan, and that  the  Appellant  is  an
    economic migrant who had come to the United Kingdom not  as  a  refugee
    but for other reasons [27].  In coming to these conclusions, the  judge
    gave full and proper reasons for his assessment  of  the  evidence  and
    there has been no challenge raised to these  findings.   Therefore  for
    the purposes of this decision they are to be regarded as final.

 8. Having assessed the Appellant's core claim  to  be  not  credible,  the
    judge went on as he was obliged to do, to assess the question  of  risk
    on return.  He said the following at [28]:

         "There still remains the issue of whether the appellant is at  risk
         if he returns to Sudan.  It is  accepted  that  he  is  a  non-Arab
         Darfuri.  MM  and  AA  say  that  such  a  person  is  at  risk  of
         persecution and harm if  returned  to  Sudan  and  is  entitled  to
         international protection because of that."

    He followed this up at [29] by saying:

         "The country guidance case of IM and AI  (Risks-membership  of  the
         Beja Tribe, Beja Congress and JEM) Sudan CG [2016] UKUT 00188  does
         not  alter  that  guidance.   Those  appeals  concern  the  alleged
         political activities of two men who were not non-Arab Darfuris."

 9. The judge then set out what is the centre  piece  of  the  Respondent's
    challenge.  He said at [30]:

         "The respondent argues that  there  is  cogent  evidence  that  the
         situation in Sudan has changed.  The argument is  set  out  in  the
         refusal letter at paragraphs 45-57 and in the  Country  Policy  and
         Information Note Sudan: Non-Arab  Darfuris  August  2017  paragraph
         5.2.  Paragraph 5.2 cites  a  range  of  opinion  and  views  about
         whether non-Arab Darfuris are at risk of persecution  in  Khartoum.
         It refers to, amongst other things, a DFAT  Country  Report,  Sudan
         and a UK-DIS  FFM  report.   Both  these  reports  record  evidence
         received from various sources, many of which are anonymous."

10. Having set out that paragraph and referred to the documents  mentioned,
    the judge found that he could not place reliance on  this  evidence  to
    the extent that it displaced the CG cases.  Consequently  he  concluded
    that the evidence presented by the Respondent  was  not  sufficient  to
    allow him to depart from the CG cases.  Thus, he found,  the  Appellant
    was at risk on return and despite the lack of credibility of  the  core
    claim, his protection claim succeeded.

Onward Appeal

11. The Respondent sought  and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal.   The
    grounds seeking  permission  argue  that  the  FtTJ  failed  to  engage
    sufficiently with the evidence presented by the Respondent showing that
    the CG for Sudan had  been  overtaken  by  improved  conditions.   This
    resulted in there being inadequate  reasons  given  for  rejecting  the
    evidence and thereby allowing the Appellant's appeal.

Error of Law Hearing

12. Before me Miss Ahmad appeared for the Respondent and Miss Kotak for the
    Appellant.  Miss Ahmad sought to rely on the grounds seeking permission
    which are lengthy but which have been summarised above.  In other words
    there was clear fresh  evidence  which  provided  credible  information
    sufficient to allow departure from the CG cases.

13. Miss Kotak made rather more detailed submissions.  She emphasised first
    of all that the main document relied upon by  the  Respondent  was  the
    Respondent's own Country Policy and Information Note dated August 2017.
     She referred in particular to the section marked at paragraph 5  under
    the heading "Khartoum".  She referred to paragraphs  5.1.3,  5.1.5  and
    5.1.7.  She highlighted that the grounds seeking  permission  were  not
    properly reflective of the country information report itself.  She drew
    attention to the last paragraph of the grounds wherein it is  reported,
    "It is finally asserted that the  FTTJ  has  failed  to  have  adequate
    regard for the information contained within the CPIN.   The  population
    of Khartoum is up to 8 million (CPIN 5.1.3); of which up to  2  million
    are IDPs (5.1.5); of whom perhaps a million are  Darfuris  (5.1.7)...."
    Miss Kotak submitted that this statement needed to be  contrasted  with
    5.1.3 of the report itself which said that estimates vary for the  size
    of Khartoum's population from around 5 million to 8 million.

Consideration of Error of Law

14. Having heard submissions from the parties and  considered  the  grounds
    seeking permission, I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  FtT
    contains such error, that it requires to be set aside  and  remade.   I
    now give my reasons for this finding.

15. The task before the FtTJ, once he had found the Appellant's core  claim
    incredible, was to assess whether the Appellant's home area of Khartoum
    was safe for him, in terms of whether he  could  return  there  without
    facing a real risk of serious harm.  In answering  that  question,  the
    judge was faced with competing information.  There were  two  CG  cases
    and an updated CPIN dated August 2017.

16. The CPIN document was said by the Respondent to provide cogent evidence
    sufficient to displace the CG cases of AA and MM.

17. It has long been held that  departure  from  a  country  guidance  case
    should only be on the basis of fresh credible evidence being presented.



18. I find that the CPIN report of  August  2017  must  be  categorised  as
    cogent evidence, because it draws upon  multiple  sources  including  a
    joint Danish-UK Fact-Finding Mission of 2016, an Australian  government
    report of April 2016 and a Foreign and Commonwealth  Office  letter  of
    29th September 2016.

19. I find that the judge has  failed  to  engage  sufficiently  with  this
    evidence.  Instead he appears to have side  stepped  the  issue  before
    him, rejecting the CPIN out of hand by saying at [32] that, "I have had
    no opportunity to hear oral evidence from these witnesses.   I  do  not
    know if they can speak first-hand of the situation  in  Sudan."   Those
    reasons I find are not sufficient to show that the  FtTJ  has  properly
    considered the authority of the sources that contributed to the report.
    This is especially in the context of the unchallenged finding  made  by
    the judge that the Appellant has lived in Khartoum  for  several  years
    and has not come to any harm there.  Likewise I find that the judge was
    wrong to conclude that he should reject the CPIN because he has had  no
    opportunity to hear oral evidence from "these witnesses".

20. This therefore leads me  to  the  conclusion  that  the  FtTJ  has  not
    properly  assessed  the  issue  before  him  which  was   whether   the
    Appellant's home area was safe for him in terms  of  whether  he  could
    return there without facing a real risk of serious harm.

21. I therefore set aside the FtT's decision on the basis that the  judge's
    findings on risk on return cannot stand.

22. I find it is appropriate that this matter be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for the decision to be remade in  that  Tribunal.   There  has
    been no challenge  raised  to  the  judge's  findings  as  set  out  in
    paragraph 7 of this decision.  I see no reason to interfere with  those
    findings and they are therefore preserved.  The rehearing will need  to
    focus on the evidence concerning risk on return to  Khartoum  for  this
    Appellant.

Notice of Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for  legal  error.
    The matter is remitted to that Tribunal  for  a  rehearing  on  whether
    there is a risk on return to the Appellant.  The  rehearing  should  be
    before a judge other than Judge Row.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     15 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
