

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/10253/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21st September 2017                    |On 18th October 2017             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                   MR.F.A.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

 Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss L.Mair, Counsel, instructed by Miles Hutchinson and
Lithgow.
For the Respondent:  Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant is a national of Albania. He came to United Kingdom
        and claimed protection with his wife and son as dependants. He said
        he had borrowed money when he was living in Greece, where he has a
        right to reside. He did not repay the money and is fearful of the
        lenders. He claimed they attacked him both in Greece and Albania
        when he returned there.


     2. The respondent refused his claim, not finding him credible. His
        appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Myers who in a
        decision promulgated on 10 March 2017 dismissed his appeal on
        credibility grounds. His wife had also made an earlier claim from
        protection based upon the same factual background which was
        dismissed on appeal by First-tier Immigration Judge Duff: again, on
        credibility grounds. The judge said that even if there were any
        truth in the claim he could remain in Greece which has a
        functioning police force or alternatively return to Albania.


     3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
        judge failed to consider the cumulative effect of various acts of
        violence and whether it suggested there was a connection.

     4. The respondent opposed the appeal in a rule 24 response. It was
        contended the judge carefully considered all of the evidence and
        the consideration of credibility was this sustainable. The judge
        also consider the position in the alternative and found no real
        risk.

     5. At hearing Ms. Mair, who appeared in the First-tier Tribunal,
        relied upon the detailed application on which permission to appeal
        was granted. The first argument related to judge's treatment of the
        decision in his wife's appeal and the fact that the appellant had
        provided new evidence in his appeal. It was also argued that the
        conclusion was against the totality of the evidence. Finally, it
        was argued that the decision did not adequately explain the
        conclusion that there was sufficiency of protection in Greece or
        Albania.

     6. I have been provided with a copy of the decision of First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Duff in relation to the claim made by the
        appellant's wife. She was not represented at the hearing which took
        place on 20 April 2016. The family arrived in the United Kingdom on
        11 May 2015, purporting to be visitors. They were refused admission
        but subsequently admitted on a temporary basis. His wife made a
        claim in her own right saying her husband, this appellant, had
        disappeared.

     7. Her account was that they had been living in Greece and,
        unbeknownst to her, her husband borrowed money. She refers to the
        debtors coming to their house looking for repayment. She said they
        were threatened. She recounts a claim of her nephew being murdered
        in Albania and suggests her husband was the intended target. She
        then claimed on 5 April 2014 there was a fire at the premises they
        were staying in.

     8. The judge concluded that the appellant had not given a truthful
        account and most likely she and her husband came to the United
        Kingdom for economic reasons. There was an inconsistency in the
        account as to whether money had been borrowed in Albania as well as
        Greece. The judge did not find it credible that if the debtors were
        hardened criminals they would not gain entry to the premises she
        was in because of a metal gate. A connection with the killing of
        her cousin and the fire, if they occurred, was speculative. The
        judge also commented on her husband's failure to explain matters on
        arrival. In the alternative, the judge concluded there was
        sufficiency of protection.

     9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Myers was aware of the earlier decision
        and Ms Mair hearing sought to argue the judge could depart from the
        earlier findings on the basis of this appellant's interview record;
        his statements; the expert report and a report from Albania about
        the killing of his cousin. It was also pointed out that he was the
        principal.

    10. The judge commented on the argument that she was not the principal
        and that she was not represented at the hearing. The judge said her
        account was broadly consistent with the appellant's and she gave
        evidence about matters of which she claimed direct knowledge.
        Although not represented the judge was satisfied at the previous
        hearing all her evidence would have been properly extracted. The
        judge dealt with the police report about the claimed killing of the
        cousin as well as the expert report to the effect that it was
        genuine. The judge accepted that the cousin was killed and like
        First-tier Immigration Judge Duff found it was speculation that
        there was some connection. It was pointed out the appellant did not
        suggest this to the Albanian authorities. Similar considerations
        apply in respect of the fire.

    11. I find no fault with the way the judge dealt with the earlier
        decision. The judge carefully considers the additional evidence in
        relation to the killing of the cousin. Rational reasons were given
        as to why this did not advance the claim. There were distinctions,
        in that this appellant on the account was the principal.
        Nevertheless his wife was in a position, if the claim were true, to
        give an account of the surrounding incidents.

    12. I am satisfied that the judge carefully considered all the evidence
        presented in the appellant's case. The credibility of the appellant
        and his wife was central to the claim. The claim being made was
        correctly set out in detail. The judge gave reasons for rejecting
        the claim at paragraph 34 to 38. Those are sustainable. The ground
        essentially amounts to an attempt to re-argue the claim.

    13. The primary finding of the judge was not to believe the substantive
        claim. As I see no material error in this conclusion the need for
        protection does not arise. The judge referred to this in the
        alternative and it is correct to say that the judge does not go
        into great detail.

    14. The appellant's representative makes the valid point that an
        assessment of the protection available should be made on the basis
        the threat claimed. The reasons for refusal letter provide greater
        detail from paragraph 36 onwards. The remarks are prefaced with the
        statement that no State can achieve complete protection and that
        the practical standard applies. The judge did acknowledge
        shortcomings in State protection as reflected in the objective
        evidence. The judge does refer to the expert evidence and refers to
        improvements in security. The judge makes the legitimate point that
        on the claim the debt was incurred in 2012 and remains outstanding.
        The judge referred to the appellant's account of his movements and
        concluded if there were creditors, they did not appear to have the
        means or inclination to pursue him.

    15. In summary, I do not find the points argued on behalf of the
        appellant demonstrate a material error of law. Consequently, the
        decision of   First-tier Tribunal Judge Myers dismissing the appeal
        shall stand.

Decision

      I find no material error of law established. The decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Myers dismissing the appeal shall stand.


      Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Farrelly
        13th October 2017


























