
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10390/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 April 2019                    |On 11 April 2019                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      N
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Blackwood (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with  the
permission of a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, from a decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it made on 22 December 2017  following  a
hearing of 8 December 2017 and which it sent to the  parties  on  3  January
2018. The tribunal decided to dismiss  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
Secretary of State's decision of  3  October  2017  refusing  to  grant  her
international protection.

2.    By way of background, the claimant is a  female  national  of  Albania
and she was born on 22 October 1982. She is married and she and her  husband
are currently in the United Kingdom (UK) albeit without  leave,  with  their
two children who were born in  2004  and  2015  respectively.  The  claimant
entered the UK in March 2014 and, initially, she  was  a  dependent  on  her
husband's unsuccessful asylum claim. She then  claimed  asylum  in  her  own
name and on the basis of her own  assertions  concerning  risk  in  Albania,
that claim being lodged on 18 March 2016.

3.    The account offered by the claimant and which formed the basis of  her
assertion  that  she  was  entitled  to  international  protection  may   be
summarised as follows: She married her current husband  in  2004  whilst  in
Albania. She had an  affair  with  her  husband's  cousin  which  led  to  a
fracture in the marriage at that time. Her cousin introduced her to  another
male person and the two of them forced her  to  become  a  sex  worker.  Her
husband came to her assistance and in November  2006  they  went  to  Greece
where they stayed without permission for something  in  the  region  of  six
years. They then relocated to Italy. There were two brief visits to  Albania
for specific purposes to do with the obtaining of  paperwork  but,  for  the
most part during this period, the claimant remained in Italy.  However,  her
husband made his own way to the UK as a result of what  was  said  to  be  a
blood feud involving him in Albania.  The  claimant  seemingly  remained  in
Italy but she had a brother there who discovered she had previously  been  a
sex worker and  in  consequence,  beat  her.  So,  she  fled  that  country,
travelling to Belgium prior to entering to the UK where she became  reunited
with her husband.

4.    The claimant says she has suffered  some  mental  health  difficulties
over an extensive period and has been receiving help for that in the UK.  It
should also be said in her favour that the  Home  Office  National  Referral
Mechanism has accepted her claim to have been forced  into  prostitution  by
her cousin and  another,  as  claimed.  The  claimant  asserted  before  the
tribunal that if she were to be returned to Albania she would be at risk  of
being harmed by her previous traffickers and/or of being re-trafficked.  She
also asserted that her family would seek to harm her  as  a  consequence  of
her previously having been a sex worker and that if her husband  (from  whom
she says she kept all of this secret) found out she  was  a  sex  worker  he
would harm her too, or, at least, not support her. In addition  to  claiming
international protection she sought to rely upon Articles 3  and  8  of  the
European Convention of Human Rights (ECHR) in her grounds of appeal  to  the
tribunal. She also sought to bring herself within  the  scope  of  Paragraph
276 ADE (vi) of the Immigration Rules.

5.    The tribunal accepted, as had the Secretary of  State,  her  claim  to
have been historically forced to operate as a sex worker.  But  it  did  not
accept very much else of what she had claimed. As to her medical  situation,
it did not think the evidence before it was sufficient to  demonstrate  that
she would have relevant difficulties  if  she  were  to  be  returned  as  a
consequence of any mental health problems. As to credibility and as  to  its
findings regarding the risk of persecution upon return,  the  tribunal  said
this:

    "21.   To consider if the Appellant has substantiated her claim, I have
    had regard  to  the  conditions  set  out  in  Paragraph  339L  of  the
    Immigration Rules to assess  credibility.  I  have  also  assessed  her
    evidence against the background information and the case law referenced
    in the parties' bundles.

    22.    The Respondent accepts that the Appellant was trafficked by  her
    cousin and the man [I shall call him "A"]. This follows the findings of
    the NRM Outreach caseworker (D5 RB) who concluded  that  the  Appellant
    would be highly vulnerable if returned to Albania. I therefore make the
    finding that the Appellant was trafficked as claimed.

    23.    The issue in this appeal, is whether as a trafficked woman,  the
    Appellant can return to Albania. The following matters have led  me  to
    conclude that she can and that it would not be unreasonable  to  expect
    her to do so.

    24.    The Appellant lives with her husband and two children,  who  are
    dependents to her appeal, and who would  therefore  return  to  Albania
    with her. She would not return alone, but with the support of a nuclear
    family.

    25.    There is no reliable medical evidence  before  the  Tribunal  to
    enable me to gauge the true level of mental problems that the Appellant
    may be suffering, though I note in the NRM report by Fiona Everett  (D5
    RB)  that  the  Appellant  displayed  signs  of  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder including flash backs, nightmares and  tearfulness,  and  that
    she was taking Mirtazapine for depression and Lansoprazole for  stomach
    pain. Whilst I can attach some weight to this evidence, in the  absence
    of a full medical or psychiatric report, I am not able to find that the
    Appellant's mental condition is such that  she  will  face  significant
    challenges because her mental state, and  cannot  return  and  live  in
    Albania, particularly given that she would return with her husband  and
    children.

    26.    The Appellant was trafficked for a period of 18 months from mid-
    2004 when her husband left her, until end of 2006 when he returned  and
    took her to Greece. Since that time, the Appellant returned to  Albania
    twice in 2011 staying for periods of three months in her  home  village
    Lezha and weeks  in  Shkoder  and  Tirana.  During  these  visits,  she
    experienced no problems  with  her  family  or  past  traffickers.  She
    ventured out during both visits to obtain paperwork for her son. In her
    home town she met with her paternal cousin, who had told her  that  her
    father still hated her. No approach was made to the  Appellant  by  any
    members of her family during the three months, which I  find  to  be  a
    clear implication that they are not interested in harming  her  or  her
    family, and undermines her claim that they have  disowned  her  because
    they disapproved of her marriage.

    27.    Similarly, during her stay in Tirana and Shkoder, the  Appellant
    nor her family were approached by the traffickers. Further, there is no
    evidence that the traffickers  remain  in  Albania  or  that  they  are
    interested in the Appellant, or will be able to locate her. Given  that
    she will return with her  family,  it  is  not  reasonably  likely  the
    Appellant will be re-trafficked.

    28.    The Appellant claims that she  was  beaten  by  her  brother  in
    Italy, after he found about her work as a prostitute. He  had  gone  to
    help her. There is no evidence of how her brother found out  about  her
    past. This is said to have happened in Italy, where the Appellant had a
    work visa and entitlement to live, yet she did not report the matter to
    the authorities and did not seek protection. The Appellant  claims  her
    husband does not know about being trafficked and that he  believes  her
    brother beat her because the family disapproved of her  marriage.  This
    is not consistent with her evidence that her brother initially went  to
    assist her in Italy and that she was with him for up to two years,  and
    that her sister, assisted her to settle there,  the  Appellant  clearly
    had the option to live elsewhere in Italy to avoid  confrontation  with
    her brother. In these circumstances, I do not find that  the  Appellant
    was beaten by her brother in Italy, to be unreliable evidence.

    29.    The Appellant states that  her  husband  is  not  aware  of  her
    problems with traffickers and that she does not want him to  find  out.
    He states he believes her problems stem from his family's blood feud. I
    do not find this to be credible, given her evidence  that  her  brother
    and his family knew about that trafficking, and given that she and  her
    husband had lived together in Lekha following their  marriage  and  for
    three months in 2011 without any attack from her  family,  despite  the
    claim that they disapproved of the marriage. It is  not  credible  that
    her husband would not seek to establish the reason her brother  decided
    to beat her after supporting her for up to two years in Italy, and  not
    beating her when they lived in the same village in  Albania.  In  these
    circumstance, I do not find the Appellant was beaten by her brother  in
    Italy.

    30.    The Respondent challenges the credibility under section 8 of the
    2004 Act because the Appellant did not make the  asylum  claim  on  the
    present grounds until her husband's application had been refused. There
    is merit in this challenge.  The  Appellant  was  a  dependant  on  her
    husband's  claim  for  asylum,  and  further  submissions,  which  were
    refused. She claimed asylum for the reasons she gives  after  all  else
    failed. She arrived in the United Kingdom with her son,  and  was  only
    reunited with her husband later. Whilst, I consider  that  it  is  well
    known that some victims of trafficking or abuse often do not  tell  all
    their experiences until later, there is no medical evidence to  suggest
    that this is the case here. In these circumstances,  I  find  that  the
    Appellant's explanation for not claiming asylum sooner because she  was
    frightened, is not reasonable, given her subsequent ability to make  an
    asylum application, and appeal, with her husband as  her  dependant.  I
    find that Appellant's failure to claim asylum on the  present  grounds,
    for two years, is behaviour that under section 8  damages  her  overall
    credibility.

    31.    Taking the evidence in the round, I find that the Appellant  was
    trafficked for the period of 36 months as claimed in  2006.  I  do  not
    find that she is at the risk of being re-trafficked. I do  not  believe
    that she is at risk from her father, brother or family members, because
    she was trafficked or because of her marriage. Applying the  principles
    in TD and AD in the Appellant's circumstances, and  taking  account  of
    (a) social status and the economic standing of the  Appellant's  family
    (b) the level of education of the  Appellant  or  her  family  (c)  the
    Appellant's state of health, particularly her  mental  health  (d)  the
    presence of an illegitimate child (e) the area of origin  (f)  and  (g)
    what support network will be available. I find that she will return  to
    Albania with the support of her husband and her children  in  a  family
    unit. As they have done in the past, the family have returned and lived
    in rented accommodation and remained  together.  There  is  no  medical
    evidence or mental health diagnosis by a suitable expert, to  highlight
    any particular  difficulties  for  this  Appellant,  and  I  note  here
    evidence that medications would be available in Albania, but  that  she
    could not afford them. It is said that her husband  is  involved  in  a
    blood feud but there is no evidence before me to substantiate this, and
    I note that along with Appellant, he returned to Albania at least twice
    and remained for periods without any problems The Appellant  originated
    from Lekha. An area where Kanun prevails.  However,  she  has  returned
    there in 2011  for  three  months,  and  experienced  no  difficulties.
    Similarly, she has since leaving Albania in 2006,  returned  and  lived
    with her husband, Tirana and Shkoder and not experienced any  problems.
    The Appellant and her family have  a  basic  level  of  education.  The
    Appellant had claimed that her husband  initially  believed  her  first
    child was not his. However, since they reunited in the United  Kingdom,
    he has accepted the child, and there are no difficulties. She therefore
    returns with two legitimate children born during marriage. There  is  a
    network of shelters and support groups in Albania for  women  who  have
    experienced trafficking, which given my findings in paragraph  29,  the
    Appellant and her family could access. Alternatively, as she  has  done
    in the past can establish themselves as a family  unit  in  Albania  in
    rented accommodation in Tirana, Shkoder, or any part of the country.

    32.     On  the  totality  of  this  evidence,  given  that  there   is
    sufficiency of protection in Albania, the Appellant has not  discharged
    the burden of proof that she is at risk of persecution or serious  harm
    (a) from traffickers, (b) from her family, and (c) from  her  husband's
    family. She  does  not  qualify  for  refugee  status  or  humanitarian
    protection.".

6.    It will be noted that the tribunal, in the above passage  referred  to
mental health difficulties and evidence as  to  mental  health  problems  at
paragraphs 25 and 31. In addition to that, at paragraph  9  of  its  written
reasons, it had said this:

    "9.    I have considered the supporting documents  including  a  letter
    from Assist Service Open Minds confirming that she suffers  from  post-
    traumatic stress disorder, chronic back pain, and chest  and  abdominal
    pain".

7.     As  to  possible  satisfaction  of  the  Immigration  rules  and,  in
particular, paragraph 276 of ADE the tribunal said this:

    "33.   The Appellant does not meet the requirements of leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom on grounds of  family  and  private  life,  under
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276 ADE of the  Immigration  Rules,  for  the
    reasons given in the decision. Neither the Appellant  nor  her  husband
    are British or not settled in the United Kingdom, and her children  are
    not British and lived not lived here for seven years. She would  return
    in her family unit and all members have  a  knowledge  of  the  Albania
    culture with no social or linguistic difficulties. There  are  no  very
    significant obstacles to their integration in Albania".

8.    As to Article 8 of the ECHR outside the rules the tribunal said this:

    "34.   The Appellant and her family have been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since 2014. Her youngest child was born here. I find that  there  is  a
    level of family and private  life  that  engages  Article  8  ECHR  and
    deserves respect.

    35.    The Respondent's decision was made in line with Immigration laws
    and amounts to a lawful interference  with  family  and  private  life.
    Article 8 does not permit a person to choose the country in which  they
    establish family and private life, or to circumvent Immigration  Rules.
    I have found that the Appellant and family do not meet those rules.

    36.    I must take account of the best  interests  of  the  Appellant's
    children in line with  section  55  of  the  Citizenship,  Borders  and
    Immigration Act 2009. The Appellant's children are aged 13 and  2.  Her
    son is in education but is not at a crucial stage where  he  is  taking
    public examinations. Her daughter was born in this country, and is  too
    young to have developed any social ties  beyond  her  family.  Her  son
    previously lived in Albania, Greece, and Italy. Both children will know
    the Albanian culture through  their  parents.  There  re-education  and
    medical services available and accessible to both children in  Albania.
    It is in the children's best interests to remain with  each  other  and
    their parents wherever they live.

    37.    In deciding proportionality, I must consider the public interest
    in line with section 117B of the 2002 Act, starting with  principle  of
    effective immigration is in the public interests. Relevant factors  are
    (a) The Appellant does not meet the Immigration Rules (b) the Appellant
    does not speak English, which will affect integration in  this  country
    (117B(2); (c) the Appellants entered the United Kingdom unlawfully  and
    developed her family and private life in the United  Kingdom  when  her
    immigration status was precarious (117b(4) and (5)). I  therefore  give
    little weight to family and private life developed during this  period,
    and (d) the Appellant is  not  financially  independent.  She  receives
    support of care services, and state funded medical care and  treatment.
    Her son attends state funded education. Therefore,  the  Appellant  and
    her family are a burden on the tax payer. (117(3)).

    38.    On the totality of  the  evidence  and  balancing  all  relevant
    factors, including the children's best interests, I find that there are
    no countervailing features that amount to exceptional circumstances  to
    outweigh the public interest in effective immigration control  in  this
    case. I therefore find that the decision is proportionate and does  not
    breach Article 8 ECHR".

9.    I pause there to observe that speaking generally, and  notwithstanding
the various  criticisms  of  the  tribunals  written  reasons  made  on  the
claimant's  behalf  by  Mr  Blackwood,  the   tribunal's   written   reasons
demonstrate that it set about its task with care and diligence.

10.   The dismissing of the appeal by the tribunal was not the  end  of  the
matter because permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  and
obtained. At the time the application for permission  was  made  there  were
two grounds. The  first  might  be  summarised  as  a  contention  that  the
tribunal erred through failing to have regard to medical evidence which  had
been contained at pages 204 to 206 of  the  Appellant's  bundle  or  through
failing to attach sufficient weight to it. The second was a contention  that
the tribunal had erred through failing to have regard or  proper  regard  to
various aspects of the evidence which had been presented to it. By the  time
I came to decide whether the tribunal had erred in law  there  was  a  third
ground before me  because  I  permitted  an  amendment  to  the  grounds  to
encompass a contention that  the  tribunal  had  erred  through  failing  to
properly assess what might be in the best interests of the children  in  the
context of Article 8 given the claimant's mental  health  problems  and  the
support she was receiving with respect to those problems in the UK.

11.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  in  response  to  the   written
application which, of course, did not include the third  ground  of  appeal.
The granting judge relevantly said this:

    "2.    Arguably, and whilst she referred to the evidence from Assist at
    [9], the judge failed to have full and proper regard to  that  evidence
    found at pages 204 to 206 of the Appellant's appeal bundle and  to  the
    conclusions therein as to the impact of removal on  the  appellant,  in
    making her findings at [25]. All grounds may be argued."

12.   Permission having been granted there was an oral  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal (before me) so  that  consideration  could  be  given  as  to
whether or not the tribunal had erred in law, and if so,  what  should  flow
from that. Representation was as stated above and  I  am  grateful  to  each
representative for the helpful oral submissions which were made to me. I  am
also grateful to Mr Blackwood for a skeleton argument which he  provided  to
me along with accompanying documentation and which Mr Mills had  a  suitable
opportunity to consider. I have taken full account of the submissions  which
were made to me when deciding whether or not the tribunal erred in law.

13.   As to ground one, in  my  view,  what  the  tribunal  had  to  say  at
paragraph 9 of its written reasons of 22 December  2017,  demonstrates  that
it must have looked at and had in mind medical evidence in the form  of  two
letters which appeared from page 204 to 206 of the bundle of documents  upon
which claimant had relied at the hearing before the tribunal. There are,  in
fact, two separate letters written by different individuals at Assist  which
is an organisation providing healthcare for refugees and asylum  seekers  in
Leicester. I was initially a little troubled by the fact that  the  tribunal
simply referred to "a letter from Assist Service"  at  paragraph  9  of  its
written reasons but I think I would be overly pedantic if I were  to  regard
that as a concern and I am satisfied  that  despite  the  way  in  which  it
expressed itself the tribunal must have known that there  were  two  letters
from that organisation before it and appearing at  the  specified  pages  to
which I have referred. The tribunal did address the  medical  situation  and
the medical evidence in its reasoning as is clear from what it  had  to  say
from paragraph 25 and 31 of its written reasons.  It  is  right  to  say  it
concluded that the medical evidence before it did not  enable  it  to  gauge
what it described as the  "true  level  of  any  mental  problems  that  the
appellant may be suffering" and it did not think that the  medical  evidence
before  it  demonstrated  an  appropriate  mental  health  diagnosis  by   a
"suitable  expert".  But  whilst  the  claimant  may   disagree   with   the
conclusions it has reached as to that, it does seem clear  to  me  that  the
tribunal must have had in mind  the  two  letters  referred  to  above  when
reaching those conclusions. So, I am satisfied it did not actually  overlook
the evidence appearing from page 204 to page 206 of the claimant's bundle.

14.   At the hearing, and in seeking to develop  the  ground,  Mr  Blackwood
sought to attack what the tribunal had had  to  say  at  paragraph  31  with
respect to what it said was the absence of an  appropriate  diagnosis  by  a
suitable expert. As I understand it his initial  contention  was  that  when
the tribunal had suggested there was no appropriate diagnosis, that in  turn
suggested  it  had,  by  that  time,  forgotten  about   the   two   letters
notwithstanding its earlier reference to them. But his alternative  argument
was I think, that if it had reached the view that there was no diagnosis  by
a suitable expert in full knowledge of what had been said  in  the  letters,
then its view was simply wrong or perverse.

15.   I have already explained that I am satisfied  that  the  tribunal  did
not overlook the content of the letters. On my reading of  them,  the  first
letter, which is  dated  1  November  2017,  does  not  actually  contain  a
diagnosis of any specific mental health  problem.  It  perhaps  comes  close
because it talks of symptoms suggestive of  post-traumatic  stress  disorder
but does not go beyond that. The  second  letter,  written  by  a  different
medical practitioner, does contain the assertion that the claimant  "suffers
from post-traumatic stress disorder". The tribunal could have  been  clearer
about this but it seems to be it can be inferred it was not  satisfied  that
that represented a diagnosis  by  a  suitable  expert  because  the  medical
practitioner who wrote  that  letter  is  not  a  clinical  psychiatrist  or
psychologist or a person who has qualifications equivalent to  that.  In  my
judgement the tribunal was entitled to consider the  evidence  contained  in
the  letters  not  to  be  sufficiently   authoritative   on   that   basis.
Accordingly, I have concluded that this ground is not made out.

16.   As to ground  two,  the  primary  point  made  here,  in  the  written
grounds, amounts to a  suggestion  that  the  tribunal  did  not  adequately
consider the claimant's assertion that her husband did not  know  about  the
history of her having been forced to work as a sex worker  and  that  if  he
were to find out, he would  ill-treat  her  or  abandon  her.  However,  the
tribunal was not obliged to accept that  assertion  merely  because  it  had
been made. Because of its potential relevance it was  required  to  consider
it and reach a view about it but that is  what  it  did.  It  rejected  that
assertion and explained why  it  was  doing  so  at  paragraph  28  and,  in
particularly, 29 of its written reasons as set out above.  It  applied  that
finding in its analysis and was entitled  to  do  so.  Further  and  in  any
event, as to more general considerations with  respect  to  credibility  and
the overall veracity of the claimant's account, it took the  view  that  her
credibility had been damaged by her failure to claim asylum  at  an  earlier
time. It explained why it was doing  so  at  paragraph  30  of  its  written
reasons. Mr Blackwood criticises what the tribunal had to  say  about  delay
at paragraph 30 and trains his fire upon the sentence which  reads  "Whilst,
I consider that it is well known that some victims of trafficking  or  abuse
often do not tell experiences until later, there is no medical  evidence  to
suggest this the case here". He  says  that  the  medical  evidence  already
referred to above was supportive of a contention that  she  would  not  have
felt able to talk about her experiences earlier  than  she  did.   I  accept
there is scope for thinking a different view might have been  reached  by  a
differently constituted tribunal. But that does not mean,  of  itself,  that
this  tribunal  erred.  The  medical  evidence  that  there  was   did   not
specifically address the extensive delay in her claiming asylum nor  did  it
purport to express a view upon whether any mental health difficulties  might
have been the reason or at least a partial reason  for  such  delay.  In  my
judgement the tribunal was entitled to say, as part of its assessment as  to
the significance of the  delay  in  claiming,  that  there  was  no  medical
evidence which explained the delay. It was entitled  to  conclude  that  the
delay did damage her credibility.

17.   Mr Blackwood argued before me, as a further  strand  to  this  ground,
that  the  tribunal  had  made  inconsistent  findings  as  to  whether  the
claimant, if returned, would be relying upon shelters  for  women  who  have
experienced difficulties with traffickers  or  would  be  relying  upon  her
husband for support. Mr Blackwood has in  mind  what  is  said  towards  the
latter end of paragraph 31 of the tribunal's written reasons.  It  seems  to
me that the key finding of the tribunal here, albeit it described it  as  an
alternative finding,  was  that  she  and  her  husband  would  be  able  to
establish themselves as a family unit in  rented  accommodation  in  Tirana,
Shkoder or some other part of Albania.  It  was  entitled  to  so  conclude.
Further, making a finding in the  alternative  does  not  amount  to  making
inconsistent findings. I have concluded this ground is not made out.

18.   As to what I have called ground three, Mr Blackwood  argues  that  the
tribunal when considering  what  might  be  in  the  best  interest  of  the
children,  did  not  take  into  account  the   claimant's   mental   health
difficulties and her history which  had  led  to  those  difficulties,  when
considering the appropriateness of the family  returning  to  Albania  as  a
family unit. The tribunals specific reasoning as to  the  best  interest  of
the children is to be found at paragraph 36 of its written reasons. It  said
this:

    "36.   I must take account of the  best  interests  of  the  Appellants
    children in line with  section  55  of  the  Citizenship,  Borders  and
    Immigration Act 2009. The Appellants children are aged 13  and  2.  Her
    son is in education but is not of a crucial stage where  he  is  taking
    public examinations. Her daughter was born in this country, and is  too
    young to have developed any social ties  beyond  her  family.  Her  son
    previously lived in Albania, Greece, and Italy. Both children will know
    the Albanian culture through their parents.  There  are  education  and
    medical services available and accessible to both children in  Albania.
    It is in the children's best interests to remain with  each  other  and
    their parents wherever they live".

19.   I agree with Mr Blackwood that,  in  that  particular  paragraph,  the
tribunal  did  not  make  a  reference  to  the  claimant's  mental   health
difficulties. I suppose the argument is to the effect that if  the  claimant
were to be returned to Albania her  mental  health  might  worsen  and  that
might, in turn, impinge upon her ability to  look  after  the  children  and
impact  adversely  on  the  children's'  emotional  state.  I  can  see  the
argument. But the tribunal had already considered the medical  evidence  and
had already decided, sustainably I have concluded, that  that  evidence  did
not support the proposition that the claimant would have  difficulties  from
a mental health perspective consequence upon any return to Albania.  Perhaps
it should have reiterated that at paragraph 36 of its  written  reasons  but
those written reasons do have to read as a whole  and  if  it  had  done  it
would have merely been repeating itself. Accordingly, I have concluded  that
the tribunal did not overlook a matter of relevance  when  considering  what
was in the best interest of the children and that,  therefore,  this  ground
is not made out.

20.   In light of the above I have  concluded  that  the  tribunal  did  not
involve in the making of an error in law. It  follows  that  decision  shall
stand.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law. Accordingly, this decision shall stand.


Signed:
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
Dated 8 April 2019




Anonymity

The claimant was granted anonymity by the First-tier Tribunal.  Nothing  was
said about anonymity before me. However, I  have  decided  to  continue  the
grant of anonymity under rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008. That  is  because  the  case  involves  sensitive  and  personal
subject matter.


Signed:
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
Dated 8 April 2019
