


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10923/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 July 2019                 |On 02nd August 2019             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    S. A.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Warren, Counsel, instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, an Iraqi national, entered the UK  illegally  and
           made a protection claim after his arrest on 13 January  2005  in
           which he claimed to be a minor. At screening interview, he  said
           that he was born, and had lived all  of  his  life  in  Iraq  in
           Chamchamal, in the Suleymanyeh governate.  Thus,  he  gave  this
           town as his last permanent address in Iraq.  He  said  that  his
           identity card had been issued to him in Chamchamal in  1987.  He
           denied having this in his possession in the UK and  stated  that
           it had been left with his family. He  denied  having  ever  been
           issued with a passport.
        2. The Appellant's protection claim was founded in the  claim  that
           he had been forced to flee Chamchamal because he was at risk  of
           honour based violence from members of a family based  there  who
           were connected to the PUK, and who could be expected to use  its
           resources to find him anywhere in the KRG, following the offence
           they had taken to his request that he should be allowed to marry
           a member of their family. That protection claim was refused. His
           appeal  against  that  refusal  was  dismissed  by  decision  of
           Immigration Judge Camp of 11 May 2005 [B1-] who found  that  the
           Appellant's account of events in Iraq was a fiction, and that he
           had lied about his age, and was an adult  when  he  had  claimed
           asylum. Appeal rights were exhausted in June 2005 [13-6].
        3. In 2006 the Appellant made his first application  for  voluntary
           assisted removal to Iraq [G9 #35].
        4. In September 2006 the Appellant was stopped by the  police  when
           driving a motor vehicle. He was found to have no driving licence
           or valid motor insurance, and to be in possession  of  a  forged
           identity document in a name that was not his own. When his  home
           was searched further documents were found that indicated he  had
           been working illegally using a false  identity  [G3  #5].  As  a
           result, on 29 September 2006 the Appellant was convicted of  two
           offences concerning the possession of forged identity documents,
           one offence of obtaining a pecuniary advantage by deception, and
           one offence of the wilful obstruction of a  police  officer.  He
           was sentenced to two consecutive terms of six  months  immediate
           detention in a Young Offenders Institute on  the  basis  of  the
           date of birth that had been rejected by Immigration Judge  Camp.
           Two further terms were to be served concurrently. [E1]
        5. On 15 March 2007 the Appellant was notified of the  Respondent's
           intention to make a deportation order in  relation  to  him.  He
           lodged no appeal against that decision.
        6. On 9 November 2007  the  Appellant  was  tried  by  a  jury  and
           convicted of a serious sexual assault  upon  a  female.  He  was
           sentenced the same  day  to  an  immediate  term  of  two  years
           detention in a Young Offenders Institute.  He  was  required  to
           sign the sex offenders register for ten  years  and  recommended
           for deportation. Again, this was done on the basis of  the  date
           of birth that had been rejected by Immigration Judge Camp  [F1].
           The circumstances of this offence were that he had taken a young
           woman to his home, had  then  despite  her  resistance  forcibly
           removed her trousers, and placed his penis between the  tops  of
           her thighs and masturbated himself to ejaculation.
        7. In 2008 the Appellant made a second  application  for  voluntary
           assisted removal to Iraq [G9 #35].
        8. On 6 November 2008 the Respondent decided to make a  deportation
           order against the Appellant, and this prompted  an  appeal  that
           was heard and dismissed  by  decision  of  a  panel  chaired  by
           Immigration Judge Hodgkinson of 1 April 2009  [G1-].  The  panel
           noted that the Appellant denied that he had ever met his victim,
           denied that any sexual assault had  ever  taken  place,  claimed
           that he had been wrongly convicted  of  the  offence  of  sexual
           assault, and that he had made a number  of  serious  allegations
           about the conduct of his criminal trial - but that he had lodged
           no appeal against  his  conviction  [G5  #14,  #49].  The  panel
           concluded that in the circumstances there were serious  concerns
           over the level of risk posed by the Appellant to the public.
        9. The Tribunal also noted that  the  Appellant  did  not  seek  to
           pursue the original protection claim dismissed by Judge Camp  as
           a fiction, but now advanced an  entirely  new  protection  claim
           based upon the assertion that he had lived in  Iraq  in  Kirkuk,
           and that he was at risk of harm in Kirkuk from  his  own  cousin
           who, as a local powerful al Qaeda leader, had tried  to  recruit
           the Appellant into that organisation, and when that  effort  had
           failed had tried to murder him [G5 #15]. This claim was rejected
           as  a  fiction,  inconsistent  with  the  original  claim,   and
           inconsistent with the applications he  had  made  for  voluntary
           return to Iraq in 2006 and 2008 [G9 #32]. The appeal appears  to
           have been advanced and considered on the basis that return would
           be to a home  area  of  Kirkuk,  and  that  the  KRG  was  under
           consideration only as an area for potential relocation:  for  no
           reason that we  can  discern  there  was  no  reference  to  the
           original claim that he had been born in Chamchamal, or had lived
           there.
       10. A Deportation Order was made in relation to  the  Appellant  and
           served upon him on 7 July 2009 [H1].
       11. On 23 July  2009  the  Appellant  made  his  third  request  for
           voluntary assisted removal, requesting that he be  removed  from
           the UK to Suleymanyeh [M3]. An attempt to physically remove  the
           Appellant to Iraq in the company of others on  15  October  2009
           failed when the Iraqi authorities refused to accept the evidence
           relied upon  for  the  Iraqi  nationality  of  the  majority  of
           passengers upon arrival at Baghdad airport [K8 #25].
       12. On 27 March 2011 the Appellant's eldest daughter was born to his
           partner, Ms N, a British citizen [I1].
       13. In May 2011 the Appellant  lodged  submissions  as  to  why  the
           deportation order should be revoked, and on 12 October 2012  the
           Respondent refused to  revoke  the  deportation  order.  In  the
           course of this decision the Respondent  specifically  noted  the
           information the Appellant had given at his  screening  interview
           as to where he was born and grew up, and from where his identity
           card was issued to him. The Respondent took the point  that  his
           "home area" was Chamchamal, and the Suleymanyeh governate [K19].
           The Appellant's appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  and
           dismissed by decision of 22 January 2013 of a panel  chaired  by
           Judge Grimmett [M2-]. It was noted that the Appellant now denied
           having ever been tried for an offence of  sexual  assault,  and,
           maintained that he had never met the victim. The conclusion  was
           that he did not accept his offending behaviour, did not show any
           insight into it, or remorse for it [M6 #13].
       14. The Appellant accepted then that he and his partner, Ms N,  were
           aware that he was subject  to  a  deportation  order  when  they
           commenced their relationship. Although there was a child of that
           relationship born on 27 March 2011,  and  his  partner  suffered
           from depression and  had  learning  difficulties,  the  Tribunal
           concluded that her evidence did not  establish  the  Appellant's
           claim that she would be unable to care for the child on her  own
           in the event of his deportation, or with the assistance  of  the
           large extended family of which she was a part.
       15. The Tribunal specifically rejected the Appellant's claim to have
           lost all  contact  with  family  members  in  Iraq.  Whilst  the
           Respondent did not dispute that some had been killed in a random
           bombing, the Appellant's claim that his father  had  disappeared
           and that he had lost contact with  his  uncle  was  rejected  as
           untrue in the context of his dishonesty, and an absence  of  any
           evidence to show he had made any effort to contact  his  family.
           The Tribunal also noted that he did not  face  a  real  risk  of
           indiscriminate violence in Suleymanyeh [M10 #27].
       16. On the 7 March 2018 the Appellant's younger twin daughters  were
           born to his partner Ms N. The twins were born prematurely.
       17. A series of further representations were made on behalf  of  the
           Appellant in an effort to get the Respondent  to  make  a  fresh
           decision which would either result in the revocation of the 2009
           deportation order, or, carry further appeal  rights.  Eventually
           this led to the decision to refuse a protection and human rights
           claim of 28 August 2018 [Y1-].
       18. The Appellant's appeal  against  this  decision  was  heard  and
           dismissed on asylum and  humanitarian  protection  grounds,  but
           allowed on Article 3 and Article 8  grounds  by  a  decision  of
           First tier Tribunal Judge VA Cox of 21 March 2019.
       19. The Appellant has lodged no appeal against  that  decision,  but
           the Respondent was granted permission to appeal it  by  decision
           of 19 June 2019 of Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson  because  it  was
           considered  arguable  (a)  that  the  Judge's  approach  to  the
           assessment of the weight that could be given to the  Appellant's
           bald denial of an ability to acquire  Iraqi  identity  documents
           was flawed, and, (b) that the Judge's approach to the test posed
           by section 117C(5) was also flawed.
       20. No Rule 24 Notice had been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal, although  Ms  Warren's  skeleton  argument
           lodged today is intended to serve that  purpose.  Neither  party
           has applied pursuant to Rule 15(2A) for permission to rely  upon
           further evidence. Thus the matter came before us.

      The Article 8 challenge
       21. The Judge's decision contains no express  reference  to  section
           117C(5), or to the structured approach required by section  117C
           to the assessment of  the  proportionality  of  the  refusal  to
           revoke the deportation order. Nor  is  there  reference  to  the
           current relevant jurisprudence.
       22. It may be that having given his  reasons  for  his  decision  to
           allow the  appeal  on  Article  3  grounds  the  Judge  felt  it
           unnecessary to rehearse in detail what he plainly considered  to
           be an alternative limb to the human rights  appeal  before  him,
           that he was approaching only on a "belt and braces" basis.  That
           does not we fear absolve him of the need to set out with clarity
           his approach to the statutory framework,  and  his  findings  of
           fact, by reference to the relevant jurisprudence.
       23. Having said that, it was not in dispute before  the  Judge  that
           the Appellant had a genuine parental relationship with his three
           children. Each of them is a "qualifying child" because they  are
           British citizens. Nor was it in dispute that the Appellant had a
           genuine and subsisting relationship with  Ms  N,  a  "qualifying
           partner" because she is a British citizen.
       24. The focus of the Article 8 appeal, since the Appellant's longest
           sentence was to a two year term of detention in a YOI, was  upon
           whether he could bring himself within Exception 2, as set out in
           section 117C(5). Exception 1 plainly had no application  to  him
           given his immigration history.
       25. Whilst  the  Judge  failed  to  make  an  express  reference  to
           Exception 2,  or  to  section  117C(5)  in  the  course  of  his
           decision, it is accepted before  us  that  this  would  not,  of
           itself, establish a material error of law, if, when  read  as  a
           whole it could be discerned from his decision that  he  had  the
           correct principles in mind and had made the  necessary  findings
           of fact. In so saying we would wish to give no encouragement  to
           a practice that fails to follow  the  statutory  framework  with
           clarity and makes clear to the reader what principles are  being
           applied.
       26. We are satisfied that the decision contains no  express  finding
           that the effect of the Appellant's deportation upon either Ms N,
           or, upon either of his daughters would be unduly harsh.
       27. However, the  Judge  did  note  that  it  was  accepted  by  the
           Respondent before him that it would be unduly harsh  to  require
           either of the children to live in Iraq [111]. He also considered
           [107-10]  the  report  of  the  independent  social  worker,  Mr
           Horrocks, that was before him [SB1-]. He concluded  that  whilst
           deportation  would  by  its  very  nature  often   involve   the
           separation of a person  from  family  members  in  the  UK,  the
           circumstances of this family were such that the consequences  of
           deportation would be rather greater. He concluded  that  it  was
           likely that the children would in  consequence  find  themselves
           being removed from the care of both  their  parents  and  losing
           contact with all of their birth family [112].
       28. This conclusion was plainly rooted in the Judge's analysis  that
           whilst the couple could cope at present with the care  of  their
           three  children  as  a  result  of  the  significant  levels  of
           assistance that they were receiving from social services,  Ms  N
           would be unable to do so alone in the event of  the  Appellant's
           deportation. The level of support available to the  couple  from
           within Ms N's extended family had not proved in the past  to  be
           sufficient on its own to meet the  children's  needs.  Mr  Avery
           accepted before us that this was a finding that was open to  him
           on the basis of Mr Horrocks' report.
       29. Although the Judge did not expressly refer to it,  Mr  Horrocks'
           report had confirmed that Ms N (who  has  learning  difficulties
           and mental health difficulties) was once again pregnant, and was
           therefore facing a situation in which she  would  shortly  be  a
           single parent with three children under the age of two, and,  an
           elder seven year old child (herself with some form  of  learning
           difficulty) that Ms N could not control. As to the elder  child,
           Mr Horrocks had noted  that  her  behavioural  difficulties  and
           temper tantrums were such that neighbours had called the  police
           to the family home on a number of occasions. The extent  of  her
           learning difficulties had yet to be assessed or  diagnosed,  but
           Mr Horrocks had observed that there was a  pattern  of  learning
           difficulties within the female members  of  Ms  N's  family  (at
           least her mother and her aunt) which had led  him  to  speculate
           that there could be a genetic element.
       30. It was his observation during the home visit that the  Appellant
           undertook the majority of the  parental  interactions  with  the
           children. He considered that the loss of the Appellant from  the
           family would leave Ms N unable to cope, with a major downturn in
           the family's ability to function and in the quality of  physical
           and  emotional  care  provided  to  the  children  so  that   an
           intervention by social services would be almost inevitable.
       31. The Judge looked to  what  might  happen  when  the  Appellant's
           deportation occurred, and concluded that the members of  Ms  N's
           extended family would be unable themselves to either offer Ms  N
           sufficient support to allow her to cope with the three  children
           alone, or, a long term home  suitable  for  the  children.  Thus
           social services would be forced  to  intervene.  Those  findings
           were plainly open to him on the evidence, as Mr Avery accepts.
       32. Mr Horrocks' view was that it was likely  that  social  services
           intervention would lead to some if not all of the children being
           taken into the care of the local authority. His opinion was that
           they would  suffer  developmental  harm,  and  that  they  could
           require long term permanent care arrangements outside the family
           home [SB21 4.24]. He noted that Ms N shared this  opinion  [SB22
           4.27]. He concluded that any deportation of the Appellant  would
           adversely affect Ms N's mental health difficulties  through  the
           loss of her partner, and her support in caring for the children,
           so that she would become overwhelmed by the  demands  upon  her.
           His opinion  was  that  she  lacked  the  capacity  to  function
           effectively as a single parent [SB23 5.2].
       33. The Judge appears to have interpreted  Mr  Horrocks'  report  as
           containing the expression of an opinion that the children  would
           not only be adopted, but placed for adoption separately, so that
           the effect of the Appellant's deportation would  be  a  loss  of
           contact not only with each birth parent, but also each  sibling.
           We can find no foundation for that in the report, and Ms  Warren
           did not seek to persuade us that there was.  Nevertheless,  even
           with the Judge's references to adoption excised, we accept  that
           there was a proper evidential foundation for a finding that  the
           effect upon Ms  N,  and  upon  each  of  the  children,  of  the
           Appellant's  deportation  would  be  "unduly  harsh",  so   that
           Exception 2 was made out. We did  not  understand  Mr  Avery  to
           argue otherwise.
       34. Read as a whole we  are  satisfied  that  although  the  Judge's
           approach lacked focus and the proper structure when the decision
           is read as a whole  it  is  plain  that  his  finding  was  that
           Exception  2  was  made  out.  There  was  a  proper  evidential
           foundation for that finding, and his reasons can  be  discerned,
           so that they meet the test of adequacy. We therefore reject  the
           Respondent's challenge pursuant to grounds two and three to  the
           Judge's decision to allow the Appellant's Article  8  appeal  on
           the basis of the "family life" he enjoys with Ms N and his three
           children as disclosing no material error of  law  that  requires
           this decision to be set aside and remade. If we were to make the
           Article 8 decision on the evidence that was before the Judge, we
           would also have reached the conclusion that Exception 2 was made
           out as a result of the severity of the  likely  effects  of  the
           Appellant's deportation upon the three children  which  go  well
           beyond those which might ordinarily be anticipated as  a  result
           of the deportation of a child's father. Thus notwithstanding the
           clear  public  interest  that  would  otherwise  exist  in   his
           deportation he would be one of those individuals that Parliament
           has concluded should not be deported; section 117C(5).


      The Article 3 challenge
       35. It was common ground before us that if this was our  finding  in
           relation to the  Article  8  challenge  then  it  would  not  be
           necessary to remit the Article 3 appeal for rehearing afresh  in
           the event that we were  satisfied  the  Judge  had  fallen  into
           material error of law in his approach to the evidence  requiring
           that decision to be set aside. It was also  common  ground  that
           the Appellant would receive no benefit from the  nature  of  the
           grant of leave to remain  that  would  result  from  either  his
           appeal succeeding on Article 3 or Article 8  grounds;  since  he
           would be granted short periods of limited  leave  to  remain  in
           either event.
       36. In the circumstances we can set out our conclusions in  relation
           to the Article 3 challenge relatively briefly. We are  satisfied
           that the Judge did fall into material error in a number of ways,
           and that his conclusion that the Appellant faced a real risk  of
           a breach of his Article 3 rights in the event of return to  Iraq
           is hopelessly flawed and must be set aside.
       37. The common theme in this relatively unstructured decision  is  a
           failure to engage  adequately  with  the  full  details  of  the
           immigration  history,  the  Appellant's  resort  to   dishonesty
           whenever he perceived that it suited him to do so, and,  all  of
           the adverse findings  made  by  the  Tribunal  in  the  past  in
           relation to the Appellant's evidence. These should have been set
           out properly and then taken by the Judge as his  starting  point
           in the event the Appellant offered new  evidence  on  any  issue
           that had previously been resolved against him, so that the Judge
           properly  applied,  and  could  be  seen  to  be  applying   the
           principles set out in  Devaseelan.  Instead,  although  he  gave
           himself a suitable self- direction to the effect that  the  only
           change in circumstances since the 2013  decision  had  been  the
           passage of time, and the birth of the twins,  we  are  satisfied
           that the Judge clearly failed to follow it [82].
       38. We  note  that  the  Judge  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
           Appellant's evidence had been consistent on at least the  issues
           of his date of birth, and the location of his "home area"  [29].
           As to the date of birth,  that  observation  rather  missed  the
           point. However consistently the Appellant had declared  a  given
           date as his date of birth, it was one that had been specifically
           rejected as untrue in 2005,  and  there  is  no  record  of  the
           Appellant offering any evidence that  would  have  allowed  that
           finding to be re-opened and re-made; certainly the Judge did not
           identify any within his decision. As  to  the  location  of  the
           Appellant's "home area",  self-evidently  from  the  immigration
           history set out above the Appellant had been inconsistent  about
           this. Chamchamal and Kirkuk are different towns, and the  former
           is not a suburb of the latter. Indeed,  the  Judge  records  the
           Appellant's acceptance of this, and his placement of  Chamchamal
           in the province of Suleymanyeh in his decision, but  then  fails
           to follow through the implications of that admission  [51],  and
           fails to consider the Appellant's acceptance that  his  identity
           card was issued to him in Chamchamal.
       39. Although neither party argued the appeal as an example of a  man
           for whom return to Iraq was not feasible, and self-evidently the
           Iraqi authorities had in 2009 provided travel documents for  the
           abortive chartered flight, the Judge's approach also appears  to
           have been that it was impossible for the Appellant to obtain any
           documents. No such finding had previously been made. We are  not
           persuaded that there was a proper evidential foundation for such
           an approach on his part.
       40. Crucially in our judgement, there was a failure by the Judge  to
           properly engage with the  fact  that  the  Appellant  originally
           claimed to have been born, and to have grown up  in  Chamchamal.
           The Judge may not have been assisted by the way in which  either
           party  had  prepared,  or  was  presenting,  the   appeal,   but
           Chamchamal is a town which at all material times has been  sited
           within the KRG; liveuamap.com. As the Appellant accepted it lies
           within the province of Suleymanyeh [82].
       41. Had the Judge been in any doubt as to the true locations of  the
           places previously mentioned in the Appellant's evidence then the
           appeal should have been stood down  whilst  the  parties  either
           reached agreement on the matter,  or,  identified  the  evidence
           that they wished to rely upon in order for him  to  resolve  it.
           There would have been nothing improper  in  the  Judge  and  the
           parties looking together at a  reliable  mapping  site  such  as
           liveuamap.com or googleearth, to narrow the issue or to seek  to
           resolve it, if necessary, by allowing the Appellant to give oral
           evidence by reference to the detailed maps in use. A  suggestion
           such as that offered to us by Ms Warren that a  Wikipedia  entry
           of unknown provenance and some ambiguity should take  precedence
           over a reliable mapping service should never have been made, or,
           accepted. In an extreme case, the Judge may have  been  required
           to consider whether  the  requirements  of  procedural  fairness
           necessitated a longer adjournment and further evidence.
       42. The Appellant had never claimed that his birth was unregistered,
           and he had accepted in 2005 that he  had  been  issued  with  an
           identity  card,  and  that  this  had  been  issued  to  him  in
           Chamchamal. Whether the family book into which  the  Appellant's
           birth would have been entered was  held  in  Chamchamal,  or  in
           Suleymanyeh, we can identify no cogent  reliable  evidence  that
           was before the Judge to suggest that it was ever held in Kirkuk.
           The Judge made no reference to the location or existence of  the
           family book, or the ability of the Appellant to retain  a  proxy
           to access it, but to the extent that  the  Judge  did  have  its
           existence and location in mind at all, we can only infer that he
           was proceeding on the assumption that it was located  in  Kirkuk
           and was inaccessible  to  the  Appellant.  Put  simply  such  an
           approach was not open to him on the evidence.
       43. If the Appellant had lived in  Chamchamal  then  he  would  upon
           return to the  KRG  be  legitimately  able  to  claim  to  be  a
           returning resident of the KRG. The Judge failed to  engage  with
           this too.
       44. This flawed approach also appears to have fed into  the  Judge's
           consideration of both the  ability  of  the  Appellant  to  find
           shelter and support with family in  the  KRG  in  the  event  of
           return there, and his ability to offer to the Iraqi  authorities
           family members who could vouch for his identity in the course of
           any re-documentation that was genuinely necessary.  (None  would
           be necessary if the Appellant's original genuine  identity  card
           was in truth available to him through contact with his family in
           Iraq.) The towns within the KRG have not  been  subject  to  the
           internal armed conflict  within  Iraq  that  has  more  recently
           affected the city of Kirkuk. If any of  the  Appellant's  family
           were originally based in Chamchamal  (and  he  has  consistently
           admitted to an uncle there) then there is no obvious reason  why
           they should have relocated. The same point can be made about his
           early claim to have fled a risk of harm to the home of  an  aunt
           in Ranya. Although there was never any need  for  him  to  flee,
           that account locates family in that town. A town  of  that  name
           lies  within  the  KRG  roughly   midway   between   Erbil   and
           Suleymanyeh.
       45. Nor did the Judge adequately engage with the Tribunal's previous
           express rejections of the Appellant's claim  that  he  had  lost
           contact with all members of his family in Iraq  and  was  wholly
           unable to resume contact with them. The Tribunal had  previously
           noted the Appellant's failure to provide any  evidence  that  he
           had taken reasonable steps to  contact  members  of  his  family
           living in Iraq, and we can  identify  nothing  in  the  evidence
           placed before the Judge to suggest there had been  any  material
           change in that respect.
       46. It is also a fair criticism of the Judge's  reasoning  that  his
           findings in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  evidence  have  the
           appearance of inconsistency. He concluded that the Appellant was
           maintaining a fictitious account in support  of  support  of  an
           asylum claim and dismissed this ground of  appeal  as  a  result
           [82]. It is difficult to see how this adverse finding  fed  into
           the Judge's acceptance of the Appellant's bald assertion that he
           had lost contact with all members of his family,  including  the
           maternal uncle who had been in the UK in 2005 [37], and since he
           would be unable to re-document himself in the event of return to
           the KRG he would thus be destitute and at real risk of a  breach
           of his Article 3  rights.  That  is  particularly  so  when  one
           reflects upon the fact that the claim to have lost contact  with
           the entire family was expressly rejected by the Tribunal in 2009
           and 2013, and, the  fact  that  the  Appellant  has  made  three
           separate  applications  for  assisted   voluntary   removal   to
           Suleymanyeh.
       47. In the circumstances, and as set out  above,  we  are  satisfied
           that the Judge did fall into  material  error  of  law  when  he
           allowed the appeal on the Article 3 ground. As noted above,  the
           parties were agreed that we did not need to re-make the decision
           ourselves on this ground, or, remit the appeal to the First-tier
           Tribunal to do so, in the event the Appellant succeeded  in  his
           human rights appeal on the Article 8 ground. We are not required
           by statute or the procedure rules to re-make a  decision  (or  a
           part of a decision) which we have set aside:  the  provision  is
           permissive. For that reason, we decline to re-make or  to  remit
           the decision upon the Article 3 ground. The human rights  appeal
           is allowed on the Article 8 ground alone.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 21
   March 2019 contained no material error of law in the decision  to  allow
   the Appellant's human rights  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  and  that
   decision is accordingly confirmed.


   The decision to allow the Appellant's human rights appeal on  Article  3
   grounds is set aside for material error of law. The parties  are  agreed
   that in the circumstances there is no need for that ground of appeal  to
   be reheard, and that aspect of the decision remade.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him  or  the
        children. This direction applies both to the Appellant and  to  the
        Respondent. Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to
        proceedings being brought for contempt of court.




   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 24 July 2019


