
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10513/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 5th April 2019 On 9th May 2019



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   Ms S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                          Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Farooq for Anderson Smith Law.
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Shergill. That decision, promulgated on 10
      December 2018, dismissed her appeal against the respondent's refusal
      of protection.

   2. There are a series of interrelated and transgenerational claims.
      Suffice it to say it is apparent from the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Shergill that the judge was not satisfied the appellant
      and her witnesses were being frank, particularly in relation to the
      family dynamics.

   3. The necessary anonymisation can lead to some difficulties in recalling
      who is who. The way of introduction the appellant, Ms SM, entered the
      United Kingdom on a visit Visa on 25 August 2005 at the age of 18. She
      was accompanied by her mother, Mrs BP and her older sister, Mrs AR.
      She subsequently overstayed and then on 28 April 2018 made a claim for
      protection. This was refused and forms the subject matter of the
      present proceedings.

   4. Her sister, Mrs AR, had also made a claim for protection which is
      connected to the appellant's claim. Her claim was allowed at 1st
      instance and the judge had requested details of what is called the
      Grant Minute or summary reasons.

   5. Her mother at the time of hearing also had a related application which
      was pending but the parties agreed that the matter could proceed.

   6.  It was indicated that in 2011 her brother Mr KK, aka Mr RMK, also
      came to the United Kingdom on a visit Visa and subsequently made a
      claim for protection which is also pending. He has a disability in
      that it was indicated he cannot speak or hear.

   7. There are also various siblings living in the United Kingdom including
      an older brother, Mr HR. He has been granted British citizenship.
      There was also reference to a Mr SK, a member of the firm representing
      the appellant. He was recently appointed a Magistrate. He is married
      to another sister. The judge made the point that Mr SK had been the
      sponsor of 3 members of the family who all overstayed.

   8. The background to the claim is that her sister, Mrs AR, entered into
      an arranged marriage in Pakistan in 2002. The marriage was not
      successful and her husband was abusive towards her. It was variously
      indicated that her husband has connections in the police and military
      or with politicians. Mrs AR's in-laws wanted Ms SM to marry into their
      family. Given the experiences of her sister, Mrs AR, her mother was
      not agreeable. Consequently, the in-laws bore the family animosity and
      at various stages sought to harm not only the appellant but also her
      mother. It was said that her brother, Mr KK, moved from Kashmir, where
      there had been living, to stay with an uncle in Lahore. He was able to
      live there for a number of years until his in-laws located him
      whereupon they attacked him, burning his face and breaking his arm.

   9. In refusing the appellant's claim the respondent said her account was
      vague at various stages. In any event, it was suggested there was
      sufficiency of protection from her and she could avoid difficulties
      from her in-laws by relocating, for instance, to Lahore. In terms of
      her private life the respondent did not see significant obstacles to
      her reintegration.

  10. First-tier Tribunal Judge Shergill had issued specific Directions in
      relation to the appeal. As a result of this the judge was provided
      with the letter issued to her sister, Mrs AM, by the respondent, dated
      21 March 2018, granting her protection. This indicated that her claim
      related to domestic violence and was largely consistent with the
      appellant's account. However, a distinguishing feature was that she
      was considered to be suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder and
      her mental health was an issue. The judge commented on the reasons
      given in the letter but said there was little reasoning in relation to
      sufficiency of protection or relocation in relation to Mrs SM. The
      judge clearly was taking into account the fact she had been granted
      protection but pointed out this was not a Devaseelan situation but
      referred to Ocampo -v- SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1276.

  11. The judge heard from the appellant and her mother as well as another
      brother (not Mr KK). The judge accepted that women in Pakistan form a
      particular social group and that lone women were vulnerable and needed
      to have a male relative. The judge accepted that the Grant Minute in
      her sister's application supported a fair amount of what she herself
      claimed. The judge noted that her sister had not been interviewed when
      her claim was being assessed because of mental health issues raised.
      The judge took the view that whilst her sister's mental health issues
      factored in the assessment of her claim ultimately the grant was based
      upon acceptance of her account of events in Pakistan. The judge also
      had regard to the contents of her mother's interview.

  12.  At paragraph 20 the judge accepted that Mrs AR had been the victim of
      significant domestic violence and that it was plausible that her in-
      laws wanted to marry one of their brothers to the appellant. The judge
      also accepted that it was plausible that their mother, Mrs BB,
      resisted the proposal and that this then led to further violence for
      Mrs AR and attempts to injure the appellant. The judge found what was
      claimed was consistent internally and with the objective evidence.

  13. At paragraph 21 the judge went on to consider whether there would be a
      male protector available for the appellant. It is in evaluating this
      that the judge expressed concerns about the reliability of the
      evidence presented in relation to support at paragraph 23. The claim
      made was that the were no male relatives that the appellant could turn
      to for support in Pakistan. The judge referred to obfuscation in
      relation to enquiries about family members. The judge attempted to
      follow a family tree and concluded there should be at least 2 sisters
      still in Pakistan who were not married.

  14. At paragraph 25 the judge turned to consider her brother Mr KK. The
      judge heard from Mr K.K.'s brother, Mr HR, who has been granted
      citizenship. He claimed not to know about his brother's life in
      Pakistan. The judge referred to discrepancies between the evidence of
      the various family members. The general tenor of their evidence was
      that all of the appellant's siblings were in the United Kingdom. Their
      evidence caused the judge to question whether her brother Mr KK had
      been in the United Kingdom earlier than the claimed 2011.

  15. At paragraph 33 the judge accepted the history of domestic violence
      given and found that the appellant might be at risk if she returned to
      her home area. However, her situation could be distinguished from that
      of her sister, Mrs AR. Her sister had left an abusive husband whereas
      the appellant had rejected a marriage proposal and more than half her
      lifetime had passed since. The judge said it was difficult to accept
      that a rejected suitor would still be concerned at this stage. Overall
      the judge felt the risk to the appellant was considerably less than
      that faced by her married sister. However, the judge accepted the
      possibility of a risk existing in her home area. Following from this
      then was the issue of relocation.

  16. At paragraph 34 the judge commented upon the recent claim that her
      brother Mr KK encountered difficulties in Lahore, the very area the
      respondent suggested the appellant could relocate to. The judge took
      the view this was an attempt to anticipate and counter the relocation
      point. The judge did not find a real risk of her being discovered and
      was not satisfied that her claim pursuers where well-connected or
      influential.

  17. The judge was not satisfied that her brother, Mr KK, had such
      disabilities that he could not take on the role of head of the
      household. At hearing, the judge commented that there was no formal
      confirmation he had made a claim for asylum. The evidence rather was
      that he was waiting for an interview. The judge concluded that the
      appellant could be returned along with her brother Mr KK who could act
      as her protector. In turn they could be supported by their other
      brother, Mr HR.

The Upper Tribunal.

  18. Permission to appeal was granted in relation to what the judge had
      said at paragraph 34 and 35, which is concerned with relocation to
      Lahore and being accompanied by her brother Mr KK. The grant of
      permission referred to the suggestion Mr KK had a pending claim for
      protection and that there was no evidential basis to conclude he would
      be willing to return to Pakistan with the appellant. The grant
      suggested it was incumbent upon the judge to say more as to why it was
      likely that Mr KK would so return and act as her protector. Other
      grounds were advanced and these were not considered particularly
      meritorious but nevertheless could be argued.

  19. At hearing the appellant's representative confirmed that her mother
      had a pending claim for protection. So had her brother Mr KK.

  20. Mr McVeety accepted that in the circumstance it was a material error
      of law for the judge to have considered relocation on the basis her
      brother would accompany her and act as her protector. This was because
      of his own circumstance.

  21. I would agree at this does amount to a material error of law in what
      is otherwise is a very carefully prepared decision. The decision
      indicates the judge carefully considered the evidence and made clear
      findings that were open. However, the outcome of the appeal turned on
      the question of relocation and the question of having a male
      protector. It was at this stage that the decision was flawed given her
      brother situation as an asylum seeker.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Shergill materially errs in law
and is set aside. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a
de novo hearing.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.
Date: 04 May 2019




Directions.

   1. Relist in the First-tier Tribunal at Manchester for a de novo hearing
      excluding First-tier Tribunal Judge Shergill.

   2. An Urdu Punjabi interpreter will be required.

   3. It would be preferable if the appeal were not relisted until there had
      been an outcome in respect of the claim made for protection by the
      appellant's brother Mr KK. An issue is the question of the appellant's
      relocation, with the suggestion that he could return with her but for
      any outstanding claim of his.

   4.  It has been indicated that his claim and that of their mother is
      based upon a threat from the in-laws of Mrs AR ,the appellant's
      sister. She has been granted protection on this basis by the
      respondent at 1st instance. If those claims have been unsuccessful and
      there are pending appeals it would seem preferable for all appeals to
      be heard together. This would make for consistency and common evidence
      would be helpful to the judge hearing the appeal. Because the cases
      are interlinked in this way it would seem advantageous to have a Case
      Management Review in relation to this.

   5. The First-tier Tribunal judge at paragraph 33 does not specifically
      find that the appellant would be at risk in her home area but refers
      to the possibility she might be at risk. The question of sufficiency
      of protection is referred to at paragraph 21 and this is linked to a
      disputed claim that the in-laws have connections. I would leave these
      matters open rather than restrict the scope of the enquiry by the
      First-tier judge ultimately dealing with the appeal or appeals. There
      should also be focus upon the question of the reasonableness of
      relocation and the availability of male support.

   6. A hearing time of around two and a half hour is anticipated.


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.
       Dated: 04 May 2019
