
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/10167/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool Civil Justice Centre       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th October 2018                          |19th October 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     hk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Khan of Fountain Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge J J  Maxwell
    (the judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT)  promulgated  on  22nd
    May 2018.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female Iranian citizen  born  in  August  1995.   She
    claimed asylum on the basis of her political opinion.  It  was  claimed
    that she would be at risk from the Iranian authorities because she  had
    been a blogger, and had posted derogatory cartoons  on  a  blog,  which
    would put her at risk if she returned to Iran.

 4. The claim for international protection was refused  on  27th  September
    2017.  The Claimant appealed to the FtT, and the FtT hearing took place
    on 25th April 2018 and 15th May 2018.  On 25th  April  2018  the  judge
    heard  evidence  from  the  Claimant,   and   submissions   from   both
    representatives and reserved his decision.

 5. When considering his decision the judge observed that although  neither
    representative had made any direct reference to the  existence  of  the
    blog, there was a link to the claimed location of the blog set  out  in
    the Claimant's witness statement.  The judge tried the link, which  led
    him to a Google page which confirmed the existence of the blog and that
    the blog site had been closed down.  The  judge  could  see  that  nine
    blogs had been posted between September 2016 and May 2017.

 6. The judge decided that the parties should be given  an  opportunity  to
    consider the  evidence  that  he  had  discovered  after  the  hearing.
    Directions dated 2nd May 2018 were sent out by the Tribunal  indicating
    that the appeal was to stand adjourned part-heard  to  15th  May  2018.
    The directions indicated that neither party was required to attend  but
    indicated that the judge had undertaken a  search  which  revealed  the
    existence of the blog, and the commencement and conclusion of the blog,
    which accorded with the Appellant's account, as did the claimed  number
    of blogs produced.  The parties were given the link  to  the  blog  and
    invited to make representations  on  the  evidence  discovered  by  the
    judge.

 7. Unfortunately due to an administrative error, the link to the blog  was
    misspelt, which meant that the parties could not access it.   When  the
    hearing reconvened on 15th May 2018 there was no attendance  by  or  on
    behalf of the Claimant and no representations made on  her  behalf.   A
    Presenting Officer attended on behalf of the Secretary of State.

 8. The Presenting Officer was  given  the  correct  link  and  allowed  an
    opportunity to  access  the  blog.   The  hearing  proceeded  with  the
    Presenting Officer  making  submissions,  having  viewed  the  evidence
    discovered by the judge.

 9. The judge has recorded in his record of proceedings that the Presenting
    Officer  submitted  that  the  material  did  little  to  advance   the
    Claimant's case, as it amounted to a bare reference to the  blog,  with
    no reference to the content, and  the  dates  and  numbers  given  were
    equivocal.

10. The judge allowed the Claimant's appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds, finding at paragraph 34 of his decision, that the Claimant had
    proved her account to be accurate and reliable.  The judge  found  that
    "she was a blogger who posted what would be regarded as both derogatory
    and anti-regime materials by way of  cartoons  lampooning  the  Iranian
    regime and senior clerics."

11. The judge was satisfied having considered background evidence, that the
    Claimant would be at risk  of  persecution  if  she  was  returned  and
    identified by the Iranian authorities.

12. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary, it was contended that the judge  had  materially
    erred in law and had failed to take into  account  relevant  case  law,
    that being EG (post-hearing internet  research)  Nigeria  [2008]  UKAIT
    00015.  It was pointed out that it was  only  on  the  morning  of  the
    hearing on 15th May 2018 that the Secretary of State was able to access
    the link and consider the evidence.  It was noted that  the  judge  had
    not provided any "hard evidence of the appellant's evidence, only links
    to a website."

13. At paragraph 29 the judge had noted that the Claimant had not  produced
    original evidence of the cartoons she claimed to be the source  of  her
    problems,  but  presented   freshly-drawn   copies,   but   there   was
    insufficient evidence of this.

14. There was no evidence from Iran to suggest that the Claimant is  wanted
    by the authorities.  The judge at paragraph 20 referred  to  finding  a
    Google page which confirmed the existence of the blog, and that it  had
    been closed down but it was submitted that this  was  not  sufficiently
    strong evidence such  that  the  claim  should  be  believed.   It  was
    submitted that the judge had placed significant weight on  the  history
    of a blog which he was not able to view, and the judge had erred by not
    fully reasoning his findings, "and has allowed this appeal  on  a  very
    weak point."

15. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Boyes of the FtT  and  I  set
    out below, in part, the grant of permission;

         "2.  The grounds assert that the judge was wrong to conduct his own
             enquiries  and  in  addition  was  wrong  not  to  allow   the
             Respondent further time to consider the material.

         3.   Having considered that which the judge has  concluded  in  the
             judgment, I find that the grounds  are  arguable.   The  judge
             perhaps should not have taken matters into his  own  hands  to
             investigate yet when  the  hearing  recommenced,  the  parties
             should have been afforded all of the material  the  judge  had
             seen and given time to digest and  argue  it  properly.   That
             this did not happen is arguably an error of law.

         4.   Permission to appeal is granted."

16. Following the grant  of  permission  the  Claimant  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary, it was  contended  that  the  judge  had  not  acted
    unfairly and the Secretary of State had been given  an  opportunity  to
    consider the link to the blog and had not requested an adjournment.

17. It was submitted that the judge had made findings open to  him  on  the
    evidence and given adequate reasons for those findings.

18. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the judge had  erred  in  law  such
    that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

19. I asked the representatives whether  there  was  a  hard  copy  of  the
    evidence discovered by the judge as this was not on the Tribunal  file.
    I noted from paragraph  22  of  the  FtT  decision  that  the  material
    amounted  to  "no  more  than  two   pages   once   downloaded."    The
    representatives indicated that they had not seen a  hard  copy  of  the
    Google page.

20. I firstly heard oral submissions from Mr  Bates  who  relied  upon  the
    grounds contained within the application for permission to appeal.   Mr
    Bates submitted that in addition to the issue of unfairness, the  judge
    had erred by not  fully  reasoning  his  findings.   Mr Bates  was  in
    possession of notes made by the Presenting  Officer  who  had  appeared
    before the judge, which indicated that submissions had been made to the
    effect that the evidence discovered by the  judge  did  not  prove  the
    Claimant's case.  It was submitted that the judge had not  referred  to
    those submissions in his decision and had erred by not doing so.

21. Mr Bates submitted that in relation to the evidence discovered  by  the
    judge, the burden of proof was on the Claimant to establish  that  such
    evidence was reliable.  It was submitted that the  Secretary  of  State
    had been disadvantaged by not receiving a hard  copy  of  the  evidence
    discovered by the judge, and by only being able to access the  link  on
    the day of the hearing.  It was submitted  that  the  lack  of  reasons
    given by the judge,  meant  that  the  Secretary  of  State  could  not
    understand from the judge's decision, why the appeal had been allowed.

22. I then heard oral submissions from Mr Khan who relied upon the Rule  24
    response.  Mr Khan made the point that the Claimant had, in her  asylum
    interview made the Secretary of State aware of  the  existence  of  the
    blog.  At paragraph 8 of her witness statement  she  had  provided  the
    link to that blog.  It was submitted that the judge had  not  erred  by
    following  that  link,  and  thereafter  had  given  the  parties   the
    opportunity to make representations  upon  the  evidence  that  he  had
    discovered.

23. Mr Khan pointed out that the Secretary of State's representative at the
    hearing on 15th May 2008 had not requested an adjournment.  I was asked
    to accept that the judge had not been unfair, and did not have  to  set
    out in his decision everything that was said by a representative.

24. It was submitted that the judge had been entitled to find the  Claimant
    credible, and had given adequate reasons for the findings that  he  had
    made and the decision disclosed no material error of law.

25. In response Mr Bates submitted that it  was  unfair  of  the  judge  to
    ignore submissions made by the Presenting Officer  at  the  hearing  on
    15th May and  to  attach  no  weight  to  those  submissions.   It  was
    reiterated that the judge had failed to give adequate reasons  for  his
    findings and had acted unfairly in  proceeding,  as  the  Secretary  of
    State only had access to the link on the morning of the hearing on 15th
    May 2018.

26. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

27. I do not find that the judge acted unfairly in considering this appeal,
    and do not find that he failed to follow the guidance in EG  (Nigeria).
    The headnote to that decision, in summary, states that it is unwise for
    a judge to conduct post-hearing research on the internet or  otherwise,
    into the factual issues which have to be decided in a case.  To  derive
    evidence from  post-hearing  research  on  the  internet  and  to  base
    conclusions on that evidence without giving the parties the opportunity
    to comment on it is wrong.

28. In my view, the judge, having been provided with a link to a blog site,
    was entitled to investigate that link.   Although  there  had  been  no
    direct reference to the existence of the blog, it was  central  to  the
    Claimant's case.  The judge at paragraph 21  sets  out  his  view  that
    having investigated the link, fairness dictated that he should give the
    parties the opportunity to consider the evidence and  to  make  further
    representations.  He makes specific reference to EG (Nigeria).

29. It is unfortunate that a misspelling of  the  link  in  the  directions
    dated 2nd May 2018 meant that the parties could not  access  the  link.
    The Secretary of State's Presenting Officer  attended  the  hearing  on
    15th May 2008 and was given the correct link.  The  Presenting  Officer
    was given an opportunity to consider the evidence that  the  judge  had
    found and in fact did make submissions on that evidence.

30. If the Secretary of State had been disadvantaged, it was  open  to  the
    Presenting Officer to make an application for an  adjournment.   It  is
    common ground that no such application was made.  Therefore  the  judge
    was entitled to proceed with the hearing, on the understanding that the
    Presenting Officer was satisfied, having been given an  opportunity  to
    consider the evidence.  I therefore do not find that the  judge  failed
    to follow guidance in EG (Nigeria), and did not act unfairly.

31. It is not an error of law to fail to set out all submissions made by  a
    representative.  The judge set out at paragraph 22 that it was only  on
    the morning of the  resumed  hearing  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative was able to properly consider the material, but  records
    that  there  was  no  application   to   adjourn   and   that   further
    representations were made.  It may have  been  helpful  had  the  judge
    briefly summarised the submissions to the effect  that  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the evidence  did  not  advance  the  Claimant's
    case, but I do not find that it is a material error of law  not  to  do
    so.  The judge needs to demonstrate that he has taken all matters  into
    account and considered the evidence in the round, and in  my  view  the
    decision promulgated on 22nd May 2018 demonstrates that  this  is  what
    the judge has done.

32. I find no error of law as  contended  by  the  Secretary  of  State  at
    paragraph 29 of the decision in which the judge finds that the Claimant
    has not produced the originals of the cartoons she  claims  to  be  the
    source of her problems as these  had  been  seized.   Included  in  the
    Claimant's bundle are fresh drawings  reproducing  cartoons  that  were
    originally  published.   It  is  submitted  in  the   grounds   seeking
    permission to appeal that there is no evidence of this but that is  not
    the case.  The judge viewed the drawings, and accepted the  Appellant's
    evidence  that  the  originals  had  been  seized,   and   these   were
    reproductions drawn by the Claimant.  The judge was entitled  to  reach
    that conclusion.

33. I find that the claim in the grounds that the Appellant had not adduced
    sufficiently  strongly  evidence  to  prove  her   claim   displays   a
    disagreement with the conclusion reached by  the  judge  but  does  not
    disclose a material error of law.  The judge at paragraph 20  sets  out
    the evidence that he discovered.  He  comments  that  the  Google  page
    confirmed that there had been a blog which had been closed down.  There
    were postings indicating a total of nine blogs posted between September
    2016 and May 2017.  The judge  at  paragraph  31  attaches  significant
    weight to the history of the  blog.   He  notes  that  the  history  of
    posting accords with the chronology  given  by  the  Claimant  and  was
    entitled to attach significant weight to this, in my view.  As  pointed
    out by the judge, the evidence was not advanced by  the  Claimant,  but
    resulted from the  judge  following  the  link  given  in  her  witness
    statement.  In this paragraph the judge specifically  records  that  in
    coming to that conclusion he has "taken  due  account  of  the  further
    representations made on behalf  of  the  Respondent."   These  are  the
    submissions made by the Presenting Officer on 15th May 2018.

34. In my view the judge has made findings which were open to him  to  make
    on the evidence and given  adequate  reasons  for  those  findings.   I
    conclude that the judge has complied with his duty to give  reasons  as
    set out in the headnote to Budhathoki (reasons  for  decisions)  [2014]
    UKUT 00341 (IAC) which is set out below;

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

35. In my view the judge has made it clear in his decision why he found the
    Appellant to be credible and he has given adequate  reasons  for  those
    findings.

36. I conclude that the grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal  display  a
    disagreement with the  decision  reached  by  the  judge,  but  do  not
    disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a material error  of  law.   I  do
not set aside the decision.   The  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  the  Claimant  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This
direction applies both to the  Claimant  and  to  the  Secretary  of  State.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.  This direction is made because the Claimant has made  a  claim
for international protection  and  is  made  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date         10th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As stated by the FtT, no fee has been  paid  or  is  payable  and  therefore
there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date         10th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


