
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10470/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2018                            |On 12 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                MUHAMMED [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U Dirie, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Kilic &
Kilic Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Julie Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Lucas who, in a determination promulgated on 26
    April 2018, dismissed the appeal of the appellant against a decision of
    the Secretary of State to refuse asylum made on 9 August 2017.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on  15  September  1986.   He
    claimed that he was Kurdish and a supporter of the PKK and that he  had
    been arrested by gendarmes in April 2006  and  detained  for  two  days
    before being released.   He  had  again  been  taken  by  gendarmes  in
    December 2012 and tortured, and in 2013 he was told that the  gendarmes
    were looking for him.  He then took steps to leave Turkey.

3.   When he made his application a report from the Medical  Foundation  was
    submitted.

4.   The judge having heard the appellant's appeal set out his  findings  in
    paragraphs 33 onwards  of  the  determination.   He  went  through  the
    various points made by the appellant and did not  find  them  credible.
    He then, at paragraph 42, said that he had noted the  medical  evidence
    which noted injuries on the appellant's body and a  diagnosis  of  PTSD
    and said:-

         "However, given that his account is regarded as not  plausible,  it
         is not accepted that his medical or psychological  condition  is  a
         consequence of his alleged ill-treatment in Turkey".

5.   The grounds of appeal stated,  inter  alia,  that  the  judge  had  not
    properly  assessed   the   evidence   and   the   relevant   background
    documentation which was before him and further had not  considered  the
    evidence of the appellant in accordance with his vulnerability.

6.   Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Saffer  dismissed  the  grounds  of
    appeal, but further grounds emphasised the terms of the medical  report
    and referred to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  Mibanga  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 367.  On those grounds  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  granted
    permission.

7.   At the hearing of the appeal before me Ms Isherwood correctly  accepted
    that there was a material error of law in the determination in that the
    judge having found that the appellant was implausible had then gone  on
    to dismiss the appeal.

8.    The  reality  is  that  the  decision  of  the  judge  was  not   made
    holistically taking into account the  evidence  and  that  the  judge's
    conclusions regarding the medical evidence were made after he had found
    the appellant  was  not  credible.   Given  particularly  the  lack  of
    reasoning by the judge for dismissing the medical evidence, and  indeed
    not considering it in any detail, I consider that there is  a  material
    error of law in the determination  and  it  is  appropriate  that  this
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing  afresh  on
    all issues.

Notice of Decision

    (1)  The decision of the judge in the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    (2)  The appeal will be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
         hearing on all issues.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed:                                 Date: 7 October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
