
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10167/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 March 2020                      |On 23 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     UR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M. Gherman, Counsel, instructed by Novells Legal
Practice
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction and background

The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born in 1978.  On 9 October 2019
the respondent made a decision to refuse his protection and human rights
claim. His appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal
Judge Bonavero ("the FtJ") at a hearing on 20 November 2019 which resulted
in the appeal being dismissed on all grounds.

The appellant's claim, in outline, is as follows.  He was politically
active for the BNP as were members of his family. He was attacked by
members of the Awami League in 2000 requiring his admission to hospital.
In 2004 he borrowed money from a man, RU, a prominent supporter of the
Awami League, in order to travel to the UK where he intended to work.
However, his earnings in the UK were less than he had anticipated and he
was therefore unable to repay the debt. As a result, RU threatened the
appellant's father and used his political connections to file cases against
the appellant.

Since his arrival in the UK he has been an active member of the Bangladesh
National Party ("BNP") and his political activities have come to the
attention of the authorities in Bangladesh.

The grounds of appeal in relation to the FTJ's decision are as follows.
Ground 1 contends that the FtJ failed to consider documentary evidence in
relation to the appellant's political activity in Bangladesh. Ground 2 is
that he failed to consider and make findings on medical evidence. Ground 3
argues that the FtJ failed to take into account evidence of the influence
and reach of the person that the appellant claims to be at risk from.
Ground 4 is that the FtJ failed to take into account "explanatory evidence"
in relation to the appellant's claim, and Ground 5 argues that he failed to
engage with material legal arguments in relation to the documents emanating
from Bangladesh.

It is necessary to summarise the FtJ's decision in order to put into
context my assessment and conclusions on the arguments advanced on behalf
of the appellant.

    The FtJ's decision

The FtJ summarised the basis of the appellant's claim and set out his
immigration history. He said that the appellant arrived in the UK on 29
February 2004 pursuant to the terms of a work permit. His leave expired on
10 February 2005. Since then he had remained in the UK without leave
although had sought to regularise his stay through human rights
applications. He noted the asylum claim in 2012 which was refused and
certified as clearly unfounded. Because the appellant absconded, the
decision was never served on him. He noted that further submissions were
rejected in 2013 because the appellant did not attend in person to make
them.

On 10 September 2018 the appellant was encountered by the respondent whilst
working in a restaurant. He was detained and then made the claim for asylum
which is the subject of the appeal.

The FtJ decided that the appellant should be treated as a vulnerable
witness. He heard evidence from the appellant and from a friend of the
appellant, AM.

In relation to the documents that the appellant relied on (a First
Information Report- "FIR", charge sheet and arrest warrant), the FtJ
considered that there were "several oddities" about them which he went on
to describe. He concluded that there were important and unexplained
inconsistencies in the appellant's account on that score, as compared to
the evidence of his witness, and he set out his reasons for coming to that
view. He referred to the evidence of the Country Policy and Information
Note ("CPIN") on Bangladesh dated January 2018 in relation to the use of
fraudulent documents.

He also referred to the decision in Tanveer Ahmed v. Secretary of State for
the Home Department, [2002] UKIAT00439. He concluded that the documentary
evidence was not reliable, including in that assessment the letters relied
on by the appellant that describe his political activities in Bangladesh.


As regards his political activities in the UK, he referred to the
photographs of the appellant at various political events, noting that the
oldest of them, according to the appellant, was taken 18 months ago, after
he had claimed asylum. Although he had claimed to be active in the BNP
since 2007 or 2008 the FtJ found that there was no evidence to support that
claim. He found that it would have been a simple thing for him to have
obtained evidence from the BNP in the UK.

He found that in any event the appellant's activities were at a low level
such that he would not be at risk on return.

He found that the appellant was not politically active in Bangladesh and
that his claim that he faced criminal prosecution there was an invention.
Further, even if the appellant had borrowed money in Bangladesh there was
no "objective evidence" to show that a local businessman would be in a
position to locate a person some 15 years after they had left Bangladesh
and the appellant could relocate.

    Submissions

I summarise the parties' submissions, also referring as necessary to the
grounds of appeal upon which permission was granted.

Ms Gherman relied on the grounds. In terms of specific matters that I asked
her to address me on, she submitted that in relation to Ground 1, although
the FtJ referred at [24] to the letters in relation to the appellant's
political activities in Bangladesh, the conclusion at [26] that the
appellant had not established that he was politically active in Bangladesh
fails to take into account the content of the letters as set out at [7] of
the grounds.

As regards Ground 2 and in relation to the attack on the appellant in
Bangladesh in 2000, in the appellant's bundle there was a medical report
from the Sheba Poly Clinic which states that he was treated there for a
head trauma and other injuries but the FtJ did not refer to that report at
all, or the other documents referred to in the grounds in terms of the
appellant's health (a 'rule 35' report dated 20 September 2018 and a report
from a consultant psychiatrist dated 12 November  2018).

In terms of what is said in Ground 4, in particular at [16] of the grounds
and the contention that the appellant did, contrary to the FTJ's view,
provide an explanation for why he would be targeted despite his not being a
party to the loan deed, the appellant explained this in his witness
statement (as pointed out at [18] of the grounds). He also gave an
explanation in oral evidence as described in the grounds. It was accepted,
however, that no agreed note of the evidence given to the FtJ had been
provided. Having said that, I indicated to the parties that the FTJ's
record of proceedings supported this aspect of the grounds as to the
appellant's oral evidence.

Similarly, in relation to the contention at [20] of the grounds (Ground 5)
that the FtJ had failed to take into account the submissions made on behalf
of the appellant in terms of specific features of the originals of the
documentary evidence from Bangladesh which supported their authenticity, it
was accepted by Ms Gherman that there was no agreed note of the submissions
made to the FtJ in this context. Nevertheless, having again referred the
parties to the FTJ's record of proceedings, the note Ms Gherman provided to
the appellant's solicitors after the hearing and the Presenting Officer's
minute or note of the hearing very fairly made available by Mr Tufan, I
accept that the grounds do reflect the submissions made to the FtJ on the
topic.

In his submissions, Mr Tufan pointed out that the appellant had been in the
UK for a number of years and had absconded. He only claimed asylum when he
was encountered by immigration authorities. These were matters that the FtJ
referred to at [23].

It was further submitted that the BNP is a lawful political party in
Bangladesh and it could not be said that a mere supporter and those
involved in low-level political activity, would be at risk, as the FtJ had
found.

Although the FtJ did not specifically refer to the details of the letters
that are said to relate to the appellant's political activities in
Bangladesh, he did conclude that the documentary evidence could not be
relied on, especially the Deed of Agreement in relation to the loan. He had
referred at [21] to the background evidence in relation to false documents
in Bangladesh and had applied Tanveer Ahmed.  It was submitted that he was
entitled to find that the documents could not be relied on and did not need
to go further and consider the shape, layout or other particular features
of the documents that the appellant had relied on.

As regards the medical documents, the medical report from Bangladesh is
from July 2000. The FtJ had found that the documentary evidence was
unreliable. The rule 35 report only states that the appellant has scars.
Although the psychiatric report says that the appellant has psychiatric
issues, that cannot establish that they result from the events that he
describes.

It was submitted that there was no irrationality in the FtJ's finding in
terms of how a local businessman would be able to locate the appellant.

In reply, Ms Gherman submitted that the appellant's sur place activities
are part of the assessment of his political activity overall. The 'section
8' issue (delay in claiming asylum) is only one factor in the overall
assessment. The medical report from Bangladesh could inform the credibility
assessment in the appellant's favour, contrary to the submissions on behalf
of the respondent. Likewise, in relation to the psychiatric report.

In addition, as set out at [14(b)] of the grounds, the background evidence
does support the contention that the appellant could be at risk on return,
even from a local businessman.

    Assessment and Conclusions

I am satisfied that the grounds and submissions on behalf of the appellant
do establish that the FtJ erred in law in his assessment of the appellant's
claim. The following are my reasons.

In concluding that the appellant was not politically active in Bangladesh
(Ground 1) it is not apparent that the FtJ gave adequate consideration to
the letters said to come from Bangladesh which supported the appellant's
account. There are letters said to be from different individuals in the BNP
in Bangladesh dated 23 April 2012, 11 October 2018 and 6 November 2019
referring to the appellant's political activities in the BNP in Bangladesh
and referring to an attack on the appellant in 2000. Whilst the FtJ
referred to the letters at [24], that is only in terms of the global
conclusion that none of the documents are reliable, but there is no
reference to the detail of them at all. It is not apparent from the FtJ's
decision therefore, that he considered the information in them.

The medical evidence (Ground 2) consisted of a medical report dated July
2000 from the Sheba Poly Clinic in Bangladesh which states that the
appellant was treated there for injuries sustained in an attack on him at
that time. It is referred to in the appellant's skeleton argument that was
before the FtJ, yet there is no reference to that report in the FtJ's
decision.

The 'rule 35' report stating that the appellant has scarring consistent
with an account of torture is similarly referred to in the appellant's
skeleton argument but is not referred to in the FtJ's decision. The same
applies in relation to the psychiatric report from Dr Hussain dated 12
November 2018. The report concludes, after having set out the appellant's
history as narrated to him by the appellant, that he suffers from Mixed
Anxiety and Depressive Disorder, with the diagnostic criteria having been
set out.

One can see that reasons could be given for concluding that none of those
reports, either individually or cumulatively, attract much weight in the
assessment of the appellant's credibility. However, if that was the FtJ's
view it was encumbent on him to say so and to give reasons, even brief
reasons. That was not done.

In terms of Ground 3, the appellant relied on country background evidence
from the CPIN in relation to the influence of the ruling Awami League, the
harassment and intimidation of political opponents, political violence, the
extent of the availability of state protection and the inadequacies of the
justice system. That evidence, to some extent at least, is capable of
supporting the appellant's account. However, the only country background
evidence referred to by the FtJ was that in relation to the availability
and prevalence of fraudulently obtained documents. Again, it was encumbent
on the FtJ to engage with the background evidence relied upon by the
appellant, at least to some extent, and even if briefly.

As to Ground 5, it is the case that specific submissions were made to the
FtJ in relation to the detail of the documents, for example that there were
original embossed stamps, original signatures and consistency in case
numbers in terms of the FIR. There is no indication from the FtJ's decision
as to what he made of those submissions. Again, it may be that reasons
could be given for finding that the argument for the appellant in that
regard carries little weight, but in my view there ought to have been at
least some engagement with that argument and an explanation by the FtJ,
even if briefly, as to why he rejected the argument.

It is plainly not necessary for a judge to refer to every document or every
argument. In addition, as I have indicated, there could be reasons as to
why the evidence and arguments in the specific respects to which I have
referred and as set out in the grounds could be rejected. Furthermore, the
FtJ did give reasons for doubting the appellant's account of how he
obtained the documents from Bangladesh in terms of inconsistencies in the
accounts of the appellant and his witness. There is also the obvious
potentially adverse credibility issue in terms of the lateness of the
appellant's claim for asylum.

However, I am satisfied that the FtJ erred in law in terms of a failure to
engage with the evidence and arguments to which I have referred above, such
that his adverse credibility assessment is vitiated by error of law. Given
that that error of law is fundamental to the assessment of the appellant's
claim, the decision of the FtJ must be set aside. It has not been necessary
for me to decide the merits of Ground 4.

In the circumstances, it is not appropriate for the decision to be re-made
in the Upper Tribunal. It is necessary for the appeal to be remitted to the
First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing before a judge other than First-
tier Tribunal Judge Bonavero, with no findings of fact preserved.  In
coming to that conclusion, I have had regard to the Senior President's
Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2 in the light of the extent of the fact-
finding exercise that needs to be undertaken in terms of the appellant's
credibility.

Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. Its decision is set aside and the appeal is remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo before a judge other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Bonavero, with no findings of fact
    preserved.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            Date: 26/3/2020




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email


