
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10883/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At: Manchester Piccadilly                     |Decision Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 8th February 2018                         |On: 20th April 2018          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     BHE
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr Wood, IAS Manchester
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant claims to be a national of  Eritrea,  born  in  1989.  He
    appeals with permission the 20th February 2017 decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Ransley to dismiss his protection appeal.










    Anonymity Order


 2. This appeal concerns a claim for international protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim for international protection is that
    he is a Pentecostal Christian who would face a real risk of persecution
    in his home country for reasons of his religious belief.  It is further
    asserted  that  he  would  face  persecution  for  reasons  of  imputed
    political opinion, because he has evaded the draft and does not wish to
    complete military service on behalf of the Eritrean government.


 4. He asserts that his personal history is as follows. He was born in  Ela
    Beried, in the region that was to become Eritrea, in 1989. In  1991  he
    and his family moved to Ethiopia where he attended school  and  learned
    Amharic. Nine years later they were deported back to Eritrea.  There he
    learned Tigrinya, finished school and worked on a farm. He received his
    military call-up papers but hid on the farm to avoid the army - he  had
    by then been baptised and did not want to fight. In  November  2011  he
    was  detained  following  a  raid  on  a  house  church  where  he  was
    worshipping. He was held  in  detention  for  approximately  one  month
    before being released upon payment of a  bribe.  He  fled  Eritrea  for
    Sudan. He married there in 2012. He subsequently moved  to  Libya  from
    where he attempted to reach Europe  by  sea.  He  was  rescued  from  a
    stricken vessel off the coast of Italy. From there he made his  way  to
    France, and then the UK where he claimed asylum.


 5. The Respondent refused protection on the  19th  September  2016.    She
    doubted whether the Appellant was in fact Eritrean, but even if he  was
    he had not demonstrated that he was  not  also  entitled  to  Ethiopian
    nationality. At the time of his birth his place of birth  was  part  of
    Ethiopia. His parents were both born in Ethiopia. Reliance  was  placed
    on the decision in ST (Ethnic Eritrea - nationality - return)  Ethiopia
    CG [2011] UKUT 52.   Since there was  no  evidence  to  show  that  the
    Appellant had done all he reasonably could to facilitate his return  to
    Ethiopia, he had not discharged the burden of proof upon him in respect
    of his claimed nationality.  As far as the  Respondent  was  concerned,
    the claim was defeated  on  this  ground  alone.  She  added  for  good
    measure, however, that she did not accept  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    Pentecostal Christian, since he had failed to correctly answer  various
    questions put to him in interview.


 6. When the matter came before First-tier Tribunal Ransley she heard  live
    evidence from the Appellant, and from a supporting witness, an Eritrean
    man named F who had been recognised as a refugee on the basis  that  he
    is a Pentecostal Christian.  She was further asked to take into account
    written evidence from a Pentecostal Christian priest,  Pastor  Getachew
    of the Jerusalem Church, Manchester.   Pastor Getachew had  written  to
    the Tribunal on the 26th January 2017 to state that it was  his  belief
    that the Appellant is of the Pentecostal faith, and that  he  regularly
    attends for worship at that church.


 7. In respect of the Appellant's claimed  faith  Judge  Ransley  made  the
    following findings:

           .  There  were  significant  discrepancies  in  the  Appellant's
             evidence. He had told his interviewing officer that  he  could
             not remember when the Pentecostal Church in Eritrea  had  been
             banned because he was not then in the country, but on this own
             chronology he was.  He then said he was a minor  at  the  time
             but he was 22. He gave the names of three Pentecostal  Pastors
             claiming that they had all been arrested in 2009 when in  fact
             none of them had. He was unable  to  give  the  names  of  any
             prominent leaders of the Pentecostal church


           . The chronology of claimed  events  in  Eritrea  is  internally
             inconsistent


           . The evidence of Pastor Getachew attracted little  weight.  His
             letter was unsatisfactory as he gave no information on how  he
             assessed the Appellant's faith, or  how  long  any  assessment
             took. It is also material that he "did not attend the  hearing
             to testify on behalf of the Appellant and no  explanation  has
             been given for his non-attendance as a Dorodian witness


           . The Appellant was asked a series of  legitimate  questions  at
             interview which he was not able to answer correctly


           . The evidence of F, that he met the Appellant in  the  'Jungle'
             and that he knows him to be a Pentecostal can be given  little
             weight for two reasons.  Firstly because his own evidence  was
             never tested before a Tribunal - he was given asylum  directly
             by the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department.  Secondly
             because he cannot speak to the core of  the  claim,  that  the
             Appellant was a practising Pentecostal in Eritrea

    At paragraph 38 Judge Ransley records that she has had  regard  to  the
    Appellant's 'rebuttal statement' ie the statement drafted  in  response
    to  the  refusal  letter,  but  that  nothing  therein   satisfactorily
    addresses the serious credibility issues  arising  from  the  remaining
    evidence.   She  rejects  the  contention  that  the  Appellant  is   a
    Pentecostal Christian.


 8. The determination then moves on to  address  the  remaining  matter  in
    issue, whether the Appellant is Eritrean, or rather whether he is  also
    entitled to Ethiopian nationality and so could therefore be expected to
    avail himself of the protection of that country.   Judge Ransley refers
    herself to the  decision  in  ST  and  its  conclusion  that  Ethiopian
    nationality law is complex; whether an ethnic  Eritrean  would  qualify
    depends on his personal history,  profile  and  circumstances.   Taking
    into  account  the  Appellant's  evidence  about  his,   the   Tribunal
    concludes:

           . That the Appellant has told so many untruths that his evidence
             that he has lost contact with his wife in Sudan (and so cannot
             obtain any of the  relevant  documents  from  her)  cannot  be
             accepted


           . It is accepted that the  Appellant  did  visit  the  Ethiopian
             embassy in London on the  23rd  January  2017  but  there  was
             nothing to show that a bona fide attempt had there  been  made
             to establish a right to return to Ethiopia

    The conclusion is reached that the Appellant  has  not  discharged  the
    burden of proof to show that he cannot get an Ethiopian passport.


 9. The Tribunal having found against the Appellant on both central matters
    in issue in his case, the appeal was dismissed.


10. The Appellant now appeals the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    the following grounds:


          i) In reaching its credibility findings the  First-tier  Tribunal
             has failed to have any regard to the explanatory  evidence  of
             the Appellant. It has simply  adopted  the  reasoning  in  the
             refusal letter without  considering  the  Appellant's  witness
             statement  or  live  evidence.  A  failure  to  take  material
             evidence into account is an error  of  law  that  renders  the
             decision unfair and unsafe.


         ii) The Tribunal erred in its approach to the 'Dorodian' evidence.
             It again failed to take material evidence  into  account,  viz
             the fact that a letter from Pastor Getachew had been  accepted
             as reliable evidence by the Home Office in the case of  F.  It
             is further submitted that the Tribunal erred as  a  matter  of
             fact when it said that no explanation had been given  for  the
             Pastor's non-attendance at court. Explanation was given on the
             face of the letter.   As for F it was improper and unlawful to
             reject his evidence because he had not initially been  refused
             asylum. He had attended court and had submitted  his  evidence
             to be tested; the Tribunal further failed to  have  regard  to
             the fact that the HOPO did not challenge F's evidence.  F gave
             evidence that he attends the  same  church  as  the  Appellant
             today and that he genuinely believes him to be  a  Pentecostal
             Christian. If that evidence was to be rejected some reason had
             to be given.


        iii) In respect of Ethiopian nationality it is submitted  that  the
             Tribunal failed to give reasons for rejecting the  Appellant's
             evidence about what happened  in  the  Ethiopian  embassy.  In
             stating that there was no  meaningful  basis  upon  which  she
             could reach a conclusion in his favour Judge Ransley failed to
             have regard to the guidance in ST.


11. For the Respondent Mr Diwnycz conceded that there  may  be  a  question
    mark over the Tribunal's approach to ST.  The  Appellant  had  asserted
    that he was born in Ela  Beried  and  that  he  and  his  parents  were
    deported from Ethiopia in 2000. The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department accepts  that  the  determination  does  not  contain  clear
    findings on whether those matters can be accepted, or whether, applying
    the guidance in ST, it could be said that it was at all likely that the
    Appellant would be able to assert a right to Ethiopian nationality.  In
    respect of grounds (i) and (ii) Mr Diwncyz submitted that the  findings
    were open  to  Judge  Ransley  and  that  the  Respondent  adopted  her
    reasoning.


    Discussion and Findings


12. The parties agreed that my findings on ground (i) could  be  positively
    determinative of this appeal, that is to say if  it  is  made  out  the
    decision would need to be set aside in its entirety. I therefore  begin
    with this. The complaint, in essence, is that the Appellant's  evidence
    was not factored into the balance when the First-tier Tribunal made its
    assessment of credibility.


13. Following the Appellant's asylum interview the Respondent had  squarely
    placed his credibility in issue, with the refusal  letter  setting  out
    several  matters  said  to  be  vague,  internally  consistent   and/or
    contradictory to the country background material. Many, of not all,  of
    these points are accepted by Judge Ransley. I  am  not  persuaded  that
    this in itself was an error. A judge is plainly entitled to accept  the
    analysis of the Respondent if she agrees with it. Whilst  word-for-word
    adoption of the refusal letter might give an unfortunate impression, it
    cannot be said to be an error of law. Nor can there be any  concern  in
    this case that the rebuttal statement and live evidence  were  entirely
    overlooked: the determination expressly  refers  to  this  material  at
    paragraphs 12 and 38. Mr Wood nevertheless submits that nowhere in  the
    determination is it apparent that  the  Tribunal  has  weighed  in  the
    balance the explanations given by the Appellant. Is this true,  and  if
    so is it material?


14. The grounds identify the relevant parts of  the  witness  statement  as
    being  paragraphs  78-82,   wherein   the   Appellant   addresses   the
    Respondent's concerns about his  apparent  lack  of  knowledge  of  the
    church hierarchy. In short the Appellant's response to  refusal  letter
    is to say that he is not much concerned with  the  names  of  prominent
    Pentecostals or who the leadership of his church are, since  these  are
    matters irrelevant to his faith and his relationship with God.  He  did
    not know any of these people personally, so although  he  could  recall
    praying for the safety of individuals detained, he did not consider  it
    important to memorise their names or the dates of their  arrests.   The
    Respondent  says  that  the  Appellant  was  unable  to   explain   why
    Pentecostalists face problems in  Eritrea  but  the  Appellant  rejects
    this: he had explained that they come  into  conflict  with  the  state
    because of their objection to  military  service.  The  Respondent  had
    criticised the Appellant for not being able to identify when the church
    was banned in Eritrea. The Appellant had said that he was unable to say
    because he was a child at the relevant time. The  reasons  for  refusal
    letter had rejected this on the grounds that the Appellant was 22 years
    old.  In his rebuttal statement the Appellant  protests  that  this  is
    completely wrong - he was a minor at the time (he was 13 in 2002).  The
    Appellant further queries why the letter from the Jerusalem Church  was
    rejected by the Respondent when she had accepted letters from the  same
    Pastor, and the same  church,  in  the  same  terms,  written  for  the
    Appellant's friends.   In other cases the letter was taken as  evidence
    of faith and refugee status had been granted.


15. As Mr Woods submits,  it  is  correct  to  say  that  the  entirety  of
    paragraphs  29-37  of  the  determination  -  the  reasoning   on   the
    Appellant's claimed practice of Pentecostalism in  Eritrea  -  reflects
    the Respondent's position. I have been unable to identify  anywhere  in
    those passages where the Appellant's evidence is considered.   Mr  Wood
    is therefore at least half way home in  respect  of  ground  (i).    Mr
    Diwnycz urged me to find any omission immaterial, given  the  terms  in
    which  the  Tribunal  expresses  itself  at   paragraph   38   of   the
    determination, in stating that it has taken the rebuttal statement into
    account: "I find that the Appellant has failed to give satisfactory  or
    credible evidence to resolve the many serious credibility issues raised
    in the refusal letter".   I have borne that in  mind,  and  I  have  no
    doubt that the Tribunal did read all of the  evidence  before  it.  The
    difficulty  remains  that  the  Appellant  does  not   know   why   his
    explanations have been found wanting, since no reasons  are  given  for
    why they are neither satisfactory nor credible.    In  the  absence  of
    reasons I must find, with some reluctance, ground (i) to be made out.


16. It follows that I need not deal with grounds (ii) and  (iii)  since  Mr
    Diwnycz accepted that  the  adverse  credibility  findings  reached  in
    respect of the 'historical' claim were  in  the  end  determinative  of
    whether the Appellant is in fact a  Pentecostal  Christian  today,  and
    whether he has made a  bona  fide  attempt  to  avail  himself  of  the
    protection of the Ethiopian authorities, and this means that the entire
    decision must be set aside.


17. I would just add this. That in respect of the witness F two reasons are
    given for declining to place weight on his evidence. The first is  that
    he had only met the Appellant in Calais. That is true and the  Tribunal
    was quite right to conclude that he could  contribute  nothing  to  the
    debate about whether the Appellant had been  a  practising  Pentecostal
    Christian whilst living in Eritrea.   F had however given evidence that
    he regularly worships alongside the Appellant in this country, and that
    he believes him to be a genuine Christian. Since the  Appellant's  case
    did not depend entirely on making out his  historical  claim  that  was
    important evidence that merited some evaluation.


18. The second reason given for rejecting F's evidence is that he had  been
    given asylum by the Home Office without ever having appeared before the
    Tribunal. Mr Woods protests that being believed by the Home  Office  is
    hardly grounds to diminish the weight to be attached to  F's  evidence.
    He rightly points out that F had submitted himself to cross-examination
    before this Tribunal and so there  was  the  opportunity  to  test  his
    evidence, an opportunity that the HOPO declined to take.    Having  had
    regard to the evidence I am satisfied that this  ground  is  made  out.
    The First-tier Tribunal no doubt  had  in  mind  the  decisions  in  AB
    (Witness corroboration in asylum appeals) Somalia  [2004]  UKIAT  00125
    and AC (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2005]
    UKAIT 124 in which  the  Upper  Tribunal  deprecated  the  practice  of
    producing a refugee witness and expecting all his assertions about  why
    he was granted to be accepted at face value. In AB  the  Tribunal  said
    this:

         "We would add a comment  on  the  growing  practice  of  appellants
          and/or their representatives  adducing  letters  granting  refugee
          status to someone who  is  (or  is  said  to  be)  a  relative  or
          colleague. All too often it  is  assumed  such  letters  magically
          prove that the person concerned was granted refugee status on  the
          basis he says he was. All too rarely are such letters  accompanied
          by  documents  confirming  on  what  basis  the  person  concerned
          actually claimed asylum or, if an appeal  was  involved,  on  what
          basis the Adjudicator allowed that  person's  appeal.  Since  such
          additional documentation should often be still  available  to  the
          person concerned or  to  that  person's  solicitors,  Adjudicators
          should consider what weight  they  can  attach  to  refugee  grant
          letters when they are not accompanied by confirmatory documents of
          this kind".


19. In this instance, F had produced all of the confirmatory documentation,
    including his screening and substantive asylum interview records.  This
    was not a case where this Tribunal had reason to doubt his evidence (as
    in AB and AC): to the contrary his statement went unchallenged. As such
    the fact that he had been recognised as a  refugee  was  not  a  proper
    basis to diminish the weight to be attached to his testimony.




    Decisions


20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error of law.


21. The decision is to be remade de novo before a  differently  constituted
    First-tier Tribunal.


22. There is an order for anonymity.




[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
19th April 2018










