
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10479/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On December 6, 2017                |On December 8, 2017                     |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               MR TONI MASOUD
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, Counsel, instructed by Broudie Jackson &
Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant is an Iranian national.  The appellant entered the United
    Kingdom on March 29,  2016  and  following  his  arrest  for  illegally
    entering the United Kingdom he claimed asylum.

 3. The respondent refused his protection claim on September 16, 2016 under
    paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal  on  September  28,  2016  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Devlin (hereinafter
    called "the Judge") on May 10, 2017 and in a  decision  promulgated  on
    June 14, 2017 the Judge refused his appeal on all grounds.

 5. The appellant appealed the decision on June  19,  2017.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Boyes  on
    September 19, 2017 who found the grounds arguable primarily because the
    sheer length of  the  judgement  made  it  almost  impossible  for  the
    appellant to understand how he lost. The respondent lodged  a  Rule  24
    response dated September 28, 2017 in which  she  argues  there  was  no
    error in law.

 6. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Schwenk adopted the grounds of appeal and argued there was an  error
    in law. He referred me to a  number  of  typographical  errors  in  the
    decision which suggested that the decision had  not  been  proof  read.
    Whilst nothing specifically turned on these errors they  added  to  the
    problems facing the appellant because  he  would  have  had  difficulty
    understanding what was being written. The decision itself was 45  pages
    in length and contained 299 numbered paragraphs. The Judge was required
    to spell out why a party had "lost" and  in  delivering  such  a  long-
    winded decision, when the issue was relatively simple,  the  Judge  had
    fallen foul of the advice in  MK  (duty  to  give  reasons)  (Pakistan)
    [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC). The Judge had also criticised aspects  of  the
    Dorodian witness evidence but had not actually put these issues to  the
    witness. With regard to the appellant's sur place activities the  Judge
    wrongly applied AB and others  (internet  activity-state  of  evidence)
    Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC) in that he distinguished between  religious
    activities as against political activities. The same risks  would  face
    an appellant whether he was publicising religious or  political  issues
    that the government frowned on.

 8. Mr Harrison adopted the Rule 24 letter and submitted the length of  the
    decision demonstrated the Judge had given careful consideration to each
    and every aspect of the case. Rather than making it  difficult  for  an
    appellant the decision actually spelt out why he had lost and whilst it
    could have been shorter it was not a material error simply because  the
    decision was longer than Mr Schwenk thought it  should  be.  The  Judge
    made clear findings at [265] about the appellant's case  including  why
    he rejected all his claims. He invited me to dismiss the appeal.

 9. Having heard submissions I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS ON THE ERROR IN LAW

10. Permission to appeal had been granted although  the  permission  itself
    did not discuss why there maybe an error save that the decision was too
    long and the appellant would have been unable to follow it.

11. In his opening submissions Mr Schwenk drew my attention to a number  of
    errors in the decision. These errors appeared to have  been  caused  in
    part through the use of an audio dictation system. Having dictated  his
    decision it is arguable the Judge  did  not  proof  read  the  decision
    because if he had done so then he would have noticed that a  number  of
    the sentences did not make sense. I indicated at the hearing that these
    errors, whilst avoidable, did not amount to what I considered to be  an
    error in law because they were  not  material.  Ironically,  given  the
    length of the decision the errors faded into the background.

12. The three main grounds advanced were (a) the length  of  the  decision;
    (b) the treatment  of  the  Dorodian  witnesses  and  (c)  the  Judge's
    approach to the appellant's sur place activities.

13. I was referred to the decision of MK which emphasised that an appellant
    needs to know on what grounds their cases  are  decided  and  why  they
    lost. MK is not an authority over how a decision should be written  and
    nowhere in MK does it suggest that decisions must be  short.  I  accept
    this decision is unusually lengthy but in assessing whether  there  has
    been an error in law I find nothing  that  suggests  the  length  of  a
    decision created an error in law. If there is an error in law  then  it
    will be because the content of the decision did not address the  issues
    or because conclusions were perverse.

14. The Court of Appeal in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982  provided  guidance
    on what could amount to an error in law. These included:

      a) Making  perverse  or  irrational  findings  on  matters  that  were
         material to the outcome.

      b) Failing to give reasons or any adequate  reasons  for  findings  on
         material matters.

      c) Failing to take into account and/or resolve conflicts  of  fact  or
         opinion on material matters.

      d) Giving weight to immaterial matters.

      e) Making a material misdirection of law on any material matter.

      f) Committing or  permitting  a  procedural  irregularity  capable  of
         making a material difference to the  outcome  or  fairness  of  the
         proceedings.

      g) Making a mistake as to a material fact.

15. There is nothing to support Mr Schwenk's argument  that  the  fact  the
    decision was lengthy that in itself should amount to an error in law.

16. The decision contained emboldened titles of  areas  considered  by  the
    Judge and the Judge's findings contained a number of sub-headings which
    set out  which  parts  of  the  evidence  the  Judge  was  considering.
    Contained within each section were findings. Whilst  the  decision  was
    lengthy it would be wrong to say that in itself was an error in law.

17. The two main grounds of appeal in my view were the submissions that the
    Judge erred by not putting concerns to the Dorodian witnesses or making
    findings about the witnesses which were inappropriate and  the  way  he
    dealt with the sur place activities.

18. Mr Schwenk addressed me on the approach taken to Reverend  Livingstone.
    He argued that the Judge  should  have  put  concerns  he  had  to  the
    witness. A Judge finds himself in a difficult situation because  he  is
    often criticised for intervening during the hearing and  "entering  the
    arena" but when he does not and simply assesses the evidence he is then
    criticised for not asking enough questions. The Judge is  not  required
    to put every concern he may have to a witness. The witnesses give their
    answers and it is open to the representatives to pursue  those  answers
    if they believe there is merit to do so. The Judge fully explained  his
    reasons for questioning the evidence given and  he  did  this  in  some
    detail. I conclude that the grounds of appeal amount  to  disagreements
    with what the Judge stated. That is not an error in law.

19. The final area raised was the Judge's approach to the  appellant's  sur
    place activities. The Judge had made  findings  about  the  appellant's
    claimed activities at [265] when he wholly rejected his claim  to  have
    converted  in  Iran  to  Christianity  and  he  concluded  the  Iranian
    authorities had no  interest  in  him.  The  Judge  did  not  stop  his
    assessment there because he then considered what he had been  doing  in
    the  United  Kingdom  with  particular  reference  to  the  appellant's
    Facebook posts.

20. The Judge was aware of the decision of AB  but  because  the  case  was
    about political blogging he stated at [277] that he did not assume  the
    findings of that Tribunal applied to religious activities. At [279] the
    Judge considered the evidence in the round and concluded his activities
    would not bring him to the attention of the authorities.  This  finding
    was made in the knowledge of what  the  Tribunal's  concerns  were.  At
    [274] and [275] the Judge set out important extracts from the  decision
    and reminded the parties that AB was not an authority  which  said  all
    posts on Facebook meant an appellant would be a risk of persecution.

21. The Judge assessed in some detail the evidence and he concluded, as was
    open to him, that this appellant would not be at risk. Such  a  finding
    was open to the Judge.

22. Accordingly, I find there was no error in law in this decision.

    DECISION

23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  I uphold the decision.

Signed                              Date     06.11.2017


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the appeal was dismissed.


Signed                              Date     06.11.2017


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





