
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10572/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 11 May 2017                      |On 18 May 2017                          |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                       mr Mohamed Nazrin Shahul Hameed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka and was born on  29  September
    1982.  He appeals against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge K Swinnerton promulgated on 29 November 2016 following a  hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 1 November 2016.  In the course of the determination
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected his appeal against the  decision
    of the Secretary of State made on 15 September 2016 to refuse to  grant
    him asylum or any other form of relief.

 2. The immigration history of the appellant is as follows.  He stated that
    he left Sri Lanka on  10  January  2010  using  his  own  passport  and
    supported by a student visa he arrived in the United Kingdom later that
    day and his student visa remained valid until  17  May  2012.   He  was
    served with the papers indicating that he had no legal basis to  remain
    after his visa had expired.  The form IS151A was served on  him  on  30
    July 2013.  He was asked to  report  and  failed  to  comply  with  the
    reporting conditions and was thereafter recorded as being an absconder.
     He went to ground and it was not  until  25  June  2015  when  he  was
    stopped by a police officer and arrested that further steps were  taken
    to remove him.  He was served with the form known as an IS96 once again
    informing him of his rights and of the respondent's ability  to  detain
    him but it was not until some nine months later on 22 March  2016  that
    he claimed asylum at Croydon.

 3. On any view this was an appalling immigration history and one where  it
    was clear that the claim for asylum could well be classified as a last-
    ditch attempt to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  after  the  appellant
    himself had spent many years avoiding detection.

 4. The nature of the claim  itself  was  based  upon  the  fact  that  the
    appellant worked in his father's jewellery  wholesale  business.   This
    was not a small-scale organisation,  it  was  a  substantial  one,  and
    indeed in the course of the evidence that  he  provided  he  said  that
    there were assets in the shop of some 2 million Sri Lankan rupees.   He
    claimed that the shop was robbed on 3 August 2009, that  is  of  course
    nearly some seven years before he claimed asylum and all the  jewellery
    and everything in the safe had been taken by the thieves and the  theft
    had been conducted by persons  coming  into  a  ventilation  shaft  and
    clearing the place.  This was a claim of a somewhat speculator raid  on
    his father's business premises.  Notwithstanding the fact that this was
    a substantial business, wholesale  jewellery,  the  appellant's  father
    carried no insurance and his father's two business partners who had not
    taken any active role, but  had  provided  an  investment,  blamed  his
    father for the fact that the place had  been  burgled,  notwithstanding
    the fact that they themselves may have overlooked to have  insured  the
    premises against theft.  As a result it  is  said  they  were  able  to
    elicit the help of five CID officers who came to the house and abducted
    the appellant.  The two business partners had apparently been  able  to
    suborn the CID officers using their influence  and  the  appellant  was
    detained by these CID officers and during the course of his  three  day
    detention was beaten and tortured.  Notwithstanding this,  after  three
    days the appellant was permitted to leave the building and  managed  to
    obtain a mobile telephone from someone passing in the street  and  from
    that his father managed to remove him  at  which  point  he  went  into
    hiding.

 5. This was a colourful account provided by the appellant and it  was  one
    which ultimately the judge did  not  accept.   The  judge  recorded  in
    paragraph 7 of the determination  the  claim  that  the  appellant  had
    helped run the father's business, that  it  had  been  robbed,  that  2
    million Sri Lankan rupees had been removed  from  it,  and  that  as  a
    result of this he was kidnapped and that  it  was  said  that  the  CID
    officers would have been prepared to put forward a claim, (which was of
    course completely false and not supported by any  evidence),  that  the
    appellant and his father had been supporting the LTTE.   It  was  as  a
    result of this he claimed that he was forced to travel  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

 6. The grounds of appeal relate solely to the issue of whether  the  judge
    improperly imposed a requirement  for  there  to  be  corroboration  in
    relation to key elements of the claim.  The  grounds  of  appeal  which
    were drafted by JK Solicitors on 12 December 2016 point  out  paragraph
    21 of the determination where the judge says:

         "Regardless of the involvement of the  police  in  any  attempt  to
         extort money from the  Appellant  and  his  father,  no  reasonable
         explanation has been provided as to why no documentation at all has
         been provided to confirm the theft.  I find it implausible that the
         break-in would have occurred as claimed and yet there would  be  no
         record at all of such a break-in."

    Secondly paragraph 22 and its contents are relied  upon  in  which  the
    judge said:

         "The Appellant has not provided any documentary evidence in support
         of his claimed physical injuries whilst in  detention.   I  do  not
         find it credible that the Appellant would  have  been  detained  as
         claimed and then simply allowed to walk away."

    On the basis of those two passages it was submitted in the grounds that
    the  judge  was  requiring  the  appellant  to  provide   corroborative
    documentary evidence and as a result of that was imposing  an  unlawful
    condition rendering the judge's assessment of  credibility  unfair  and
    disproportionate.

 7. First of all there is no requirement imposed by the judge in either  of
    those two passages.  What is said in paragraph 21 is that no reasonable
    explanation had been provided as to why no  documentation  at  all  had
    been provided to confirm the theft and secondly  in  paragraph  22  the
    judge was merely noting as a fact that the appellant had  not  provided
    any documentary evidence in support of his  claimed  physical  injuries
    whilst in detention.  So the basis upon which the appeal is advanced is
    factually inaccurate.  There is no requirement.  The judge  imposed  no
    requirement,  but  was  entitled  to  comment  upon  the   absence   of
    documentary evidence.  When it came to the granting  of  permission  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer the requirement to  provide  corroborative
    material is featured in her grant of permission in which she says it is
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had required the  appellant
    to corroborate his claim and failed to direct himself to  the  possible
    difficulties faced by asylum seekers generally and this  asylum  seeker
    in particular in providing corroborative evidence.  For reasons I  have
    already given  I  do  not  think  the  determination  can  properly  be
    construed as a requirement  to  provide  corroboration  rather  than  a
    legitimate point made that no documentary evidence had been provided in
    circumstances where  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  such  documentary
    evidence to be in existence.

 8. Ms Reid on behalf  of  the  appellant  relies  quite  properly  in  her
    skeleton argument on two central pieces of material.  The first is  the
    sensible and well-established guidelines  of  the  UNHCR  Handbook  and
    Guidelines on Procedures and Criteria for  Determining  Refugee  Status
    under the 1951 Convention in  which  in  paragraph  196  it  makes  the
    perfectly good the point  that  an  applicant  cannot  be  expected  to
    provide  documentary  evidence  where  that  person  is  fleeing   from
    persecution and will have arrived with the barest necessities and  very
    frequently even without personal documents.  Consequently care must  be
    taken that an impossible burden is not  placed  upon  an  applicant  to
    produce documentation when it is not reasonable for that person  to  do
    so.  Further, the Court of Appeal in HK (Sierra Leone) [2006] EWCA  Civ
    1037 speaks in paragraphs 28 and  29  of  the  difficulties  in  making
    assessments of claims  of  this  type  and  that  because  a  claim  is
    inherently unlikely that does not mean that it  is  not  true  and  one
    should therefore exercise care in dealing with such  cases  to  suspend
    disbelief in a way that is entirely appropriate in the  context  of  an
    asylum claim.  I bear in mind all of  those  factors  when  considering
    this appeal.

 9. The relevant passages of the determination which  are  the  subject  of
    challenge are found in  paragraphs  21  and  22.   The  judge  said  in
    relation to this account that:

         "The Appellant confirmed that the theft was reported to the  police
         yet no police report has been provided and neither has  any  report
         of the incident in any local newspaper been  provided.   Regardless
         of the involvement of the police in any  attempt  to  extort  money
         from the Appellant and his father, no  reasonable  explanation  has
         been provided as to why no documentation at all has  been  provided
         to confirm the theft."

    This, as I  have  said,  was  a  claim  that  there  was  a  relatively
    spectacular heist on a jewellery shop which carried  a  great  deal  of
    gold and precious metals which resulted in the daring  entry  into  the
    premises by thieves and the removal of the contents.  In my judgment it
    was entirely open to the judge to say that such an event was likely  to
    be recorded by a newspaper.  There is no suggestion  that  it  was  not
    placed in the public domain.  There is no reason why the police  should
    have kept it secret and accordingly this theft of a substantial  amount
    of property, in the way that it is said to have been  conducted,  might
    reasonably have resulted in a newspaper report.  It  may  be  that  the
    newspaper report could not  now  by  obtained.   It  may  be  that  the
    newspapers involved have gone out of business.  It may be that they did
    not keep a library of such  things.   Had  any  such  explanation  been
    provided  by  the  appellant,  he  might  have  offered  a   reasonable
    explanation as to why documentation of this type had not been provided.
     But the simple fact  was  that  no  reasonable  explanation  has  been
    provided.  That was a simple matter of fact and the judge was  entirely
    entitled to say that in paragraph 21 of his determination.  He  is  not
    required to hold back in telling the truth.

10. Consequently as far as the absence of any report is concerned, then  it
    was open to the appellant in the many years that he  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom, to make some enquiries as to the local newspapers as to
    what had occurred on a date which  he  was  able  to  identify  and  in
    relation to an event which specifically related to premises  which  the
    appellant himself was able to identify.  There is nothing therefore  in
    the guidance provided by UNHCR to suggest that  an  individual  is  not
    required to make reasonable enquiries to provide  documentary  material
    to support his claim.  I am  sure  had  this  matter  occurred  as  the
    appellant claimed, it would  have  been  the  subject  of  at  least  a
    newspaper report.  It is also surprising that, since 29 November  2016,
    when the appellant himself has had sight  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination, that he himself did not consider that it might have been
    useful for him to have written to the local press and obtained the very
    information which he had omitted to provide in the earlier appeal.   It
    might at least have prompted him,  one  would  have  thought,  to  take
    further action, having been so criticised by the judge.

11. That therefore deals with the absence of any press  report.   Similarly
    regardless as the  judge  said  about  whether  there  were  rogue  CID
    officers, the fact is that this was an incident which was  reported  to
    the police.  We know that the police  in  Sri  Lanka  keep  records  of
    crimes which are  committed  and  it  would  not  therefore  have  been
    impossible at all for the appellant to have written to the local police
    force to ask them if they were able to provide a record  of  the  crime
    having been reported to them.  It needed to  have  been  no  more  than
    that, and there may or may not have been further documents.  It  is  of
    course entirely irrelevant that the culprits were not  found,  that  is
    not what the judge was looking for.  What the judge was looking for was
    some material that a report had been provided to the  police  and  that
    they had taken action.  It may be  that  they  may  have  responded  by
    saying, "Well it was all so long ago.  We do not  have  any  record  of
    this incident.  The records have been destroyed."  I am agnostic as  to
    whether the police would in fact have destroyed such reports after such
    a period.  It is unimportant whether  they  would  or  would  not  have
    destroyed such reports but the fact is that the appellant has  made  no
    attempts at all to obtain the police report notwithstanding  the  claim
    that he made in early 2016.  He had ample  opportunity  until  November
    2016 to write to the police even if their response had simply been, "We
    are unable to locate any records."  I am therefore fully satisfied that
    the judge was making no requirement for there to be  corroboration  and
    was simply pointing out the inevitable and  entirely  reasonable  point
    that incidents of this do not exist in a documentary desert.

12. Similar considerations apply in relation to  the  judge's  handling  of
    paragraph 22.  The appellant had claimed  that  he  had  been  terribly
    beaten and injured by his treatment by the rogue CID  officers  and  he
    had been subjected to being punched and kicked, his left arm and  right
    leg were cut with a blade, heated metals were put on him  to  make  him
    scream.  In this lurid account of his events it  cannot  be  said  that
    there were no physical injuries.  Those physical injuries  however  may
    have, probably would have, produced very little to see when he made his
    asylum claim in 2016.  We know not because we still have not  got  that
    material.  However it was not simply that he suffered a  past  incident
    in  which  he  was  subjected  to  harm.   He  said  that  there   were
    consequences of this.  There was his related depression.  He was  still
    subject to stress.  The consequential psychological problems due to his
    ill-treatment were still something  about  which  he  complained.   Yet
    there was no medical evidence that there was  any  such  effects.   The
    appellant himself says "Well I wasn't taking any medication.  I  wasn't
    treating myself for these injuries".  Nevertheless if the appellant  is
    to state that he is suffering psychological injuries as a result of his
    past treatment, or indeed if he is to establish that there is  physical
    scarring, then it is not at all unreasonable for him to produce medical
    evidence or for the judge to comment on its absence.

13. Accordingly I find that there is no valid criticism of  the  judge,  no
    requirement was made by him that there should  be  corroboration.   The
    judge pointed out, as many other judges have done, that  there  was  no
    material that supported this claim.

14. There is a further two difficulties in the way of the appellant.   Both
    of them are substantial.  The fact is that he made no claim for  asylum
    until 2016 at which point as I have already indicated this was a  last-
    ditch attempt to avoid removal.  Before that there had been a number of
    opportunities whereby he could have made a claim.  He had  been  served
    as an overstayer with the IS151A as long ago as 30 July 2013  at  which
    point it would have been clearly open to him to have made his claim for
    asylum.  Instead he acted in a way which was quite contrary to being  a
    genuine asylum seeker by failing to report and absconding.

15. There was a second opportunity for him to have made out this claim.  He
    was arrested on 25 June 2015 when he was stopped by police.  Once again
    that was an obvious opportunity for him to have made out his claim  for
    asylum.  He was served with a formal notice that things were to  happen
    in his case when he was served with an IS96.  Notwithstanding  this  he
    did not claim asylum until nine months later and  there  is  simply  no
    credible  explanation  why  he  should  have  waited  so   long.    His
    explanation that he did not know anything about the  asylum  system  is
    given the lie by the fact that  his  sister  had  successfully  claimed
    asylum as a result of the status of her husband and they  were  plainly
    people with whom he was in contact in the United Kingdom who would have
    offered him advice had he suffered the horrendous  experience  that  he
    later claimed to have suffered.  The  judge  properly  found  that  was
    damaging to his claim.  I entirely agree with that and indeed would  be
    minded to find that that alone was sufficient to discredit his claim.

16. Furthermore there is an unchallenged finding in  paragraph  25  of  the
    determination that his mother and younger  brother  are  still  in  Sri
    Lanka.  This of course is now many years after the alleged robbery that
    took place in August 2009.  They are living  in  Bandarawala  and  they
    have experienced no difficulties over the past  seven  years.   It  was
    therefore entirely open to the judge to  conclude  that  there  was  an
    internal relocation option available.  There was no viable  claim  that
    these five CID rogue officers had been able to engage  the  support  of
    the entire police force or indeed the entire judiciary  or  the  entire
    prosecution service in Sri Lanka in order to put him at risk were he to
    return.  Accordingly the fact that there is a place in which  he  could
    settle without the interference of non-state actors was a matter  which
    the judge was properly required to take into account and did so.  As  I
    have said there is no challenge to that conclusion.

17. For these reasons I am entirely satisfied  that  the  judge  reached  a
    sustainable conclusion and accordingly I dismiss the appellant's appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  I find that there is no material error  of  law
    and permit the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to stand.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no material error on a point  of  law  in
his decision and his determination of the appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.






                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                 11 May 2017


