
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10035/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC via Skype    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2020                    |On 14 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     MA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Wood, Immigration Advice Service
For the respondent:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.



Introduction

      1. The appellant has appealed against a decision  made  by  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Stedman, sent on 11 February 2020  in  which
         his appeal was dismissed on protection and human rights grounds.

      2. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers
         to his claim for international  protection.   The  appellant  is  a
         citizen of Nigeria and claims that he is  at  risk  of  persecution
         because he is a bisexual man.

Background

      3. The SSHD did not  accept  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  sexually
         attracted to men and to have been involved in sexual  relationships
         with men in Nigeria and the UK.  The FTT was therefore  obliged  to
         resolve this  dispute.   The  appellant  did  not  have  any  legal
         representation before the FTT.  The SSHD  was  also  unrepresented.
         The FTT set out 'preliminary matters' at [4]-[6] of  the  decision:
         the  SSHD's  detailed  refusal  letter  dated  30  September   2019
         comprised the SSHD's case; the FTT's primary concern was to  ensure
         the appellant had a fair hearing and was  enabled  to  present  his
         case as  fully  as  possible.   The  FTT  also  recorded  that  the
         appellant  described  feeling  uncomfortable  because  two  persons
         sitting at the back of the court room were his ex-partner's parents
         (and his child's grandparents).  I  have  checked  Judge  Stedman's
         record of proceedings which contains the  following  (that  I  have
         attributed to the appellant and the judge respectively):

             A:  "There  are  parties  in  this  court  and  I  am  feeling
             uncomfortable and I feel that I would  uncomfortable  to  give
             evidence in their presence.  I made a Court Order re a British
             child on 29.12.20  and  these  are  the  grandparents  sitting
             behind me."

             J: "Inform appellant that is. Public hearing and have not been
             given a reason or sufficiently strong reason to  exclude  them
             from court."

      4. On behalf of the appellant Mr  Wood  relied  upon  two  grounds  of
         appeal against the FTT decision:

          1) The FTT acted unfairly in failing to  consider  or  apply  the
             Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 ('the Guidance')
             when dealing with the appellant's claim to feel  uncomfortable
             as a result of the grandparents' presence in the hearing room.

          2) The FTT acted  unfairly  in  not  granting  the  appellant  an
             adjournment in  order  to  obtain  material  in  family  court
             proceedings relevant to his child.

      5. In a decision dated 27 August 2020, FTT Judge granted permission to
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT') on both grounds.

UT hearing

      6. At the hearing, Mr Bates  accepted  that  ground  1  was  made  out
         because the judge unfairly failed to address and  seek  to  resolve
         the appellant's articulated discomfort and this unfairness vitiated
         the factual findings, such that the decision of the FTT must be set
         aside.  For the reasons I set out below Mr  Bates  was  correct  to
         make this concession.  Both representatives accepted that there was
         no need to address ground 2 and in these circumstances and I say no
         more about it.

Error of law

      7. In the particular circumstances of this case fairness demanded  the
         judge to make further enquiries regarding the appellant's claim  to
         feel uncomfortable with a view to taking measures to ensure that he
         felt sufficiently comfortable to give the best  evidence  possible.
         The judge's record of proceedings and the decision  itself  do  not
         set out what steps were taken in this respect.  This is a  case  in
         which  the  appellant  clearly  felt  very  uncomfortable  to  give
         evidence in the presence of the grandparents.   Not  only  did  the
         appellant raise this before the judge but it appears that prior  to
         the hearing he wrote a note to be passed to the judge.  A  copy  of
         that handwritten note appears on the file and says  this:  "I  want
         the court clerk to kindly inform the judge urgently before my  case
         proceeds.  I took the mother of child to court in regards my  child
         and  the  judge  asked  me  some  questions  in  the  family  court
         proceedings.  I am feeling very uncomfortable seeing  the  presence
         of my child mum parents in the court.  I don't understand  what  is
         really going on."

      8. The appellant's articulated discomfort must  be  seen  in  context.
         Both he and the SSHD  were  unrepresented.   He  therefore  had  no
         representative to explain the relevant procedures to him before the
         hearing began.  The disputed issue before the FTT was an  intensely
         personal one - the appellant's sexual  orientation.   Although  the
         appellant gave detailed answers to questions during the  course  of
         two  lengthy  interviews  with  the  SSHD,  there  was  no  witness
         statement to rebut  the  detailed  reasons  provided  by  the  SSHD
         rejecting the appellant's claim to be bisexual.  It may be that the
         appellant  perceived  that  the  grandparents  might  use  evidence
         relating to his  sexual  orientation  against  him  in  the  family
         proceedings, given the state-sanctioned  hostile  attitudes  toward
         homosexuals  he  was  accustomed  to  in  Nigeria.   Although,  the
         appellant had already been open about his claimed sexuality to many
         including some members of his family, he claimed that they rejected
         him as a result.  It is unclear whether  the  grandparents  of  the
         appellant's child knew about his sexuality.

      9. In these circumstances the FTT was required to consider what  steps
         could be taken to alleviate the appellant's discomfort.  The  Equal
         Treatment Bench Book ('ETBB') includes a section in Chapter  10  on
         sexual orientation called "Being 'outed' in court".    This  states
         that:

              "Many lesbian, gay and bisexual people are deeply fearful  of
             the consequences of 'coming out'.  For many, the  fear  is  of
             potential personal  rejection  by  family,  friends  and  work
             colleagues.  Employment can be lost, families  devastated  and
             relationships  damaged  by  unnecessary  and  prurient   court
             reporting.  Courts and tribunals should be  aware  that  these
             factors may place additional burdens on LGB parties, witnesses
             and victims of crime, and should consider what measures  might
             be available to counteract them."

     10. Although the appellant had already 'come out' as bisexual  to  some
         it is unclear whether this information was before the family  court
         and the extent to which the appellant believed that  what  he  said
         before the FTT might adversely impact his prospects in  the  family
         proceedings.

     11. The FTT decision and the record of proceedings both make  it  clear
         that the judge did not consider that she was provided  or  given  a
         sufficient reason to  exclude  the  grandparents.   The  judge  had
         earlier emphasised that her primary concern was to  ensure  a  fair
         hearing.  That entailed eliciting all relevant  evidence  from  the
         appellant given the absence of representatives.  Yet the judge  has
         not  particularised  what  questions  were  asked  to   probe   the
         appellant's reasons for feeling very uncomfortable  or  what  steps
         were taken to ameliorate this.  There were a number of options open
         to the judge short of excluding the grandparents  from  the  entire
         hearing: exploring the reasons for the discomfort in the absence of
         the grandparents for a short period; reassurance as  to  the  FTT's
         role as distinct from the role of the family court;  excluding  the
         grandparents for the more sensitive aspects of the appellant's oral
         evidence.  I do not suggest that the  judge  was  obliged  to  take
         these options but fairness required a better understanding  of  the
         reasons  for  the  appellant's  discomfort  to  inform  appropriate
         measures to combat it.

     12. Ground 1 is narrowly pleaded.  Mr Bates did  not  take  issue  with
         this and accepted that where, as here, an appellant claims that  he
         would  feel  very  uncomfortable  giving  oral  evidence,  it   was
         incumbent upon the FTT  to  explore  why.   Judges  have  at  their
         disposal aides to assist in this process.  These include  the  ETBB
         and the Guidance - see AM (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
         1123.

     13. As the grounds of appeal note, para 2  of  the  Guidance  makes  it
         clear that sexual orientation may be a  factor  to  assist  in  the
         identification of a vulnerable person.  Para 10.1(iv) states:

             "Consider restricting or barring members of the  public/family
             members in other cases to enable oral  evidence  to  be  given
             freely and without covert intimidation. If, from  reading  the
             papers you suspect abuse or trafficking, you  should  consider
             excluding individuals not associated with the presentation  of
             the case to enable the witness to  give  evidence  unhindered.
             You may  notice  individuals  in  the  Tribunal  who  have  no
             apparent bearing on the hearing and you may  consider  closing
             the hearing to the public."

     14. I do not cite these provisions as a means of suggesting  that  this
         appellant should have been treated as  vulnerable.   Rather,  these
         provisions serve to underline the point I have  already  made  that
         sexual orientation can be a factor of  particular  sensitivity  and
         consideration may need to be given to barring members of the public
         to enable oral evidence to be given freely.   The  judge  does  not
         appear  to  have  given  any   consideration   to   excluding   the
         grandparents even for a brief period,  on  the  basis  that  "these
         hearings are held in public".  The Guidance  makes  it  clear  that
         although FTT hearings are public, there are (limited) circumstances
         which justify the public being barred.

Conclusion

     15. It follows that FTT decision is vitiated by  procedural  unfairness
         and needs to be remade.

Disposal

     16. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the  relevant  Senior  President's
         Practice Statement  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
         findings required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that
         this is an appropriate case to remit to the FTT.  This  is  because
         completely fresh findings of fact are necessary.

     17. It would be helpful if the FTT holds a directions hearing in  order
         to address issues arising from  the  family  proceedings,  which  I
         understand to be ongoing.



Decision

     18. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error  of
         law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

     19. The appeal shall be remade in the FTT de novo,  by  a  judge  other
         than Judge Stedman.


Signed:  UTJ Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated: 8 October 2020

