
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: PA/10898/2018 (V)
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC          |Decision & Reasons         |
|                                          |Promulgated                |
|On 7 January 2021                         |On 18 January 2021         |
|                                          |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                     GH

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant: Mr C Timson of Counsel, instructed by Maya Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a Bangladeshi national with date of birth given  as
   10.8.81, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 11.2.20  (Judge  Holmes),
   dismissing on  all  grounds  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 4.9.18, to refuse his claim  for  international
   protection on the Convention  grounds  of  actual  or  imputed  political
   opinion as a former BDP supporter who had  been  attacked  by  the  Awami
   League, who had instituted prosecution for criminal offences  by  lodging
   false accusations against him.




2. This appeal has some history to it. It was first dismissed by the  First-
   tier Tribunal in October 2018 (Judge Drake) but by the  Upper  Tribunal's
   decision of February 2019 (Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman)  was  set
   aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade afresh.  Hence
   the appeal hearing before Judge Holmes on 18.12.19.



3. Despite concluding at [32] of the impugned decision that it had not  been
   shown that the FIR was "non-genuine", Judge Holmes found the appellant an
   unreliable witness, disbelieved his account, and applying  Tanveer  Ahmed
   [2002] UKAIT 00439, found the documents produced by the appellant  to  be
   unreliable. At [34] the judge was not satisfied that  the  appellant  was
   ever a BNP member or supporter in Bangladesh, and that he had not engaged
   in any sur place Bangladeshi politics. In the premises,  the  appeal  was
   dismissed.



4. The  grounds  are  poorly  drafted  and  somewhat  difficult  to  follow.
   However, they make complaint that the judge erred in law in the following
   paragraphs of the impugned decision:



     i. Paragraph [25], where the judge accorded limited weight to the Rule
        35 report. The judge appeared to accept that, at the  highest,  the
        evidence was that the appellant had been subject to past  violence,
        but that there was no evidence of causation, or whether any or  all
        of the scars were sustained  on  the  same  occasion.  The  grounds
        assert that if the judge accepted that he had been subject to  past
        violence, it is unclear how the judge could come to the  firm  view
        rejecting the appellant's account.




    ii. Paragraph [28], where the judge noted that the appellant relied  on
        what he claimed to be a a false criminal FIR filed against  him  in
        Bangladesh,  together  with  arrest  warrants  and  other   related
        documents. The  judge  observed  that  whilst  asserting  that  the
        documents were genuine, in his witness statement and oral  evidence
        the appellant had provided no detailed account or  any  explanation
        of their provenance. Given the letter from the lawyer confirming he
        had been instructed by the appellant to act in his case, the  judge
        considered   that   there   ought   reasonably   to   exist   other
        correspondence which the appellant could easily  have  produced  in
        support of the  claimed  lawyer/client  relationship.  The  grounds
        assert that there was no issue that he did not have a  lawyer  "and
        it is unclear as to why he would submit privileged legal  documents
        to support a lawyer/client relationship other than the  documentary
        evidence already adduced." It is submitted that the judge erred  in
        the assessment of this documentary evidence and failed to take into
        account the "oral documentary evidence," whatever that means.




   iii. Paragraph [30], in which it is asserted "the Judge  indicates  that
        he feels that the value  of  the  verification  report  is  further
        diminished, yet concludes that the FIR has been  shown  to  be  not
        genuine." This is challenged by the grounds, though it is far  from
        clear on what precise basis.

5. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the light of the submissions made to me and the  grounds  of  application
   for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The  Tribunal  has  the
   respondent's Rule 24 reply,  dated  27.7.20,  which  I  have  taken  into
   account.

6. In relation to [25] and the first ground  of  appeal,  the  ground  makes
   little sense other than a disagreement with the decision. The  judge  did
   take into account the Rule 35 report, noting that whilst the scaring  was
   consistent with the description of  the  attack  it  was  not  definitive
   medical evidence of the causation of such scars. As set  out  above,  the
   judge pointed out that evidence if such expert evidence had been adduced,
   which it was not, "the most it is likely to have proved would be that the
   appellant had been  subjected  to  past  violence."  Observing  that  the
   scaring was not described as fresh at the time of the report in 2018, the
   judge was satisfied that the injuries were not then recent. However,  the
   judge set out a number of difficulties with this evidence, including that
   it provided no evidence of  causation,  that  is  to  when  and  in  what
   circumstances the injuries were sustained, and that the  report  did  not
   amount to "any reliable opinion on whether all  of  the  scares,  or  any
   identifiable group of scars noted in the report had been sustained on the
   same occasion." The judge then concluded, "Ultimately, therefore, I  find
   that the support that the rule 35 report provides to the appellant's case
   is limited." It is important to note that the judge did not discount  the
   evidence entirely but evidently considered it in the round in the context
   of the evidence as a whole, in the round, as the judge confirmed at  [8].
   I am satisfied that no error of law is disclosed by this ground.

7. In relation to the second ground and [28] of the decision, the ground  is
   in essence an assertion that the judge erred in expecting  the  appellant
   to have adduce further or better evidence of  the  claimed  lawyer/client
   relationship, which was obviously relied on by the appellant to  underpin
   the claim that false criminal proceedings had been filed against him. The
   judge accepted that corroborative evidence was not  a  legal  requirement
   but considered that "where it could have been easily obtained its absence
   may be relevant to the assessment of credibility." I can  find  no  fault
   with that statement. The assertion in the grounds that  it  is  "unclear"
   why the appellant would submit  further  privileged  legal  documents  is
   disingenuous. The obvious reason was carefully explained  by  the  judge:
   that given the nature of the lawyer's letter confirming  instructions  to
   act, it would be reasonable to conclude that there must be more than that
   single letter of correspondence between the appellant and his lawyer, and
   that in those circumstances it would have been easy for the appellant  to
   adduce that correspondence in further support of his case. The  point  is
   patently clear, particularly where the respondent's case was and remained
   that there were no such criminal proceedings against  the  appellant  and
   that the so-called 'legal documents' were not genuine.

8. In this regard, the grant of permission suggests that the the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge "applied more than the requisite lower standard of  proof"
   and concluded that "there were material errors of law in the decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal". With respect, that was not for Judge  Finch  to
   determine when granting permission to appeal, in which the threshold test
   is whether the decision discloses an 'arguable' error of law. Further, as
   Mr McVeety submitted, with which submission Mr Timson could not disagree,
   the grant of permission was in relation to a ground neither  pleaded  nor
   identified as Robinson obvious. In point of fact, the grant of permission
   appears to be based on a misreading of [30] of  the  decision  where  the
   judge correctly referred to the balance of probabilities, as he was there
   dealing with the respondent's assertion that the documents relied  on  by
   the appellant were not genuine. Further, neither did the appeal  turn  on
   whether false accusations made against members of opposition  parties  in
   Bangladesh were  prevalent,  as  the  objective  evidence  indicates.  In
   effect, that premise, the well-known device  of  political  opponents  in
   Bangladesh to make false criminal  accusations  against  each  other,  is
   assumed in consideration of the appellant's case. The real  question  was
   whether the documents adduced by or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  were
   either genuine or reliable as evidence that such  false  accusations  had
   been levelled at him by political opponents,  as  claimed.  In  extensive
   detail set out between [22] and [32] of the decision, the judge carefully
   considered the documents, identifying  various  difficulties  with  their
   provenance and content. As set out below, the judge first found that  the
   respondent had failed to demonstrate on the  basis  of  the  verification
   report that the FIR was not genuine,  before  considering  what  reliance
   could be placed on these documents in support of the appellant's case.  I
   am not satisfied, therefore, that the judge required any higher level  of
   proof than the lower standard of proof. I am satisfied and  it  is  clear
   that the judge made  a  correct  self-direction  as  to  the  burden  and
   standard of proof between [8] and [11] of the decision, under the heading
   'General legal points.'

9. In relation to the third ground and [30] of the  decision,  it  is  clear
   that the author of  the  grounds  has  misunderstood  this  part  of  the
   decision. At this point the judge identified the issue as being  whether,
   on the balance of probabilities, the respondent had demonstrated that the
   FIR was not  genuine.  The  judge  immediately  stated  that  he  had  no
   hesitation in stating that the evidence was not sufficient  to  show  the
   FIR was not genuine, finding the document verification report to  be  "of
   diminished evidential weight", for the several  reasons  given  at  [30].
   Whilst the appellant and/or his legal representatives believe  the  judge
   found the FIR not genuine, the judge made no such finding. Ultimately, at
   [32] the judge concluded that the FIR had not  been  shown  to  be  "non-
   genuine". However, the judge went on  at  [32],  applying  Tanveer  Ahmed
   principles, to conclude that the  Bangladeshi  documents,  including  the
   letter purporting to come from the BNP branch in  Oldham,  could  not  be
   relied upon, or in other words, that the appellant failed to  demonstrate
   that they were reliable in support of his case. That conclusion is  fully
   reasoned and discloses no error of law.

10. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on  the
   basis of any pleaded ground.

Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed on all grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       7 January 2021





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       7 January 2021





