
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10174/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 September 2017                    |On 20 September 2017                 |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                     K L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan dismissing his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent made on 14  September  2016  to  refuse  him
    asylum and humanitarian protection.

2.   The appellant is a Sri Lankan national born on [  ]  2005.   He  is  12
    years old.  He entered the UK as an unaccompanied  minor  on  12  March
    2016.  His claim for asylum was based on his fear that if  he  returned
    to Sri Lanka he would face mistreatment on the  basis  of  his  imputed
    political opinion as his father was a fighter for the LTTE and  due  to
    his race as a Tamil.

3.   At the hearing before Judge Khan, the appellant did not give  evidence.
     The judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant's  father  and  his
    maternal aunt, Mrs Kusmawathy Loganathan.

4.   The facts of the appellant's claim are set out at paragraphs 3 to 7  of
    the respondent's detailed Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  and  dated  14
    September 2016.

5.   The judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  for  reasons  set  out  at
    paragraphs 37 to paragraph 53.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ford  as
    follows:

         "2.  Having read the record of proceedings from  the  hearing  that
             was adjourned in October 2016, it is arguable that Judge  Khan
             may have misunderstood the reason for that adjournment,  which
             appear to be because the Appellant's father had made an asylum
             claim,  the  Appellant's  father  suffered  from   psychiatric
             problems and it was being argued that he would  be  unable  to
             care for the Appellant.  It was argued that  there  should  be
             linking to any appeal by the Appellant's father.  For  reasons
             that are unclear no directions were made for  the  linking  or
             for filing of further evidence and I can see no mention in the
             ROP of any mental health assessment of this Appellant.   Judge
             Khan records at paragraph 7 that (as the Tribunal was informed
             by counsel) the matter  was  adjourned  in  October  2016  for
             medical expert evidence to be obtained and decided that  there
             had been ample time in which to do so.  The Tribunal may  have
             erred in concluding that the  adjournment  was  to  allow  for
             medical  reports  to  be  filed  for  this   Appellant.    The
             Appellant's representatives argue that as they did not receive
             the most recent CAMHs evidence concerning the Appellant  until
             a few days before the hearing in June, they  had  no  time  in
             which to arrange for a  full  assessment.   Counsel  expressed
             concern  about  the  Appellant's  weight   loss   and   mental
             condition.


         3.   It is arguable that the Tribunal erred in


                a. Refusing the adjournment application partly  because  the
                    Tribunal  wrongly  understood  that  the  Tribunal   had
                    already granted time for the Appellant to file  his  own
                    expert psychiatric report.


         4.   There is an arguable material error of law."

7.   At the hearing before me Ms Anzani relied on  her  grounds  of  appeal.
    Mr Jarvis submitted that there was some strength in  the  grounds.   He
    submitted that it was correctly stated at ground 4 that at paragraph 42
    of the determination, the judge misread the Sri Lankan police book  and
    in so doing materially erred in fact.  There were two police complaints
    lodged by the appellant's uncle, the first relating to the  appellant's
    mother and brother being taken by armed individuals on  25  March  2014
    (following which they were released), and  the  second  to  them  being
    taken by military officers on 5 March 2016, and  to  them  still  being
    missing.  The  Immigration  Judge  made  no  reference  to  the  latter
    complaint at any point in the determination.

8.   Mr Jarvis also accepted that the judge failed  to  properly  grasp  the
    nature of the medical evidence.  The judge  did  not  factor  into  his
    decision the evidence that the appellant had been diagnosed  with  PTSD
    and moderate deception.  In the light of the submissions  made  by  Mr.
    Jarvis, I found that there was merit in the grounds lodged on behalf of
    the appellant.

9.   It would also appear that the solicitors did  not  have  sight  of  the
    copies of the medical reports until late, and were not in a position to
    commission a full psychiatric assessment of the appellant in  time  for
    the hearing.

10.  For the above reasons, I found that the judge made material  errors  of
    law such that his decision could not stand.  The  decision  has  to  be
    remade.  It is remitted to Hatton Cross for rehearing by a judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan.

Directions

1.   Appeal to be remitted to Hatton Cross.

2.   Possibly two witnesses.

3.   Tamil interpreter required.

4.   Time estimate three hours.

5.   An up-to-date bundle of documents should be submitted  within  fourteen
    days of the date of hearing.

6.   Anonymity direction upheld.




Signed                                  Date:  19 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

