
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/10913/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 March 2018                        |      On 01 May 2018                |
|                                        |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                    a a a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Rogers, Legal representative, Immigration
Advice Centre Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.    The  appellant  is  a  national   of   Sudan.    He   claimed   asylum
    unsuccessfully in 2006 but made further submissions in  December  2016.
    These were based on him being a deserter from the Sudanese Government's
    army.  When the respondent rejected these submissions in October  2017,
    the appellant appealed.  In a decision sent on 15 November 2017  First-
    tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Shanahan dismissed his appeal.  The judge did
    not consider the appeal on the substance because he considered that the
    appellant had failed to comply with rule 19 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (FtT) (IAC) Rules 2014 in not submitting any grounds.  It  is  accepted
    by both parties that the judge was mistaken about  this  matter,  since
    unbeknown to him it seems the reminder notice  sent  to  the  appellant
    gave him until 3 November 2017 to submit grounds and he did  so  by  31
    October 2017.

2.   For the above reasons there has been an error of process  amounting  to
    an error of law and one necessitating that  I  set  aside  the  judge's
    decision.

3.   To conclude:

     The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error.

     The case is remitted to the FtT.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed:                                 Date: 26 April 2018

  [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




