
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/10004/2018
     PA/10028/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 February 2019                           |On 11 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                     J A
                                     V A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss M Chowdhury, Counsel instructed by Stuart & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

1.   This is an appeal by J A and V A, an anonymity  direction  having  been
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal, against a decision of  Judge  Freer
    (the judge) to dismiss their appeals on asylum and human rights grounds
    as well as their claims for humanitarian protection.  I found there  to
    be no material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    for the reasons given below.

Background

2.   The appellants come from Nigeria, but they were in  fact  born  in  the
    UK. However, they spent much of their childhood in Nigeria. They  claim
    to have entered the UK in 2001.  They  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of long residence in July 2012 and on  the  basis
    of Article 8 in 2014.  On 2 November 2016 they applied on the basis  of
    ten years' private or family life in the UK.  It appears that the first
    appellant VA first made an asylum claim which was made in November 2016
    and that the second appellant Mr JA  applied  for  asylum  in  February
    2018.  The respondent gave reasons for dismissing the first appellant's
    appeal on 31 July 2018 and the second appellant's appeal in  a  lengthy
    letter of 3 August 2018.  Both appellants appealed these  refusals  and
    their conjoined appeals were heard by the judge on 14  September  2018.
    The judge gave lengthy his decision to dismiss the  appeal  is  an  all
    grounds argued before him.

Basis for the asylum and human rights claims

3.   I found it quite hard when  I  came  to  this  case  to  ascertain  the
    precise  basis  of  their  application  for  asylum  and  human  rights
    protection  in  the  UK,  but  it  is  essential  background  to  those
    applications that they both suffered from various medical issues  which
    were addressed in the First-tier  Tribunal  decision.   The  appellants
    claim to fear abduction by their  father  or  father's  family  as  the
    children's mother had been accused of witchcraft.  The  respondent  did
    not  accept  that  these  assertions.  However,  the  respondent   also
    concluded that such threats as had  been  made  did  not  amount  to  a
    "Convention reason" falling within the UN Convention  relating  to  the
    status of Refugees. The judge dismissed the appeal finding  that  there
    was no persuasive evidence that anyone had been involved with which  is
    the green with the respondent that in any event this would  not  amount
    to a "Convention" reason.

Permission to appeal

4.   The basis of the application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is set out in the grounds of appeal drafted by Miss Chowdhury,
    who represents the appellants before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  first
    ground asserts that the findings in relation to asylum  are  confusing,
    pointing out that the health issues that  the  appellants  suffer  from
    would be in danger of becoming public knowledge if they  were  returned
    to Nigeria. This would have a bearing on their asylum claim because  it
    is possible that they may be accused  of  witchcraft  if  their  mental
    health issues were discovered.  It is submitted in the grounds that the
    analysis by the First-tier Tribunal is confusing.   The  second  ground
    states that in relation to the approach and reasoning  in  relation  to
    their qualifications to remain in the UK, the judge's approach was also
    confusing and poorly analysed.

5.    In  granting  permission  in  this  case  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill
    highlighted two points.  She considered that it was arguable  that  the
    reasoning in relation to paragraphs 46 and 51 went against the decision
    of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) [2010]  UKSC  31  but  she  was  less
    persuaded that the other ground which  she  highlighted  (that  it  was
    arguable that the  judge  might  have  taken  into  account  irrelevant
    considerations in weighing up the possibility that the appellants might
    otherwise qualify for leave to  remain  in  the  UK)  was  meritorious.
    However, Judge Gill decided to grant permission  on  all  grounds.  All
    grounds were fully argued by Miss Chowdhury before the Upper Tribunal.

Discussion

6.   The grounds criticise the judge's decision for  its  lack  of  coherent
    reasons, but it was incumbent on the  appellants  to  show  that  their
    claim for asylum in the UK would have given rise to Convention  reasons
    if their claims were accepted as being genuine. It would seem difficult
    for them to argue that they were members of a "particular social group"
    as they did before the FTT. Judge Gill  referred  to  the  case  of  HJ
    (IRAN). In that case it was  successfully  argued  before  the  Supreme
    Court that a homosexual asylum seeker could not reasonably be  expected
    to tolerate the need to  act  discreetly  in  relation  to  his  sexual
    activity and matters relating to his sexual identity in the wider sense
    upon his return to his home country (the 'reasonably  tolerate'  test).
    The applicants argued that it was contrary to the  Convention  for  the
    person claiming refugee status to have to show that there was no way of
    pursuing his sexual orientation without exposing himself to the risk of
    persecution.

7.   However, in order to  establish  membership  in  a  "particular  social
    group" the applicant must share  an  innate  characteristic  or  common
    background that cannot be changed or share a characteristic  or  belief
    is so fundamental to his identity or conscience that the person  should
    not be forced to renounce it. Numerous examples been  established  over
    the  years  including  former   victims   of   trafficking,   perceived
    collaborators and even family members but in this case the judge simply
    observed that the appellants would to be bound to disclose  their  past
    health issues and unlike sexual preferences  these  are  not  generally
    issues people would wish to ventilate  publicly.  Therefore  I  am  not
    satisfied that it is correct to equate the two.

8.   In so far as the judge decided that the appellants did not  qualify  as
    members of a "particular social group", I  am  satisfied  that  he  was
    entitled to do so and that  these  appellants  do  not  fall  within  a
    particular  social  group  as  they  do  not  appear  to  share  common
    characteristics. Thus, even if the credibility of the appellants' claim
    had been accepted by the FTT in full they would have found it difficult
    to satisfy the Refugee Convention. I am satisfied that, in  so  far  as
    the judge rejected the appellants' claim that they  formed  part  of  a
    particular social group, he was entitled to do so. He was  entitled  to
    reach the conclusion he reached as to the appellants' asylum claim.

9.   In relation to the appellants' protected human rights, they  appear  to
    have relied on articles 3 and 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights (ECHR). Their claim as partly based  on  "health-based"  medical
    issues. They both allege that they suffered from  depression,  but  the
    judge found there to be a form of treatment that could be  received  in
    Nigeria. He also noted the high level of qualifications  they  had  and
    thought that some of their fear may  be  related  to  their  return  to
    Nigeria itself but was not justified by the facts- in  other  words  it
    was not necessarily established  that  there  would  be  a  long  -term
    adverse impact on the psychological state  of  the  two  appellants  to
    return them to Nigeria. It is also claimed that the first appellant had
    a major depressive  disorder  and  relied  on  medical  evidence  which
    painted a picture of more serious ill-health including diabetes.  There
    was evidence from Dr Khoo that it was necessary to continue  the  first
    appellant medications without any interruption.

10.  The test for medical cases has recently been reviewed in  the  case  of
    Paposhvilli v Belgium [2016] ECHR 41738/10 and in  later  cases  before
    the English courts and tribunals. It is clear from those cases that  it
    is not simply a case of comparing the availability of treatment  in  an
    advanced Western country with less  developed  systems  elsewhere.  The
    effect on health of  removal  must  be  immediate  and  substantial.  A
    particularly high threshold will need to be surmounted if an  applicant
    is to succeed under article 3.  There  is  not  an  obligation  on  the
    respondent to provide them with a particular level of healthcare.  But,
    in any event, it is clear on the evidence that there in fact was  quite
    extensive healthcare  provision  within  Nigeria,  although,  this  was
    likely to  come  at  a  greater  economic  cost  and  it  may  be  less
    straightforward to access those services in  Nigeria.  I  am  satisfied
    that the judge did have in mind the high  threshold  to  be  surmounted
    both for the asylum claim and an Article 3 claim.

11.  Article 8 was more complex, given that these appellants  have  been  in
    the UK for a long period of time. Based on  their  evidence,  this  was
    since 2001. But, the judge could not just decide the case based on  the
    long period of residence in the UK. For much of that period  there  had
    been precarious, for example,  in  relation  to  the  first  appellant,
    removal directions had been set as long ago as 2016. The judge properly
    referred to the factors pertaining to the public  interest  in  section
    117B Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. He had regard to the
    fact that neither appellant had formed a relationship in the  UK,  both
    had acquired significant skills here and although they had close family
    members in  the  UK,  the  judge  was  satisfied  that  they  could  be
    reasonably returned to Nigeria, having regard to the  fact  that  their
    main language is English. Although they have not lived in Nigeria for a
    large part of their lives, they  are  now  adults  and  although  their
    health needs had to be taken into account, they are not such as to  tip
    the balance in the appellants' favour. As far as one can see, there are
    no consequences of such gravity that require the  respondent  to  grant
    the appellants leave to remain in the UK outside the Immigration Rules.
    There would be no threat their moral  and  physical  integrity  of  the
    appellants in the short term if they were returned to  Nigeria.  Ground
    three of the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal asserts  that  the
    first appellant's loss of medication for a "highly  unusual  condition"
    amounted to an insurmountable obstacle "when deciding the appellant 1's
    case under paragraph 276 A.D.E the Immigration Rules". However,  whilst
    it is accepted that judge had to have regard to the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules, he dealt fully with this issue as I  have  explained
    above (see for example paragraph 75 and in the following paragraphs  of
    his decision). In particular, the judge commented on the lack of up-to-
    date evidence but noted the absence of an assertion that such treatment
    would be unavailable in Nigeria. In short the judge was  not  satisfied
    that the appellants had shown that any medication required would not be
    available, in equivalent form at least, in Nigeria.  Having  regard  to
    those factors the judge was entitled to come to the conclusion he  came
    to on article 8 based on the evidence and submissions made.

10.  As a postscript to that I should say  that  I  did  not  find  all  the
    judge's language appropriate or helpful and  I  do  not  think  it  was
    necessary  for  the  judge  to  go  into  such  matters  as  suggesting
    alternative bases for claims which the appellants may or may not  have.
    No doubt the appellants, who appear to be intelligent individuals, will
    take legal advice on their immigration status  on  the  grounds  argued
    before the FTT. However, the judge was entitled to reach  the  decision
    that he did.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 6 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 6 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
