
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number PA/10881/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester CJC
Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 28th November 2018
On 06th February 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between


                                     L N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Patel (Counsel, instructed by GMIAU)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision
   refusing his asylum claim was heard by Designated First-tier Tribunal
   Judge McClure at Manchester on the 24th of November 2017. The appeal was
   dismissed for the reasons given in the decision promulgated on the 12th
   of February 2018. The found that whilst at that time the Appellant was a
   minor he would be returned to Vietnam as an adult and that in the
   circumstances his removal would not place the UK in breach of its
   obligations.

2. The grounds argue that the Judge erred in his assessment of the
   circumstances that the Appellant would face on return to Vietnam and that
   his vulnerability had not been taken into account. The fact that the
   Appellant would face discrimination as a Catholic was also relevant in
   the balancing exercise. Permission was refused by the First-tier Tribunal
   but on renewal the Upper Tribunal granted permission with the Judge
   observing that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed
   to assess the case at the date of the hearing and failed to consider
   section 55.

3. At the hearing it was argued that the Appellant was 17 at the date of
   the hearing and the grant of permission and that made the errors
   identified material, the Judge should not have been looking at the
   Appellant being returned as an adult. On the facts that had been accepted
   the Appellant would have succeeded and the error was looking at the
   position as an adult, this was intrinsically unjust to the Appellant.

4. The Home Office observed that the Appellant had been granted LTR under
   the policy that applied to minors and so that did not take the case
   further. The Judge had considered the Appellant's circumstances on return
   as an adult and removal would not take place before he turned 18.
   Reference was made to paragraphs 49, 31 and 53 and the Judge had
   concluded that the Appellant would not be at risk of re-trafficking. If
   an error was found and the decision was remade on the findings that stand
   the decision would be the same.

5. The fact is the Appellant is now an adult and any consideration of his
   case would have to be predicated on that basic fact. Although there were
   delays in the processing of the Appellant's claim the Appellant was
   granted LTR in line with the policies that apply to minors in his
   position as it was at the time. Given the grant of leave it was clear
   that the Appellant would not be removed before he had turned 18 and the
   Judge considered the Appellant's position in the real circumstances that
   would apply to him.

6. The facts on which the Judge made the decision have not changed except
   that now the Appellant will be returned as an adult. If the decision were
   to be remade then the findings on which the decision rested would be the
   starting point for the decision that had to be remade. In the
   circumstances I am not satisfied that the decision of Judge McClure does
   contain any error in approach or in the findings made and the conclusions
   drawn. In any event given that the Appellant is now an adult any error
   would not material, the remade decision would reach the same conclusion
   for the reasons already given.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Signed: [pic]

Dated: 13th December 2018



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I continue that
order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
2008.)

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed: [pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 13th December 2018






































