
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10510/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 20 March 2018                            |On 14 May 2018               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     ADW
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit instructed by VJ Nathan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


    1. The appellant appeals with permission against a  decision  of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd, promulgated on 30 November 2017, in  which
       the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on  protection  and  human
       rights grounds.





Background


    2. The appellant is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka  born  on  [  ]  1985.  The
       appellant's wife and children are dependents on his claim.
    3. Having considered the evidence with the required  degree  of  anxious
       scrutiny the Judge sets  out  findings  of  fact  from  [46]  of  the
       decision under challenge.
    4. At [47] the Judge states  he  first  deals  with  the  issue  of  the
       Consultant's  report.  The  appellant  relied  upon  report  from   a
       Consultant Psychiatrist which diagnosed the  appellant  as  suffering
       from moderate depression and PTSD.  The  Judge  notes  the  applicant
       attributes his symptomology to torture suffered in Sri Lanka and  the
       worry of his immigration status. As such the  Judge  noted  that  the
       report provided support for  the  appellant's  account  that  he  was
       tortured in Sri Lanka. At [50] the Judge writes:

           "50.   I accept the Consultants diagnosis of PTSD  and  moderate
                depression. However these can  be  caused  by  a  number  of
                different events. I find the  Consultant's  report  recounts
                the history the Appellant has told him. If the Appellant was
                suffering from flashbacks, nightmares and he could not sleep
                after the offence in early 2010, it is  surprising  that  he
                did not go to see his GP about any of those symptoms over  a
                seven-year period. The Appellant was asked about his  health
                problems  in  his  screening  interview  and  a  substantive
                interview but he did  not  mention  any  problems  with  his
                mental health."

    5. The Judge finds  that  contrary  to  what  the  Consultant  says  the
       appellant had not at any time had a series of counselling. His GP put
       him on a dose of antidepressants and prescribed sleeping tablet which
       the appellant no longer takes [51].
    6. At [53] the Judge finds the appellant's depression and PTSD have  not
       been caused by detention and torture in Sri Lanka at the hands of the
       authorities and that the problems with his mental  health  have  been
       caused by his uncertain immigration status.
    7. The Judge notes  the  account  given  by  the  appellant  of  torture
       suffered in Sri Lanka, which the Judge accepts at  [57]  has  been  a
       broadly consistent account although also notes the appellant has  not
       provided any medical evidence to support the scars  he  says  he  has
       from any torture he was subjected to, which are also not mentioned by
       the Consultant. Having  considered  the  evidence  relating  to  this
       aspect the Judge finds at [59]:

           "59.   However, I do not accept that the appellant was arrested,
                detained and tortured as he claims for a number of  reasons.
                The appellant admits he had no problem when  he  was  buying
                goods for the area  controlled  by  the  LTTE.  He  was  not
                involved in the transport of the items. His  only  role  was
                the purchase of goods. I am not persuaded  this  would  have
                brought him to the attention of the authorities. They do not
                appear to have been aware of it at the  time.  I  find  they
                would have had no reason to be interested in  such  activity
                several years afterwards."

    8. The Judge notes the appellant was able to live in  Sri  Lanka  for  a
       week after his alleged release with no one looking for him  and  that
       he and his family were able to leave using their passports. The Judge
       states if they were on a wanted list he was not persuaded this  would
       have been possible and found it implausible  that  the  family  could
       travel out safely on their passports with  the  help  of  the  wife's
       uncle if wanted by the authorities [61].
    9. The Judge noted the appellants claim made at  the  hearing  that  the
       authorities had been looking for him in Sri Lanka  which  was  not  a
       matter mentioned in his asylum interview, which persuaded  the  Judge
       such event did not occur.
   10. The Judge finds the appellant to be of no interest to the authorities
       in Sri Lanka due to any perceived link with the LTTE, or a journalist
       who had links with the LTTE. The Judge finds the appellant would  not
       be at risk if he were to return to Sri  Lanka.  The  Judge  finds  he
       would not be arrested, detained and tortured as he claims. If he  had
       been the Judge finds he would have claimed asylum rather than putting
       in an application for leave to remain so he could return  home  [66].
       The Judge also refers to  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence  of  the
       appellant and his wife which made him doubt  their  credibility.  The
       appellant stated he is in contact with his mother and she  speaks  to
       her grandchildren whereas the wife  claimed  the  appellant  had  not
       contacted his family in case it puts his family in Sri Lanka at  risk
       [67].
   11. The Judge properly considered the best interests of the children  and
       the applicant's claim both within and outside the immigration rules.
   12. Permission to appeal was sought  by  the  appellant  and  granted  by
       another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis it was said  to
       be arguable the Judge did not provide any  or  adequate  reasons  for
       rejecting the  Consultants  conclusion  and  having  found  that  the
       appellant was  suffering  from  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  and
       moderate depression, the Judge did not arguably  apply  the  guidance
       contained in the Joint Presidential Guidance Note number  2  of  2002
       and  did  not  consider  whether  concerns  as  to  the   appellant's
       credibility, which the Judge did express in the  decision,  may  have
       been the result of the appellant's vulnerability.




Grounds and submissions



   13. In relation to Ground 1, on behalf of the appellant, it was submitted
       the Judge had erred in consideration of the  psychiatric  report.  It
       was submitted the Judge conflated causation and  aggravation  of  the
       issue. The Judge accepted the appellant suffered from  PTSD  but  not
       causation.
   14. It was submitted the report contained a diagnosis of the  appellant's
       condition and  symptoms  consistent  with  PTSD  as  a  result  of  a
       catastrophic  event  and  that  the  doctor  took  into  account  the
       appellants adverse immigration history. It  was  accepted  the  Judge
       accepted the diagnosis but also claimed that PTSD could be caused  by
       different events which it was submitted is contrary to the  diagnosis
       of the Consultant.
   15. It was submitted that as mental health issues were recorded they must
       be factored into the assessment of the appellant's credibility as  he
       is a vulnerable individual.  It  was  argued  PTSD  is  a  factor  of
       relative significance.
   16. It was accepted the appellant did not mention  certain  events  until
       later on in the process but argued this is a matter  that  should  be
       subject to evaluation by the Judge relative to such matters not being
       considered, this will be a relevant factor regarding the  appellant's
       credibility.
   17. In relation to Ground 2, it  was  submitted  the  Judge  missed  some
       factors.  The  Judge  had  not  considered  whether  the  appellant's
       presentation was as a result of mental health  problems.   The  Judge
       did not consider the evidence  of  the  same  in  the  psychiatrist's
       report. It was argued [86] could not be correct as a  result  of  the
       vulnerability of the appellant as the father of the child.
   18. It is accepted the psychiatrist does not say the children will be  at
       risk but it was submitted it  was  relevant  to  draw  a  distinction
       between the position now and what it will be if the family return  to
       Sri Lanka in relation to the impact upon the appellant and what would
       happen to him as the father of the children at the  point  of  return
       and thereafter upon the family unit. It was submitted this is a  very
       significant omission in the decision  and  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
       could not infer what the outcome would be if these  issues  had  been
       taken into account. It was submitted the  vulnerability  issues  were
       relevant to credibility and risk on return.
   19. Mr Musquit relied on the other grounds as pleaded.
   20. On behalf the Secretary of State, Mr Bates referred to the  fact  the
       Judge accepted the diagnosis of PTSD and that the issue was therefore
       that causation. It  was  submitted  the  Consultant  dealt  with  the
       appellant's own account of events and was asked  to  accept  if  that
       account was consistent with the diagnosis of  torture.  Although  the
       Consultant says it is, it was submitted the credibility of the  claim
       was a matter for the Judge.
   21. The Consultant finds the symptoms to be  'consistent'  which  it  was
       submitted is the lowest level according to the Istanbul Protocol.
   22. The Judge makes an assessment in the round of all the evidence noting
       counselling was referred to by the Consultant but that the  appellant
       claimed not to have received counselling and only to have received  a
       low dose of tablets. The  Judge  also  noted  the  appellant  stopped
       taking the sleeping tablets.
   23. It was submitted the appellant dealt with  his  PTSD  by  taking  the
       lowest level of antidepressants and that there was no scarring report
       available to the Judge.
   24. It was submitted there was no clear basis of  the  challenge  to  the
       Judge's findings. The Judge had not accepted that the events happened
       as claimed.
   25. The Judge took a balanced view as demonstrated by [47] where  it  was
       found the Consultant's report provided support  for  the  appellant's
       account although also notes  at  [49]  that  although  the  appellant
       claimed he had scars from his torture the Consultant makes no mention
       of the same in his finding, and at [51] that the  appellant  had  not
       received the course of counselling as claimed by the  consultant,  or
       at [52] that the appellant had sought no help for a period  of  seven
       years and that when he did neither the GP nor psychological therapist
       considered his mental health problems needed significant  input  with
       them being treated with low-dose medication with no referral for  any
       form of secondary mental health input, or [52]  in  which  the  Judge
       finds  he  was  not  persuaded  that  the  appellant  had  truthfully
       presented his symptoms of PTSD  and  depression  to  the  Consultant,
       whilst accepting the Consultant's opinion has been  reached  in  good
       faith.
   26. Mr Bates submitted the only other factors are the worsening condition
       as a result of the appellant's immigration status  in  light  of  the
       fact that the claimed torture has not been found to be credible.
   27. Mr Bates argued the findings were open  to  the  Judge  and  properly
       reasoned in  the  decision.   It  is  submitted  the  Judge  properly
       considered the best interests of children,  including  mental  health
       issues, but found at [69] that the appellant would not be at risk  of
       treatment on return sufficient to breach articles 2 or 3 of the  ECHR
       and  that  the  appellant's  representative  before  the   First-tier
       Tribunal confirmed there was no appeal under Article 3 in relation to
       the appellant's medical problems.
   28. It was submitted the Judge at [85] considered the best  interests  of
       the children were to continue  living  in  a  family  unit  with  the
       appellant and his wife and that although one was a qualifying  child,
       it was reasonable for the child to be removed to Sri Lanka and return
       with the family unit.
   29. Mr Bates submitted the Judge has given adequate reasons in support of
       the findings made.
   30. In response Mr Muquit submitted it was  not  disputed  the  appellant
       suffers from  PTSD  and  the  issue  was  the  significance  of  that
       diagnosis on the evidence. It was submitted there should have been  a
       finding vulnerability as it was incumbent upon the Judge to  consider
       how this will impact upon the  appellant's  case.   The  Judge  gives
       reasons for the PTSD not as a result of torture, but  allegedly  made
       this finding in isolation of the evidence.
   31. It is submitted other issues regarding the type  of  evidence  arise.
       The Judge mentions the GP and the medication provided but the GP also
       thought the medication was not enough and needed to bring the same up
       'to speed'. It is submitted the Judge did not address his mind to the
       question of whether matters found adverse should be assessed in light
       of the appellants vulnerability. It is submitted this is relevant  in
       relation to whether the child can go back to Sri Lanka to  be  looked
       after by  a  vulnerable  father.  If  there  is  an  enforced  return
       accompanied  by  deterioration  as  this  will  be  relevant  to  the
       appellant's immigration status.
   32. It was submitted that although article 3 issues were not raised  this
       related to the father not the impact on the child is the  child  will
       be with the father and the impact upon the child was not  dealt  with
       by the Judge.
   33. It was put to Mr Muquit from the  bench  that  the  finding  is  that
       article 3 was not raised in any event and that the issue was  article
       8 in relation to the  child.   When  asked  whether  his  submissions
       regarding the impact on the child the  father's  condition  had  been
       raised before the First-tier Mr Muquit  was  unable  to  say  whether
       those submissions had been made to the Judge on this basis.
   34. It was submitted that even if these matters had not  been  raised  in
       the past this is a case where the Judge should have dealt  with  this
       matter himself.  In response to questioning was accepted these issues
       do  not  appear  in  the  skeleton  argument  statement   of   and/or
       submissions made  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  though  it  was
       repeated by Mr Muquit  that  the  Judge  should  have  made  a  self-
       direction in relation to this issue.

Error of law


   35. The Judge clearly understood the core of the appellant's  case  which
       is that he had been detained and tortured in Sri Lanka as a result of
       an imputed adverse political opinion  arising  from  support  of  the
       LTTE.  The Judge noted despite that claim the appellant had  admitted
       he experienced no problems buying goods for an area controlled by the
       LTTE and that the appellant had not  made  out  why  the  authorities
       would have good reason to be  interested  in  such  activity  several
       years afterwards.
   36. The Judge's findings in relation to  the  lack  of  interest  in  the
       appellant and that he will  be  of  no  interest  on  return  are  in
       accordance with the decision of the Upper Tribunal in GJ and others.
   37. There is merit in the assertion the Consultant, when undertaking  the
       assessment, took at face  value  the  appellant's  account  what  had
       happened to him in Sri Lanka. A medical expert is not there to assess
       the credibility of  the  claim  but  rather  to  undertake  a  proper
       examination and give his  or  her  opinion  in  relation  to  medical
       matters. In this case, despite the appellant  claiming  he  had  been
       tortured for which he had scarring, the Consultant makes  no  mention
       of any such physical injuries but  does  diagnose  the  appellant  as
       suffering from PTSD and moderate depression, a diagnosis accepted  by
       the Judge.
   38. The appellant challenges the Judges finding that although he  suffers
       from PTSD and depression the causation is not  as  a  result  of  the
       issues claimed by the appellant. That is not  the  Judge  disagreeing
       with  the  Consultant's  assessment   of   the   appellants   medical
       presentation. The Judge was required to consider the  credibility  of
       the claim by looking at the evidence from all sources including  that
       set out in the Consultant's report. It is not disputed, and  in  fact
       has been recognised in the case law,  that  there  are  a  number  of
       factors that may give rise to a diagnosis of PTSD from  those  within
       the immigration and asylum system.
   39. The claim  the  Judge  became  confused  and  conflated  issues  when
       considering the medical evidence is not made out. The difficulty  for
       the appellant is that  the  Judge's  finding  that  he  rejected  the
       appellants claim to have been arrested detained and tortured  in  Sri
       Lanka is a finding reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence and a
       finding not found to be infected by arguable legal error. As such, if
       one takes this element away from the Consultants assertions as to the
       causation of the appellants presentation, what is left? The answer to
       that is  that  referred  to  by  the  Judge  namely  the  appellant's
       certainty regarding his immigration status.
   40. The appellant asserts the Judge should have treated the appellant  as
       a vulnerable witness and incorporated  into  the  assessment  of  the
       credibility of the appellant's account the fact he  is  a  vulnerable
       individual who has been diagnosed with mental health  issues.  Judges
       of the First-tier Tribunal receive extensive training in relation  to
       the  practice  direction  regarding  the  treatment   of   vulnerable
       witnesses and there is nothing in the determination or  the  material
       provided that suggests the Judge erred in assessing the merits of the
       appellant's case. It is not suggested the appellant's  representative
       on the day made any submissions in relation to the  manner  in  which
       the hearing should have been conducted. The  appellant  attended  and
       gave evidence through an interpreter. There  was  no  suggestion  the
       appellant experienced any difficulties in  being  involved  with  the
       appeal process and a person, even one who is vulnerable, is  expected
       to  tell  the  truth.  It  is  not  made  out  that  the   appellants
       vulnerability was such that the Judge was required  to  do  any  more
       than he did in assessing the credibility of the appellants claim.
   41. The Judge devotes a number of paragraphs in the decision [70  -  113]
       to consideration of the human rights aspects of  the  claim.  As  has
       been noted above, the appellant's representative  before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal confirmed there was no appeal on article 3  grounds  in
       relation to the appellant medical problems. It is not  a  conditional
       statement that that related only to  the  appellant  but  must  be  a
       statement relating to any issue arising as a result of the appellants
       medical condition. It  was  not  made  out,  for  example,  that  any
       treatment required would not be available within the  United  Kingdom
       or within Sri Lanka if the appellant required the same.
   42. The submission the Judge erred in failing to consider any risk to the
       children  as  a  result  of  a  deterioration   in   the   appellants
       circumstances if he  is  returned  to  Sri  Lanka,  as  a  vulnerable
       individual, has no merit in establishing an arguable  error  of  law.
       The first point of note is that it has not been made  out  that  this
       was a line of  argument  or  submission  put  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge. I do not find  it  made  out  on  the  basis  of  the
       evidence provided and submissions made that this was  an  issue  that
       the Judge should have taken on board for himself. The  appellant  was
       represented by counsel. The Judge was entitled to expect the  matters
       upon which the tribunal being asked to make a ruling would have  been
       put before him.
   43. There is no evidence that the appellant's condition will  deteriorate
       to the extent he will be unable to function  or  become  suicidal  if
       returned to Sri Lanka, or that there will be any adverse impact  upon
       his wife who is also available to care for the children.  It  is  not
       made out medical treatment is not available if required.
   44. The Judge considered the best interests  of  children  but  concluded
       they were that they should  remain  in  this  family  unit.  This  is
       clearly a finding by the Judge that no evidence had been  adduced  to
       suggest that the best interests of the children would not be to  live
       within the family unit, which would have been the case  had  evidence
       been adduced to support the claim that the appellant's condition  may
       put the children at risk.
   45. I find the Judge conducted a properly structured  balancing  exercise
       when considering the article 8 aspects of this case and in concluding
       that the respondent has established that the decision to  remove  the
       appellant and the family  is  proportionate.  Disagreement  with  the
       conclusion or desire for a more favourable outcome does not, per  se,
       establish arguable legal error.
   46. I find the Judge, in a detailed determination, clearly considered the
       evidence with the required degree of  anxious  scrutiny  as  set  out
       above. I find the Judge was aware of the appellant's position  as  an
       individual suffering mental health issues. I do not find it made  out
       that the manner in which the Judge assessed the  credibility  of  the
       appellants claim is infected by arguable  legal  error.  I  find  the
       Judge has given adequate reasons for findings made and,  accordingly,
       that the weight to be given to the evidence  was  a  matter  for  the
       Judge. I find no arguable legal  error  has  been  made  out  in  the
       dismissal of the protection aspects of the appeal or in  relation  to
       the human rights aspects both in relation to article 3 and article 8.
       The appellant fails to establish any legal error  in  the  manner  in
       which the Judge reached the conclusion that this is  a  proportionate
       decision.
   47. The determination shall stand.


Decision

   48. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The decision shall stand.


   Anonymity.


   49. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3 May 2018

