
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10436/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |  Decision & Reason Promulgated|
|on 14th March 2018                     |On 10th April 2018            |
|                                          |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                    [G S]
                          (No anonymity direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C McGinley, Gray & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal McGrade dismissing an appeal on protection and human rights
      grounds.


   2. The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He is of Kurdish ethnicity and
      was brought up near Mosul.  According to the appellant, in 2014 his
      family became involved in a land dispute which became violent.  A few
      months later Isis attacked the appellant's village but the appellant
      and his family had already fled.  In December 2016 the appellant left
      Iraq.  He is undocumented.

   3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not accept as credible the
      appellant's evidence of his family's involvement in a violent land
      dispute.  The judge accepted, however, that the appellant had given a
      plausible account of being forced to flee the vicinity of Mosul owing
      to Isis attacks.  His account was consistent with country information.
       The judge also accepted that following the attacks the appellant had
      lost contact with his family.

   4. The judge then addressed the question of the appellant's lack of
      documentation.  The judge accepted that the appellant has no Civil
      Status Identity Document (CSID) and that there would be very
      considerable difficulties for him in obtaining this.  In addition the
      appellant had neither a passport nor a laissez passer.  The judge
      observed that a CSID was required to obtain a passport or laissez
      passer.  It was therefore not feasible to return the appellant to Iraq
      and in consequence of this the judge rejected the appellant's claim to
      humanitarian or Article 3 protection.

   5. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on the basis
      that an arguable error arose in consequence of the Court of Appeal's
      decision in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944, which was handed down
      shortly after the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal gave his decision
      in the present appeal.  The issue arising relates to the position of
      undocumented Iraqis, in respect of whom the Court gave the following
      guidance, summarised at paragraph 9 of the Annex to the judgment:





           "Regardless of the feasibility of P's return, it will be
           necessary to decided whether P has a CSID, or will be able to
           obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  A CSID is
           generally required in order for an Iraqi to access financial
           assistance from the authorities; employment; education; housing;
           and medical treatment.  If P shows there are no family or other
           members likely to be able to provide means of support,  P is in
           general likely to face a real risk of destitution, amounting to
           serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to P by the
           Secretary of State or her agents to assist P's return have been
           exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still have no
           CSID."



   6. Mr McGinley referred me in addition to paragraph 39 of the body of the
      Court's judgment, which reads as follows:
      "The position with a CSID is different.  It is not merely to be
      considered as a document which can be used to achieve entry to Iraq.
      Rather, it may be an essential document for life in Iraq.  It is for
      practical purposes necessary for those without private resources to
      access food and basic services.  Moreover, it is not a document which
      can be automatically acquired after return to Iraq.  In addition, it
      is feasible that an individual could acquire a passport or a laissez-
      passer, without possessing or being able to obtain a CSID.  In such a
      case, an enquiry would be needed to establish whether the individual
      would have other means of support in Iraq, in the absence of which
      they might be at risk of breach of Article 3 rights."



Submissions
   7. At the hearing before me Mr McGinley submitted that the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal erred in not allowing the appeal.  The judge found
      the appellant had lost contact with his family members.  There was no
      one from the contested area of Iraq able to assist the appellant in
      obtaining a CSID.


   8. For the respondent, Mrs O'Brien observed that it seemed to have been
      accepted that the appellant had left his home area because of an
      attack by Isis and he had no family support, in which case the dicta
      of the Court of Appeal at paragraph 39 of AA (Iraq) would apply and he
      would be entitled to Article 3 protection.  Mrs O'Brien further
      observed that only a short interval of time had elapsed between the
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal issuing his decision in this appeal
      and the Court of Appeal handing down its judgment.


Discussion
   9. There was some discussion at the hearing before me of the precise
      basis on which Article 3 applied.  Following the guidance at paragraph
      9 of the Annex to AA (Iraq), the basis of the risk of serious harm to
      the appellant is not indiscriminate violence in terms of Article 15(c)
      of the Qualification Directive but destitution, amounting to inhuman
      or degrading treatment.  On the basis of such a risk the appellant is
      entitled to humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of the
      Immigration Rules, there being no suggestion he is excluded under
      paragraph 339D.


  10. Although in the circumstances the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      should not be blamed for applying what appeared to be the relevant
      country guidance at the time of hearing the appeal on 3rd July 2017,
      only a few days later on 11th July 2017 the Court of Appeal handed
      down its decision stating that the approach taken by the Upper
      Tribunal to the relationship between the feasibility of return and the
      lack of a CSID was incorrect.  Regardless of the feasibility of return
      the issues arising from the lack of a CSID should be addressed.

  11. In the present appeal, in the course of an admirably concise and clear
      decision, the judge erred by failing to address the issues rising from
      the lack of a CSID on the mistaken assumption that it was not
      necessary to do so as return was not feasible.  The judge nevertheless
      made appropriate findings, on the basis of which a decision allowing
      the appeal should be substituted for the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal.


Conclusions
  12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.


  13. The decision is set aside.

  14. The decision is re-made by allowing the appeal.


Anonymity
The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction.  I have
not been asked to continue this direction and I see no reason of substance
for doing so.


Fee Award                     (N.B.  this is not part of the decision)
No fee has been paid or is payable and therefore no fee award is made.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
            4th April 2018

