
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: PA/10616/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 October 2020                  |On 07th October 2020               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     ND

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Mr T Hodson of counsel, instructed  by  Elder  Rahimi
                    Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. The appellant, who is an Iranian national of Sunni  faith  and  Kurdish
    ethnicity, with date of birth given as 18.9.93,  has  appealed  to  the
    Upper Tribunal with permission against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated 18.12.19, dismissing on  all  grounds  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary  of  State,  dated  19.10.19,  to
    refuse his claim for international protection.

 2. The appeal was originally listed to be heard at Field House on 28.4.20,
    a date which had to be vacated because of the  COVID-19  pandemic.  The
    Upper Tribunal subsequently issued directions proposing that the appeal
    should be held remotely, directing the appellant to prepare  and  lodge
    an agreed consolidated bundle.

 3. Pursuant to  directions,  submissions  have  been  received  from  both
    parties and on 24.7.20 the Upper Tribunal issued further directions for
    the error of law issue to be determined in a remote hearing.

 4. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of the oral  and  written  submissions  and  the  grounds  of
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. I  have  in
    particular noted the Rule 24 response of 13.5.20  and  the  appellant's
    further submissions of 4.5.20.

 5. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 21.1.20.
    However, when the application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McWilliam granted permission on 26.2.20, considering  it
    arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  should  have  considered
    whether what the appellant may divulge when  questioned  on  return  to
    Iran as a failed asylum-seeker about attending demonstrations in the UK
    would amount to an additional  risk  factor,  along  with  his  Kurdish
    ethnicity. Permission was granted on  all  grounds  and  the  appellant
    continues to pursue all grounds.

 6. I have addressed the grounds in order as set out below.

 7. It is first argued that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in finding
    at [30] of the decision that neither the appellant's attendance at  one
    or two demonstrations nor at  a  HDK  event  in  London  where  he  was
    photographed with the party  leader  "would  necessarily  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities in Iran and place this appellant  at  risk
    on return." At [31] the judge did not accept that there would be a real
    risk when stopped at the  airport  or  that  he  would  necessarily  be
    questioned. It is pointed out that  the  appellant  does  not  have  to
    demonstrate that he "necessarily"  would  be  questioned  or  that  his
    attendance at demonstrations or the meetings with the HDK leader  would
    "necessarily" have come to the attention of the authorities in Iran. HB
    (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 430 (IAC)  held  that  a  returnee  without
    passport is likely to be questioned on return. Taken together with  his
    Kurdish ethnicity as an additional risk factor, it is argued  that  the
    finding is flawed.

 8. The second ground argues that the judge erred in failing to give weight
    to the documentary evidence of a letter from the KDP and an email  from
    a member of the UK Committee of the party.  However,  at  [29]  of  the
    decision the judge gave cogent reasons for according little  weight  to
    this evidence. Amongst other  reasons,  the  appellant's  evidence  was
    contradictory. In the circumstances, there is no merit in this ground.

 9. The third ground argues that the judge's rejection of  the  appellant's
    account of leafleting in Iran on behalf of the KDP was in error of law.
    The argument that the judge was not entitled to make an  implausibility
    finding without consideration of country context  is  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the finding and fails to disclose any error of law.

10. The fourth ground arguing that the judge  provided  inadequate  reasons
    for other adverse credibility findings is also a mere disagreement with
    the decision. Complaint is made that the judge  referred  to  "numerous
    discrepancies in the appellant's account which undermine  the  veracity
    of the claim," asserting that the judge failed to make clear what those
    discrepancies were. However, a simple reading of the  decision  reveals
    numerous examples cited of such discrepancies,  including  between  the
    screening interview, his asylum interview, and  his  oral  and  written
    statements. No error of law is disclosed in this ground.

11. The fifth  ground  argues  that  the  judge  made  adverse  credibility
    findings based on  erroneous  assumptions  and  speculation  about  the
    appellant's knowledge of his screening interview before the substantive
    asylum interview. However, it was open to the  judge  to  consider  and
    reject the appellant's explanation for the  discrepancies.  Whilst  the
    appellant claimed that he lost his copy of the interview  and  did  not
    have the opportunity to go  through  it,  the  judge  disbelieved  that
    account. No error of law is disclosed.

12.  The  sixth  ground  argues  procedural  unfairness  in   refusing   an
    adjournment request made only at the conclusion of the appellant's  re-
    examination by Mr Hodson, on the basis  of  the  appellant's  reference
    during his evidence to having made a video of him  participating  in  a
    demonstration outside the Iranian  embassy  in  London  in  support  of
    Kurdish rights and that he had sent this to a Kurdish online TV channel
    in Iran where it was shown to a large audience,  potentially  amounting
    to 120,000 individuals. However, as the judge concluded, the  appellant
    had had ample time and opportunity to prepare his case for  the  appeal
    hearing and there was no evidence that the video  he  referred  to  had
    been sent or seen as claimed. The overriding objectives of the Tribunal
    are to deal with cases fairly and justly. The appellant has  the  right
    to a fair hearing. He had fair notice of the appeal hearing  and  every
    opportunity to prepare for it.  It  was  not  suggested  prior  to  the
    hearing that he had not  had  enough  time  to  prepare  or  that,  for
    example, he was awaiting important  evidence.  Even  now,  many  months
    later, there is no evidence that any such video exists or that  it  was
    sent to a television channel or even broadcast on that channel  online.
    Nothing in the lengthy submissions  on  this  ground  demonstrates  any
    procedural unfairness.

13. I am satisfied that the only ground of any merit is the alleged failure
    of the judge to properly consider the risk on return  and  whether  the
    appellant would disclose when questioned that he  had  participated  in
    anti-regime demonstrations in the UK and whether this disclosure  would
    have put him at risk of mistreatment  by  the  Iranian  authorities.  I
    heard Mr Hudson's submissions on this ground and then Mr Tan's response
    before indicating my provisional view that the appeal had to be allowed
    on this first ground, irrespective  of  argument  about  the  secondary
    grounds outlined above. In the circumstances, Mr Hodson agreed that  it
    was unnecessary to pursue the other grounds further.

14. I indicated at the hearing that I proposed to allow the appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    remake the decision in  the  appeal  it  by  allowing  it.  Although  I
    summarised my reasons orally, I reserved my full reasons, which  I  now
    give.

15. In summary, Mr Hudson's submission was  that  when  combined  with  the
    Country Guidance, the positive  findings  of  fact  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal not only made the dismissal of the appeal in error of law  but
    should have resulted in the appeal being allowed. For his part, Mr  Tan
    accepted that the judge was wrong to refer to "necessarily" but  relied
    on the negative findings and in particular that at [31] of the decision
    the judge found the appellant not credible. Mr Tan suggested  that  the
    judge only stated that the appellant "may" have  attended  one  or  two
    demonstrations. However, as I pointed out, the evidential burden was to
    the lower standard of proof.

16. HB (Kurds) Iran held that:

    "(1) SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum  seeker)  Iran CG [2016]
    UKUT 308 (IAC) remains valid country guidance in terms of  the  country
    guidance offered in the headnote. For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  that
    decision is not authority for any proposition in relation to  the  risk
    on return for  refused  Kurdish  asylum-seekers  on  account  of  their
    Kurdish ethnicity alone.

    (2) Kurds in Iran face discrimination. However, the evidence  does  not
    support a contention that such discrimination is, in general, at such a
    level as to amount to persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

    (3)  Since  2016  the  Iranian  authorities  have  become  increasingly
    suspicious of, and sensitive to, Kurdish political activity.  Those  of
    Kurdish ethnicity are thus regarded with even  greater  suspicion  than
    hitherto and are  reasonably  likely  to  be  subjected  to  heightened
    scrutiny on return to Iran.

    (4) However, the mere fact of being a  returnee  of  Kurdish  ethnicity
    with or without a valid passport, and even  if  combined  with  illegal
    exit, does not create a risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

    (5) Kurdish  ethnicity is nevertheless  a  risk  factor  which,  when
    combined with other factors, may create a real risk of  persecution  or
    Article 3 ill-treatment. Being a risk  factor  it  means  that  Kurdish
    ethnicity is a factor of particular significance when  assessing  risk.
    Those "other factors" will include the matters identified in paragraphs
    (6)-(9) below.

    (6) A period  of  residence  in  the  KRI  by  a  Kurdish  returnee  is
    reasonably  likely  to  result  in  additional   questioning   by   the
    authorities on return. However, this is a factor that  will  be  highly
    fact-specific and the degree  of  interest  that  such  residence  will
    excite will depend, non-exhaustively, on matters such as the length  of
    residence in the KRI, what the person concerned was doing there and why
    they left.

    (7) Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are at  risk
    of arrest, prolonged  detention  and  physical  abuse  by  the  Iranian
    authorities. Even Kurds expressing peaceful dissent or  who  speak  out
    about Kurdish rights also face a real risk of persecution or Article  3
    ill-treatment.

    (8) Activities that can be perceived to be  political  by  the  Iranian
    authorities include social welfare and charitable activities on  behalf
    of Kurds. Indeed, involvement with any organised activity on behalf  of
    or in support of Kurds can be perceived as political and thus involve a
    risk  of  adverse  attention  by  the  Iranian  authorities  with   the
    consequent risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

    (9) Even 'low-level' political activity, or activity that is  perceived
    to be political, such as, by way of example only,  mere  possession  of
    leaflets  espousing  or  supporting  Kurdish  rights,  if   discovered,
    involves the same risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.  Each
    case however, depends on its own facts and an assessment will  need  to
    be made as to the nature of the material possessed and how it would  be
    likely to be viewed by the Iranian authorities in the  context  of  the
    foregoing guidance.

    (10) The Iranian authorities demonstrate what could be described  as  a
    'hair-trigger' approach to  those  suspected  of  or  perceived  to  be
    involved in Kurdish political activities or support for Kurdish rights.
    By 'hair-trigger' it means that the threshold for suspicion is low  and
    the reaction of the authorities is reasonably likely to be extreme."

17. At [97] of that decision,  the  Upper  Tribunal  noted,  "What  is  not
    disputed is that  a  returnee  without  a  passport is  likely  to  be
    questioned on return."

18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found at [30] that there was no  reliable
    evidence from the KDP  in  the  UK  that  the  appellant  had  attended
    demonstrations in the UK, "though I  am  willing  to  accept  that  the
    appellant matt have attended one or two demonstrations." The judge then
    asked the wrong question, whether the appellant's attendance  at  these
    demonstrations would "necessarily" have come to the  attention  of  the
    Iranian authorities so as to put him at risk  on  return.  The  correct
    question is whether  this  sur  place  activity  might,  to  the  lower
    standard of proof, come to the attention of the authorities. A  similar
    error arises in the same paragraph as to the HDK  event  at  which  the
    judge accepted the appellant had attended and was photographed with the
    party leader. In relation to the HDK event, the judge was not satisfied
    that these photographs would "necessarily" have come to  the  attention
    of the Iranian authorities through the appellant's Instagram account.

19. At [31] of the decision the judge considered HB (Kurds) Iran, accepting
    that Kurdish ethnicity was a risk  factor  in  combination  with  other
    factors, and that in certain circumstances  even  low  level  political
    activity might involve the risk  of  persecution,  if  discovered.  The
    judge acknowledged that each case depended on  its  own  facts  and  an
    assessment should be made as to how the authorities would be likely  to
    view sur place activities, and that the authorities  adopted  a  'hair-
    trigger' approach. The judge then stated, "However, I do not find  this
    appellant's account to be credible and do not accept that he  would  be
    at real risk on return. I do not accept there would be a real risk when
    stopped at the airport on  return  or  that  he  would  necessarily  be
    questioned."

20. As stated above, Mr Tan relied on  this  adverse  credibility  finding.
    However, it is not clear to me what the judge  intended  to  convey  by
    this sentence, given that the judge accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    participated in one or two demonstrations and at a HDK event  where  he
    was photographed with the party leader. I can  see  from  the  decision
    that the judge did not accept that this  activity  would  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities from the  appellant's  Instagram  account,
    for the reasons set out at [30] of the decision, including that it  was
    held in a name different to that of the appellant. However,  the  judge
    failed to  consider  what  the  appellant  may  disclose  himself  when
    questioned. In any event, once again, the judge  has  asked  the  wrong
    question.  It  is  not  whether  the  appellant  would  necessarily  be
    questioned; the case law indicates that he is likely to be  questioned.
    As stated, the real issue is what may be disclosed as a result of  such
    questioning.

21. Given that the appellant would be under suspicion on return as a failed
    asylum-seeker, and particularly because of his  Kurdish  ethnicity,  it
    can be assumed that the Iranian authorities will question him and, I am
    satisfied, will likely ask him about any  anti-Iranian  or  pro-Kurdish
    political activity in the UK and require him  to  disclose  any  social
    media account details. Even if there are no social  media  accounts  to
    disclose, the judge not being satisfied that they would  have  come  to
    the attention of the Iranian authorities, the judge did accept and made
    findings of fact that the  appellant  attended  "one  or  two"  pro-KDP
    demonstrations and a HDK event where he was photographed with the party
    leader. As is also clear from Country Guidance, the appellant cannot be
    expected to lie when questioned about this political activity.  On  the
    basis of  the  Country  Guidance  of  HB  (Kurds),  the  threshold  for
    suspicion is low, the reaction reasonably likely  to  be  extreme  and,
    "... involvement with any organised activity on behalf of or in support
    of Kurds can be perceived as political  and  thus  involve  a  risk  of
    adverse attention by the Iranian authorities with the  consequent  risk
    of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment."

22. It seems to me to be inevitable that on return the  appellant  will  be
    questioned and it must be taken as likely that he will disclose the sur
    place activity accepted by the judge to have  taken  place.  Given  his
    Kurdish ethnicity and this, albeit low-level,  political  activity,  HB
    (Kurds) confirms that the Iranian authorities are likely to take action
    against the appellant which will at the very least infringe  article  3
    ECHR. Even if not likely, the risk is more than sufficient to cross the
    threshold of the lower standard of proof.

23. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out  above,  I  find  such
    material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that it must be set aside and remade. On  the  findings  of  fact,  the
    appellant has demonstrated to the lower standard of proof that he  will
    be at risk of  persecution  or  treatment  infringing  Article  3  ECHR
    arising out his accepted  sur  place  low-level  anti-regime  and  pro-
    Kurdish activities.

Decision

    The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it on  asylum  grounds,
    alternatively humanitarian protection grounds, and alternatively  human
    rights grounds.

    I make no order for costs.

Signed: DMW Pickup
Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
Date:    2 October 2020


Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."

Signed: DMW Pickup
Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
Date:    2 October 2020
