
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10410/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 January 2019                   |On 09 April 2019                     |


                                   Before

                            THE HON LORD BECKETT
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                               H--- Q--- B---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  We  make
    this order  because  this  is  a  protection  case  and  those  seeking
    international protection are, generally, entitled to anonymity.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal by  a
    citizen of Vietnam born in 1981 allowing  in  part  an  appeal  by  the
    appellant against the decision of the Secretary of State  refusing  him
    international  protection  and/or  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 3. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  because  he  was
    satisfied that removing the appellant to Vietnam would subject him to a
    real risk of ill-treatment so serious that it would be contrary to  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under Article 3 of the European Convention
    on Human Rights to expose him to that risk.  However the Judge  decided
    that the appellant had not shown that he was  a  refugee  and  had  not
    shown he was entitled to humanitarian protection.

 4. In extreme summary form for the purposes  of  introduction  it  is  the
    appellant's case that he is a refugee but even if he is not  a  refugee
    he should, on the judge's findings, have been found to be  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection.

 5. We begin by considering the appellant's immigration history.

 6. He says he entered the United Kingdom in October 2017.  Whether or  not
    that is right, on 27 October 2017 he  was  encountered  by  police  and
    arrested on suspicion of cultivating  cannabis.   He  said  during  his
    police interview that he was a victim of trafficking.   On  26  January
    2018 he was convicted  before  the  Crown  Court  at  Bolton  of  being
    involved in the production of class B controlled drugs,  in  this  case
    cannabis, and an offence of abstracting electricity unlawfully.   On  8
    February  2018  he  was  sentenced  to  a  total  of   twelve   months'
    imprisonment made up of one term of twelve months and a concurrent term
    of three months.

 7. As a consequence  of  the  conviction  the  respondent  decided  on  15
    February 2018 to make him the subject of a deportation order.

 8. On 3 March 2018 the appellant claimed asylum.   On  15  August  2018  a
    deportation order was made (the decision on 15 February was to make the
    deportation order) and the respondent decided that  the  appellant  was
    not entitled to protection or leave to remain on any other basis.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the appellant's case had  been
    referred to the Competent Authority for a decision on his claim to have
    been the victim or trafficking and on 3  November  2017  the  Competent
    Authority informed him that there were reasonable  grounds  to  believe
    that he was a potential victim of human trafficking.  However following
    the required further consideration he was told on 17 January 2018  that
    it was concluded that he was not a victim of  human  trafficking.  That
    decision, which is made on a higher standard or proof than  applies  in
    asylum cases, does not bind the Tribunal  when  it  applies  the  "real
    risk" standard to the evidence before it. The First-tier Tribunal Judge
    followed the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge  Finch  in  ES  (s82  NIA
    2002; negative NRM) Albania [2018] UKUT 00335 (IAC) which explains  the
    correct approach in protection claims to a decision  of  the  Competent
    Authority which we have outlined above.

10. Here it was this  appellant's  case  that  he  started  a  genuine  but
    unsuccessful business repairing motorcycles.  His  efforts  to  finance
    his business led him into debt with legitimate banks and then with loan
    sharks who used their control over him to make him their slave  and  he
    entered the United Kingdom to do their bidding.

11. The judge considered evidence of  the  activities  of  Vietnamese  loan
    sharks and noted their links to illicit immigration agencies.   In  the
    event of the appellant's return he would still have debts.

12. The judge also considered evidence that the Vietnamese authorities were
    willing but generally unable to restrain the activities of traffickers.
     There was also medical evidence that the appellant had been injured.

13. The judge  made  clear  findings.  In  2014  the  appellant  started  a
    motorcycle business and borrowed money.  He ended  up  owing  money  to
    loan sharks and was assaulted.  He found someone who would arrange  for
    him to go Russia where he was handed over to other operators  and  made
    to do unpaid work.  He was held captive and coerced  to  work  and  was
    taken to the United Kingdom and placed in charge of a cannabis  factory
    where he was caught.  The judge found expressly "that  he  is  at  real
    risk of serious harm and being re-trafficked because of his history".

14. Nevertheless, the judge decided that the appellant was  not  a  refugee
    because he was not a member of a particular social group.  It  was  the
    judge's finding that:

         "I do not consider that he has shown that  he  is  a  member  of  a
         'particular   social   group'   in   that   there   are   immutable
         characteristics that mean he would be considered  by  others  as  a
         member of any such group.  This will not always be  the  case  with
         those who have been trafficked - for instance,  those  forced  into
         sex work may be more readily identifiable than others."

15. However the judge had already indicated that there were  links  between
    loan sharks and people smugglers.

16. There was no meritorious claim under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The points
    relied on were subsumed in the Article 3 finding.

17. We deal first with Ms Loughran's subsidiary point that the judge should
    not have concluded that the appellant was not entitled to  humanitarian
    protection.  The difficulty  with  the  judge's  approach  is  that  at
    paragraph 74 he said:

         "For similar reasons to those I have just given,  I  conclude  that
         the  appellant  is  not  entitled  to  a  grant   of   humanitarian
         protection."

18. We do not follow these reasons at all.  In the preceding paragraphs the
    judge had been considering the risks the appellant would  face  in  the
    event of return and concluded that there was a risk of  his  being  re-
    trafficked and a risk of serious harm.  It makes no  sense  to  suggest
    that these are reasons to  say  he  is  not  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection.  Ms Loughran drew attention to Home Office guidance  saying
    that the Secretary of State will normally give humanitarian  protection
    "if there is a real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3  where  the
    mistreatment does not amount to persecution for  a  Refugee  Convention
    reason".

19. In other words the respondent recognised that  humanitarian  protection
    would almost invariably follow a finding of Article 3  risk  where  the
    person was not a refugee.  Mr Avery considered the point  and  did  not
    feel able to make any submissions.

20. However it was Ms Loughran's main contention that the judge  was  wrong
    to say the appellant was not a member of  a  particular  social  group.
    The precise characteristics of a "particular social group" are  subtle,
    not to say elusive, but two broad strands emerge.  At the minimum there
    has to be an "immutable characteristic".  Not everyone who is a  member
    of a social group  by  reason  of  an  immutable  characteristic  risks
    persecution but those that do and can prove it are refugees.  There  is
    an additional qualification in the minds of some that  people  must  be
    recognised by society as a whole as part of such a group.   We  do  not
    regard this as a second limb.  Rather it recognises that  in  cases  of
    protection a person needs protection only because of how that person is
    perceived.  Very often a person is perceived as belonging to one of the
    qualifying groups correctly but if a person was perceived  incorrectly,
    for example as following a particular religion, and to face persecution
    as a result then that person would be entitled to protection.

21. Ms Loughran drew  our  attention  to  the  EU  Qualification  Directive
    particularly Article 10(1)(d) which states:

         "A group should be considered to form  a  particular  social  group
         where  in  particular  members  of  that  group  share  an   innate
         characteristic or common background  that  cannot  be  changed,  or
         share a characteristic or belief that is so  fundamental  to  their
         identity or conscience that  a  person  should  not  be  forced  to
         renounce it; and that group has a distinct identity in the relevant
         country,  because  it  is  perceived  as  being  different  by  the
         surrounding society."

22. The immutable  characteristic  here  is  the  history  of  having  been
    trafficked.  The perception of being different arises in the  minds  of
    those who know about the history, such as people-smugglers surveying  a
    list of debtors as they look for people  to  exploit.   Refugee  status
    does not depend on the characteristic being "readily  identifiable"  as
    the judge seemed to suggest but of there being  such  a  characteristic
    and a person facing a real risk of persecution as a result.

23. Mr Avery argued that there was no discernible social group here.   With
    respect we disagree.  Ms Loughran said  that  "victim  of  trafficking"
    would suffice and we agree.   We  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred.

24. On the findings the judge had made, which have not been challenged,  he
    should have recognised that the appellant's inalienable  characteristic
    (history of being trafficked) and risk of being further trafficked show
    that he was a member of a group with a shared characteristic  that  was
    perceived by society to be different.

25. We find the First-tier Tribunal erred.  We set aside  the  decision  to
    the extent that it decided the appellant was not a  refugee.   We  find
    the appellant is a refugee of being a member  of  a  particular  social
    group.  If we are wrong, he was entitled to humanitarian protection.

    Decision

26. The First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law.  The  appeal  is  allowed.  The
    appellant is a refugee.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 4 April 2019                   |



