
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10753/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision Promulgated Before
On 31st May 2019  On 01st July 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                Miss T T D H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Wilford, Counsel, instructed by Qualified Legal
                    Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a national of Vietnam, born in August 1992. She came
       to the United Kingdom in May 2017 on her own passport, endorsed  with
       a valid visit visa. Her visa expired in November  2017.  She  made  a
       claim for protection in February 2018 when she was 6 months pregnant.
        She gave birth to [J], on 4 May 2018. The father  of  the  child  is
       also a Vietnamese national.

    2. She claimed that she would face a risk  of  persecution  if  returned
       because of her religion and her political opinions. In her  statement
       she said she found it increasingly difficult to practice as  a  Roman
       Catholic. She said she went with her parents every Sunday  to  church
       but she had been advised from an early age to be discreet  about  the
       practice of her religious beliefs.

    3. She said that her father had been detained  by  the  authorities  for
       distributing leaflets protesting against confiscation of church land.
       She said then on  8  March  2016  she  had  been  trying  to  protect
       religious images in her church and was  detained  for  a  day.  Other
       members of her family had  experienced  difficulties,  including  her
       mother who was arrested in June  2017  trying  to  protect  religious
       objects. Her  father  was  also  arrested  for  giving  out  leaflets
       protesting about land being taken from the church.

    4. Since arriving in the United Kingdom she has been attending  a  local
       Catholic church and provided evidence to support this.

    5. In 29 April 2016 she  took  part  in  a  protest  against  a  Chinese
       company, Formosa, dumping waste in the  sea.  She  was  arrested  and
       detained  for  a  day.  She  was  assaulted  in  December  2016   for
       distributing leaflets

    6. She said that in January 2017 she moved to  Saigon  and  then  became
       involved with the Viet Tan group. She also was involved with a  group
       called Tuoi Tre. after moving to Saigon.

    7. The respondent refused  his  claim  on  24  August  2018.It  was  not
       considered to be credible  and  her  claimed  difficulties  with  the
       authorities were rejected.  The  respondent  concluded  she  had  not
       demonstrated she was a Roman Catholic. Similarly, she was  questioned
       about the Viet Tan party and her account  was  considered  vague  and
       lacking in detail. The respondent also did not accept her involvement
       with Tuoi Tre. In considering her  credibility  reliance  was  placed
       upon section 8 of the 2004 Act in light of  her  delay  in  claiming.
       Overall, her account was considered  to  be  vague,  implausible  and
       inconsistent.

The First tier Tribunal

    8.  The  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fowell  at
       Birmingham on 9 November 2018. The appellant had produced her baptism
       certificate from Vietnam, dated 20 September 2018. It stated that  on
       4 October 1992 she was baptised by Bishop Phanxico Xave leVan Hong.

    9. In a  decision  promulgated  on  13  November  2018  her  appeal  was
       dismissed. The judge did not find it established that she had come to
       the adverse attention  of  the  authorities  because  of  either  her
       religion or politics. No argument was  advanced  on  article  8.  The
       judge did not find the appellant credible.

   10. Reference was made to the delay in claiming protection. She  had  not
       provided information from family to support  her  claims.  The  judge
       referred to a lack of evidence  about  the  appellant's  Catholicism.
       There was a letter from her Parish Priest in the United  Kingdom  but
       it  was  brief  and  did  not  state  how  the  priest  assessed  her
       Catholicism. Beyond Facebook posts she had provided  no  evidence  of
       active involvement in politics  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  judge
       commented on her ability to leave Vietnam on her own passport without
       difficulty.

The Upper Tribunal

   11. Permission to appeal granted on the basis it was arguable  the  judge
       imposed too high a standard of proof  in  assessing  the  appellant's
       claim to be a Catholic. Permission was also granted on the basis  the
       judge  arguably  failed  to  apply  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  claim
       generally.

   12. At hearing, the appellant's representative accepted that Catholics in
       Vietnam per se did not face persecution. However he  made  the  point
       that any negative findings in this regard impact upon the appellant's
       general  credibility.  Furthermore,  being  a  Roman  Catholic  would
       enhance the  suspicion  with  which  the  appellant  was  viewed.  He
       submitted that the judge in determining this issue  had  applied  too
       high a standard of proof.  The  appellant  had  provided  photographs
       showing her in a church. There was also  a  letter  from  the  Parish
       Priest at the church she attended. I was also referred to her answers
       in the course of her asylum interview about her religious beliefs.

   13. Regarding her political activities I was referred paragraph 23 of the
       decision where the judge comments on her ability to leave Vietnam  on
       her own passport. Whilst this was relevant to her  claimed  political
       activity in Vietnam it did not take into account  her  activities  in
       the United Kingdom. Mr Wilford argued the judge failed to  take  into
       account the risk from her Facebook activities.

   14. Mr Tan referred me to paragraph 25 where the judge stated he did  not
       find the appellant's  account  to  be  credible.  He  said  that  the
       appellant's religious activities were only part  of  the  credibility
       issues arising. For example, at paragraph 18 the  judge  referred  to
       her significant delay in claiming protection. Paragraph  19  comments
       upon the lack of evidence about her  family's  claimed  difficulties.
       Regarding her claimed Catholicism, Mr Tan referred me to  the  letter
       at D 57 of  the  respondent's  bundle  from  the  appellant's  Parish
       Priest. He  points  out  it  actually  said  very  little  about  the
       appellant.  Similarly,  the  baptismal   certificate   from   Vietnam
       contained very little information to assist the judge in relation  to
       her claim.

   15. Regarding her political activities and  the  Facebook  evidence,  the
       judge refers to this at paragraph 21 and paragraph 23. There was also
       very limited evidence of political activity since being in the United
       Kingdom and the judge was entitled to find he had  not  made  out  of
       claim of being an activist.

Conclusions.

   16. The judge accurately  sets  out  the  appellant's  claim.  The  judge
       itemises the evidence submitted in support  of  that  claim.  At  its
       height the appellant did not claim any high-level activity either  in
       her church or in relation to politics  either  in  Vietnam  or  since
       arriving. The genuineness of her fear was an issue.

   17. The judge started by highlighting the delay of 9  months  before  she
       made her claim. At that stage her Visa had  expired  several  months.
       The appellant had not been able to justify this delay.

   18. There was a lack of evidence to show the appellant or her family have
       experienced difficulties in Vietnam. There were  Facebook  posts  but
       the judge did not see anything which would place the  appellant  real
       risk.

   19. The judge assessed  the  evidence  about  the  appellant's  religious
       activity in the United Kingdom. The judge accepted she  had  been  to
       church here and knows the priest. However, the  judge  observed  this
       did not mean her claim was genuine. The judge made  the  valid  point
       that she was able to leave on her own passport without difficulty.

   20. There was no challenge to  how  the  judge  dealt  with  the  medical
       evidence.

   21. Ultimately, the judge did not  find  the  appellant  to  be  credible
       either in relation to her claimed religious difficulties or political
       activities. The judge  acknowledged  she  may  have  protested  about
       environmental issues but the fact she was able to leave suggested she
       had not come to the adverse attention of the authorities.

   22. The application for permission deals in detail  with  how  the  judge
       dealt with her claimed  religious  activities.  Mr  Wilford  has  not
       sought to make the case that the appellant is at  risk  of  religious
       persecution but the  findings  related  to  the  appellant's  overall
       credibility. He submitted that in considering the evidence the  judge
       expected to high a standard of proof. Much of the  application  deals
       with her claim to be a Catholic. It is fair to say that many  of  her
       answers  about  Catholic  beliefs  were  consistent   with   external
       information. She had provided her baptismal certificate as well as  a
       letter from the Parish Priest  here.  The  judge's  comments  on  the
       letter from the Parish Priest  and  her  attendance  at  church  were
       valid.

   23.  The  judge  evaluated  the  evidence  about  her   claim   political
       activities. The decision does not indicate that the  two  aspects  of
       the claim were interdependent. I accept that the findings in relation
       to one impacted upon the  view  of  the  appellant's  credibility  in
       relation to  the  other.  However  the  principal  claim  related  to
       political activities I can find no fault was how the judge dealt with
       the evidence. Ultimately I do not find any error of law established.

Decision.

No material error of law has  been  shown.  Consequently,  the  decision  of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Fowell dismissing her appeal shall stand.


Signed
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.   Date: 30 June 2019

