

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/10523/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 September 2018                  |On 15 October 2018                   |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     C P
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Rai, of Counsel, instructed by Iqbal Law
                    Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of  State  against  the
          determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Flynn  allowing  the
          deportation appeal of CP by way of a determination promulgated  on
          16 July 2018. For convenience, I refer to the parties as they were
          before the First-tier Tribunal.


       2. The appellant is a national of St Lucia born in October 1986.  She
          entered the UK in October 2011 and was given leave to enter  as  a
          student until 1 January 2014.  An  out  of  time  application  for
          further leave was refused but the  appellant  remained  unlawfully
          and her  daughter  was  born  in  2014.  Shortly  thereafter,  the
          appellant was convicted of conspiring to import Class A drugs  and
          was sentenced to five years in prison. Her partner, and father  of
          her child, received a nine year sentence. On 31  March  2016,  she
          claimed asylum. This was  refused  along  with  her  human  rights
          claim.


       3. The appellant maintained that she had provided  information  about
          individuals who had been involved in  the  smuggling  process  and
          this had come to their attention. Threats had  been  made  to  her
          family in St Lucia and she was  afraid  for  her  safety  and  the
          safety of her young daughter if she were returned there.


       4. Permission to appeal against the determination of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal was granted by Judge Landes on  14  August  2018  on  the
          basis that the judge arguably  gave  inadequate  reasons  for  the
          finding that there would not be a sufficiency of protection,  that
          she applied the wrong threshold with respect to s.117 and confused
          the s.72 certificate with s.94. The matter then came before me  on
          24 September 2018.


       5. The Hearing


       6. I heard submissions from the parties. The  appellant  was  present
          with her daughter. A full note of the submissions is set out in my
          Record of Proceedings.


       7. Mr Lindsay submitted that  the  judge  had  a  statutory  duty  to
          consider s.72. The respondent had not waived reliance on that. The
          judge had also erred with respect to her finding that there was an
          insufficiency of  protection.  He  maintained  the  findings  were
          brief,  unreasoned  and  inadequate.  There  was  no  reliance  on
          evidence to support the conclusions reached. The  evidence  showed
          that legislation was in place to deal with crime  and  that  there
          was therefore provision  and  assistance  for  victims  of  crime.
          Following Horvath,  it  was  enough  to  show  that  there  was  a
          functioning police force. There was no unwillingness on  the  part
          of the authorities to provide protection and it was an  error  for
          the judge to find that the St Lucian authorities would not do  so.
          The judge had further erred in her consideration  of  the  "unduly
          harsh" test. The appellant had received a five year  sentence  and
          so a  different,  higher  test  applied  and  this  had  not  been
          considered.


       8. Mr Rai responded. He stated that consideration  of  s.72  was  not
          critical to the determination because the judge had found that the
          appellant was not a danger to the community. Whilst the judge  had
          directed herself to s.72 at paragraph 9 of the determination,  she
          then went on to consider s.94. although there had  been  confusion
          on the part of the judge, this was not  material.  The  judge  had
          looked at the OASys report, had considered that there  was  a  low
          risk of re-offending, disagreed with the respondent's  submissions
          and then proceeded to consider article 8. whilst  not,  therefore,
          specifically considering the s.72 certificate, she had  done  what
          was required.


       9. Mr Rai also accepted that the judge had been wrong in applying the
          unduly harsh test instead of considering whether there  were  very
          compelling circumstances. However in assessing  all  the  evidence
          and the factors put forward at paragraphs 57-79, she had addressed
          all the s.117C(5) factors. So, although she had  erred,  this  was
          not a material error. The appellant was the primary carer  of  her
          daughter who was a British citizen. The appellant was found not to
          be a danger to the community. The judge  then  considered  whether
          there would be  a  sufficiency  of  protection  available  to  the
          appellant in St Lucia. She considered the respondent's evidence as
          recited in the decision letter, then  looked  at  the  appellant's
          evidence and considered the  appellant's  fears.  Her  conclusions
          adequately dealt with the issue and reasons  were  given  for  her
          conclusions.


      10. Mr Lindsay replied. He submitted that it was not at all clear that
          the judge had s. 117C and the correct test in mind. She  may  have
          considered some of the required matters but that did not mean  the
          error was not material. A consideration of the correct test  might
          have led to a different outcome. On the issue of a sufficiency  of
          protection, the judge relied on the US State Department report  to
          support her conclusion but disregarded the fact that the  security
          forces and  the  police  were  functioning  and  able  to  provide
          protection even if there was corruption. No good reason was  given
          for rejecting the respondent's submissions.


      11. That completed submissions. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I
          reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.


      12. Discussion and Conclusions


      13. I have considered all the evidence before me and have  had  regard
          to the submissions made.


      14. I  note,  first  of  all,  that  there  is  no  challenge  to  the
          appellant's claim to be fearful  of  criminal  associates  of  her
          former partner in St Lucia who had threatened her family and  whom
          she feared would seek to harm, her and her daughter (at paragraphs
          49-50). Indeed, the respondent did  not  seek  to  challenge  that
          claim even in the decision letter.


      15. It is agreed that the judge made errors, both in  her  failure  to
          consider s.117C(6) and instead apply 117C(5) and in confusing s.72
          with s.94. The issue as far as those two errors  is  concerned  is
          whether they are material. Additionally, there is the criticism of
          the judge's conclusion on the  sufficiency  of  protection  in  St
          Lucia.
      16. I  deal first with the s.72  certificate.  Although  it  was  made
          plain to the judge in the decision letter (see paragraph 9 of  the
          determination)  and  in  the  Home  Office  Presenting   Officer's
          submissions (at 37) and by Mr Rai (at 15), that the appellant  had
          to rebut the s.72 certificate and would be seeking to do  so,  the
          judge appears to disregard this and instead  concentrates  on  the
          s.94 certificate, noting that the decision to  certify  the  claim
          had been withdrawn (at 42 and 43). She makes  disparaging  remarks
          about the respondent's carelessness in believing there  was  still
          in a certificate, failing entirely to appreciate that she was  the
          one who was careless in confusing two entirely different processes
          of certification.


      17. Section 72 (2) provides: "A person shall be presumed to have  been
          convicted by a final judgment of a particularly serious crime  and
          to constitute a danger to the community of the United  Kingdom  if
          he is-

            (a) convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

            (b) sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two
years".

            Section 72(10) provides: "The Tribunal or Commission hearing
the appeal-

            (a) must begin substantive deliberation on the appeal by
considering the                   certificate, and

            (b) if in agreement that presumptions under subsection (2), (3)
or (4) apply                 (having given the appellant an opportunity for
rebuttal) must dismiss the                   appeal in so far as it relies
on the ground specified in subsection (9)(a)" (i.e.                 asylum
grounds .



      18. The duty of the Tribunal is clearly set out.  The  starting  point
          of the assessment is the consideration of  the  certificate  which
          involves the presumption that a person with a sentence of over two
          years (the appellant received a five year sentence) has  committed
          a particularly serious crime  and  constitutes  a  danger  to  the
          community. It is only if these presumptions can be rebutted by the
          appellant that an asylum claim can be considered under the Refugee
          Convention. It is plain however from the judge's findings at 41-55
          which culminated in the allowing of the appeal on asylum  grounds,
          that the judge failed entirely to have regard  to  this  statutory
          duty upon her. Nowhere in the assessment of the  asylum  claim  is
          there any recognition of the appellant's criminal conviction,  its
          seriousness or the  presumption  that  she  is  a  danger  to  the
          community. There is no engagement with the arguments made  on  the
          s.72 certificate and no finding that it had been rebutted  by  the
          appellant. Having failed to even conduct  an  assessment  of  that
          issue, the judge had no authority  to  proceed  to  consider,  let
          alone allow, the appeal on asylum grounds.


      19. Mr Rai argued that the error was not material  because  the  judge
          had found that the appellant did not constitute a  danger  to  the
          community. That finding comes rather late in the determination  at
          paragraph 74 and as part of the article 8 assessment. It is put in
          this way: "I do not agree with Ms Burrell's submission that  there
          is any evidence to indicate that the appellant continues to pose a
          risk, although I accept that  this  possibility  cannot  be  ruled
          out". I cannot accept that this rather ambiguous  finding  can  be
          used to argue that the s.72 error is not a material one.  It was a
          finding made in another context, it is equivocal and it  does  not
          take account of the correct starting point. It may be that had the
          judge applied the correct approach and considered the risk in  the
          context of the particularly serious crime committed and  the  need
          for the appellant to rebut the two  presumptions  identified,  she
          may  have  reached  a  different  conclusion.  Whilst   Mr   Rai's
          submission is attractive on  the  face  of  it,  it  cannot  stand
          particularly in light of the other errors made, which I  now  turn
          to.


      20. The next error made by the judge is in relation to  the  issue  of
          sufficiency of protection. The appeal was  allowed  on  the  basis
          that  the  appellant  would  not  receive  protection   from   the
          authorities and would be unable to relocate with a young child. No
          reasons are given for the latter  finding.  With  respect  to  the
          availability of protection, Mr Lindsay is right to point out  that
          the Horvath principles have not been  followed.   It  is  accepted
          that there is a functioning police force and legal system and that
          mechanisms are in place to assist even if they are not  effective.
          A fuller assessment and better reasoning are required.


      21. Finally there is the error with respect to the judge's  article  8
          assessment. In undertaking a proportionality assessment, the judge
          applied  s.117C(5).  That  provides  for  an  exception   to   the
          deportation of a foreign criminal not  sentenced  to  imprisonment
          for four years or more where there is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
          relationship with a qualifying child and the effect of deportation
          on the child would be unduly harsh.  The  judge's  assessment  was
          based on this "unduly harsh" test and 117C(5) was considered  (see
          75, 76 and 79) whereas 117C(6) applied. That  requires  a  foreign
          criminal sentenced to imprisonment of at least four years to  show
          "very compelling circumstances over and above" the exceptions  set
          out. The appellant received a five year prison sentence and so the
          latter provision applies. Mr Rai sought  to  argue  that  all  the
          circumstances had been considered and  the  relevant  factors  had
          been taken into account  but  the  fact  remains  that  the  judge
          reached her findings on the wrong  legal  matrix  and  applying  a
          lesser test. I cannot say whether she would have reached the  same
          conclusion  had  the  more  stringent  test  been   applied.   The
          respondent  is  right  to  criticize  the  judge  for  failing  to
          correctly apply the law and failing to  appreciate  that  more  is
          needed in this case than the factors identified.


      22. For all these reasons, I conclude that the judge materially  erred
          in law. The decision is set aside and shall be re-made by  another
          judge of the First-tier Tribunal at a date to be  arranged.  I  do
          not preserve any findings as they were made in the  wrong  context
          and  are,  therefore,  unsustainable.  The  respondent's  implicit
          acceptance of the appellant's claim as set  out  at  paragraph  14
          above is not disturbed by the setting aside of this determination.




      23. Decision


      24. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law which are  material  to
          the outcome of the appeal. The decision is set aside and shall  be
          re-made by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal.


      25. Anonymity


      26. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.


    Signed










    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 3 October 2018


