
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/10631/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 20 April 2017                       |      On 3 May 2017                  |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     BBY
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Hodson, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on 10 September 1990, who
      entered the UK clandestinely on 7 April 2016 and applied for asylum on
      the basis that he would be at risk on return to Iran because he
      converted from Islam to Christianity. The respondent did not accept
      that the appellant had genuinely converted to Christianity and
      dismissed the application. The appellant appealed to the First-tier
      Tribunal ("FtT") where his appeal was heard by FtT Judge Jerromes. In
      a decision promulgated on 25 November 2016, the judge dismissed the
      appeal. The appellant is now appealing against that decision.


 The Appellant's Claim


   2. The appellant's claim, in summary, is that he was born into a strict
      Muslim family but from the age of seven felt negatively towards the
      religion. He claims that in August/September 2015 he told a friend,
      whom he visited on a farm, his misgivings about Islam and that the
      friend placed his hand on his head and said some words he did not
      understand. Five or six days later he felt calm. He returned to see
      the friend on another occasion and was taken to a church service at a
      farm. He claims to have attended the church service a total of three
      times and to have converted on the third visit.


   3. He claims that he told a friend about his conversion and gave him a
      bible. Shortly thereafter the police went to his home (he thinks the
      friend informed on him).  Fearing for his life, the appellant then
      left Iran, travelling to the UK on buses and lorries.


   4. Since coming to the UK, the appellant claims to have used his new
      found freedom to study the bible, attend church and share his
      Christianity with others. He attends Hampstead Garden Suburb Free
      Church and has attended a bible study class at Tron Church, Glasgow.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   5. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and Reverend Dr
      Tutton, the minister of Hampstead Garden Suburb Free Church. Reverend
      Tutton also submitted two letters in support of the appellant's claim.
      The evidence of Reverend Tutton was that the appellant has been
      attending services regularly, has made enquiries about being baptised
      and has introduced others to the church. The view Reverend Tutton was
      that the appellant is a sincere Christian.


   6. Despite the evidence of Reverend Tutton, the judge did not accept the
      appellant had genuinely converted (or intends to convert) to
      Christianity.


   7. The reasons the judge gave for rejecting the appellant's  account of
      his conversion in Iran are that:


   a. There was no corroborative evidence of the conversion, despite the
      appellant having spoken to his uncle in Iran who he claims has made
      enquiries with the authorities.
   b. The appellant was inconsistent as to the location of the farm based
      church he claims to have attended. At one point he claimed it was the
      same location as where his friend put a hand on his head, but
      elsewhere he refers to it being a different farm.
   c. There are inconsistencies about the timing of the conversion.
   d. The appellant claimed to have been given two bibles when there was no
      reason for this.
   e. It was not plausible he would give a bible to his friend, who he knew
      was Muslim.
   f. The appellant demonstrated little knowledge of Christianity at the
      screening interview.


   8. The judge was also not persuaded by the appellant's claim to be
      practicing as a Christian in the UK. The judge accepted that the
      appellant attended Reverend Tutton's church but did not give weight to
      Reverend Tutton's evidence. The judge noted that Reverend Tutton "has
      always accepted at face value similar claims [to be a sincere
      Christian] by others". The judge highlighted that Reverend Tutton was
      unable to name any people the appellant had brought to the church.


   9. The appellant had submitted an email from someone at Tron Church,
      Glasgow, concerning his attendance at a bible study group in April -
      May 2016. The judge placed no weight on this, her reason being that
      the email was from a personal account with no identification evidence.




  10. Regarding the appellant's knowledge of Christianity at the asylum
      interview, the judge stated:


         "I accept he demonstrated knowledge of the Christian faith at the
         Asylum Interview but as the respondent points out such information
         is readily available and again must be viewed in the context of the
         appellant's general credibility and the other evidence"


  11. The judge also considered whether the appellant was at risk on return
      because he might come to the attention of the authorities in Iran,
      even if he is not a genuine convert, and concluded that this was
      unlikely.


Grounds of Appeal

  12. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge erred by giving weight to
      the absence of corroboration of the appellant's conversation when it
      is well recognised that asylum applicants are often unable to obtain
      documentary or other proof.
  13. The grounds point to various alleged discrepancies and argue that the
      judge has failed to deal with the evidence properly. This includes
      that:
   a. The judge drew an adverse inference from the discrepancy in the
      appellant's account of the location of the farm based church when this
      was clarified by the appellant. The grounds contend that the judge
      failed to consider the clarification.
   b. The judge found there to be an inconsistency in when the appellant
      converted to Christianity but the grounds argue this was very minor.

  14. The judge described as "implausible" that the appellant would give a
      bible to a friend he knew to be Muslim. The grounds argue that the
      appellant explained why he gave his friend the book and that the judge
      has ignored this.


  15. The grounds also challenge the judge's adverse credibility finding on
      the basis of the appellant having a poor knowledge of Christianity
      when he arrived in the UK, when that was consistent with his account
      of having recently converted and having had only minimal opportunity
      to study the religion.

Submissions


  16. Mr Hodson argued that the judge erred by requiring corroboration. He
      maintained that the judge found against the appellant because his
      uncle did not corroborate the account of why the appellant fled Iran
      without recognising that the uncle was not involved in the conversion
      to Christianity. All the uncle could corroborate was how the appellant
      left Iran, which was not at issue.  There was nothing of material
      significance that the uncle or indeed anyone else could corroborate.


  17. Mr Hodson also argued that the judge had taken minor inconsistencies,
      for example about the date of conversion and location of the farm, and
      given these far greater significance than was warranted. In terms of
      the farm location, Mr Hodson argued that it is clear from the asylum
      interview that the apparent discrepancy was explained by the
      appellant, but the judge failed to consider this.


  18. Mr Hodson also contended that the judge misunderstood the significance
      of the appellant giving a bible to his Muslim friend. This was part of
      the 'emotional journey' of the conversion. The judge, he argued, had
      made an adverse finding, without engaging with the evidence.


  19. With regard to the sur place activities, Mr Hodson contended that the
      reasons for not giving weight to Reverend Tutton's evidence were
      inadequate.


  20. Mr Jarvis responded by arguing that the judge had delivered a fully
      reasoned decision, where she engaged with the material evidence, and
      that the complaints in the grounds are merely disagreements.


  21. In respect of corroboration, Mr Jarvis argued that the judge was
      entitled to identify, and draw an inference from, the lack of
      corroboration. He cited in support of this proposition TK (Burundi)
      [2009] EWCA Civ 40.  He argued that the appellant's uncle was not a
      peripheral figure, and he could have commented on the claimed
      conversion and knowledge of Christianity.


  22. Mr Jarvis also argued that the judge was entitled to find the
      appellant not credible based on the various findings looked at
      cumulatively. He referred to Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 where the
      Court of Appeal commented on what is involved in a credibility
      assessment and stated that a judge should look at the issue of
      credibility in the round "based on an accumulation of points".

Consideration

  23. Reading the decision as a whole, it is apparent that the judge, in
      reaching her conclusion as to the appellant's credibility, has placed
      significant weight on the absence of corroboration of events in Iran.
      At paragraph 41 the judge set out her reasons for not accepting that
      the appellant converted to Christianity. The first of her reasons (at
      paragraph 41.1)  is that:


         "There is no corroborative evidence of [the conversion in Iran] and
         while I am conscious this is an asylum claim, on the other hand
         [the appellant] has spoken to his uncle (who he says made enquiries
         regarding the authorities alleged interest in him and arranged his
         trip to the UK) and such evidence is readily obtainable but has not
         been produced".


  24. The judge made a further reference to the absence of corroboration at
      paragraph 42, where she stated:


         "At the screening interview [the appellant] said his 'uncle and
         brother looked into [the police going to his home] ' but there is
         no evidence before me from either his uncle (with whom he has been
         in touch since he came to the UK) nor his brother."

  25. It is unclear what corroborative evidence the appellant could have
      obtained. His claim was that he had a spiritual experience with a
      friend, who then took him to a home based church located on a farm on
      three occasions, where he was given two bibles, and that he told
      another friend about his conversion. There is no documentary evidence
      that would typically be generated by the events as described by the
      appellant and therefore it is unclear what corroboration the judge was
      expecting.


  26. If the reference to corroborative evidence at paragraph 41.1 of the
      decision (cited above, at paragraph 23) is to the absence of a witness
      statement from the appellant's uncle, it is difficult to see how this
      is material. The appellant's case was not that his uncle was involved
      in or aware of the rationale for the conversion. The only involvement
      of his uncle was in assisting in his escape from Iran and then looking
      into what happened with the police. A statement from the uncle would
      not have provided meaningful corroboration to support the appellant's
      account of developing an interest in and then converting to
      Christianity.


  27. In an asylum appeal, the absence of corroborative documentary
      evidence, where such evidence can reasonably be expected, can be
      relevant to credibility. See ST (Corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia
      [2004] UKIAT 119. This point was made clear in  TK( Burundi), which
      although not an asylum claim stated that:


          "where there is no credible explanation for the failure to produce
         [ ] supporting evidence it can be a very strong pointer that the
         account being given is not credible".


    And that judge's should:


          "adopt a cautious approach to the evidence of an appellant where
         independent supporting evidence...is readily available within this
         jurisdiction, but not provided."


  28. In this appeal, there was unlikely to be supporting evidence
      (documentary or otherwise) to substantiate the appellant's account of
      converting to or developing an interest in Christianity whilst in Iran
      and such evidence would not, in any event, be readily available within
      the jurisdiction as was the case in TK (Burundi). In these
      circumstances, it was an error of law to give weight to the absence of
      corroboration in the assessment of the appellant's credibility.


  29. Credibility was the central issue in the appeal. As the error
      concerned the judge's assessment of credibility, it was material to
      the outcome. Accordingly, the decision cannot stand. Given that
      credibility will need to be considered afresh, I have decided to remit
      the appeal to the FtT.


Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
   law such that it should be set aside in its entirety and the appeal heard
   afresh.

31. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh
   before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Jerromes.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 28 April 2017                 |







