
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/10195/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 25th August 2017                   |       On 7th September 2017          |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     And

                                   Mr A.A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mrs R Hussain, Solicitor

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These proceedings concern A.A. born 16th November 1997.  He  claims  to
    be a national of Iran but his nationality is disputed.

 2. For the sake of clarity throughout this decision I shall refer to  A.A.
    as "the  Appellant"  and  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  as  "the  Respondent"  which  reflects   their   respective
    positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he entered the United  Kingdom  illegally
    on 10th March 2016 and he claimed asylum  the  same  day.   His  asylum
    application was subsequently refused by the Respondent.

 4. The Appellant's asylum claim centres on an assertion that he has a well-
    founded fear of persecution in Iran because of  his  imputed  political
    opinion.  The Respondent comprehensively  disbelieved  the  Appellant's
    account, first that he was a national of Iran, and secondly that he had
    come to the attention of the authorities in Iran.  It  was  noted  that
    the Appellant when giving his evidence spoke Kurdish Sorani.

 5. Following the Respondent's refusal of his claim, the Appellant appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Caswell).  In a decision  promulgated
    on  16th  February  2017,  the  judge  made  findings   upholding   the
    Respondent's case that the Appellant's claim was incredible throughout.
     She made comprehensive findings saying that  the  Appellant's  account
    was internally inconsistent, had not been supported by any evidence and
    in short, he was not a witness of truth.

 6. In [16] the judge said the following:

         "It follows that the Appellant has not shown that he is an  Iranian
         national, and I find he has fabricated a case for asylum.   I  find
         that he does not face any real risk in Iran of persecution, serious
         harm or death, torture or inhuman or  degrading  treatment  at  the
         hands of the authorities or anyone else on any grounds."

 7. Following paragraph 16 the judge set out a heading:

    "Notice of Decision" under which there are the following sentences:

    "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds"

    "The appeal is dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds".

    "The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".

    The decision is then dated 9th February 2017.  It  was  promulgated  on
    16th February 2017.

 8. Application for permission to appeal that decision was submitted by the
    Respondent.  Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hodgkinson.  The relevant parts of the grant of permission states
    as follows:

         "The  grounds  argue  that  the  judge   perversely   allowed   the
         Appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights   grounds,   or
         alternatively provided inadequate  reasoning  in  doing  so  having
         concluded that the Appellant has '...  not  shown  that  he  is  an
         Iranian national, and I find he has fabricated a  case  for  asylum
         ... he does not face any real risk in Iran ...'

         It is arguable that the judge inadvertently allowed the  appeal  on
         asylum and human rights grounds bearing in mind  her  findings  and
         conclusions in the body of her decision.  The grounds  disclose  an
         arguable error of law, as the judge's decision presents as perverse
         in the light of her reasoning".

 9. Permission having been granted, the matter comes before  me  to  decide
    whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law, to such  an  extent
    that it requires the decision to be set aside and re-made.

UT Hearing

10. Mrs Pettersen appeared for the Respondent and Mrs Hussain appeared  for
    the Appellant.   Mrs  Pettersen  made  brief  submissions  saying  that
    because the judge's decision is both unclear and perverse, in the light
    of the findings the judge has made, there is no alternative but to  set
    the decision aside and return it to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh
    hearing.  Mrs Pettersen accepted that although the judge  had,  in  her
    submission, rightly found that the Appellant's  claim  on  humanitarian
    protection should be dismissed, Mrs Pettersen was not seeking to  argue
    that that part of the decision should stand.  She accepted that it  was
    only proper that the full decision be set aside and the matter returned
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  Mrs Hussain, on behalf of  the  Appellant,
    accepted that this was the appropriate course.  She  did  not  seek  to
    argue that the decision should stand.  She acknowledged that  the  only
    appropriate course was for the matter to be returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.  She indicated that at the rehearing  she
    would be attending to represent the Appellant.

Error of Law

11. I find I am satisfied that the decision of  Judge  Caswell  contains  a
    material error of law as identified in the Respondent's grounds seeking
    permission.

12. It is quite clear from reading the decision  that  either  the  judge's
    decision is recorded in error or that the findings are perverse,  given
    the final outcome.  Whichever of those alternatives is the correct  one
    however is not clear.

13. As matters have gone so far as to come before this Tribunal, I  see  no
    alternative but to  set  aside  the  decision  in  its  entirety.   The
    decision will have to be re-made.   This  is  in  accordance  with  the
    Tribunal's reported decision of Katsonga [2016] UKUT  228  (IAC).   The
    matter will now be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    decision to be made.






Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.  The decision of the First-
tier Tribunal is set aside.  The matter is remitted to  that  Tribunal  (not
Judge Caswell) for a rehearing and for a fresh decision to be made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     06 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
