
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10425/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 February 2019                           |On 25 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                     EN
                       (anonymity direction CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Joseph of Counsel, instructed by Turpin &
                    Miller LLP, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood of the Specialist Appeals Team


Anonymity Direction - Rule 14 the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
2008
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the Appellant or  any  family  member.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a national of Uganda born in 1954.  He arrived  on  30
    May 2015 and on  15  June  2015  applied  for  international  surrogate
    protection  because  he  feared  persecution  on  account  of   imputed
    political opinion, namely involvement with the ADF.   He  was  a  half-
    brother of XY who was prominent in the Allied Democratic  Forces  (ADF)
    and had been killed and his wife had shortly thereafter died.  He,  the
    Appellant, had taken over the care of his twin children for  which  the
    ADF had sent him money. In June 2014 he and  his  wife  had  each  been
    detained. She had been released after a month but he had been  held  in
    detention for a year, firstly for about  three  months  in  a  military
    prison where he had been ill-treated, and subsequently from nine months
    at Luzira prison.

 2. The Appellant was born in Munyarwanda in Kisoro.  He  received  primary
    education. He married in 1957. He had two  children  by  that  marriage
    which ended in about 2001. He re-married in 2007: his second  wife  had
    four children by her previous marriage and all the children lived  with
    the Appellant and his second wife: see paragraph 2 of  the  Appellant's
    statement of 6 February 2019 at pages 3-12 of  the  Appellant's  bundle
    (AB). He worked as a farmer and a screen printer for  auto  parts:  see
    paragraph 5 of his 2019 statement.

The SSHD's decision

3.   Following the compromised judicial review  proceedings,  on  14  August
    2018 the Respondent made a  fresh  decision  refusing  the  Appellant's
    claim on subsidiary protection grounds and under Articles 2  and  3  of
    the European Convention. His claim based on his  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom was also rejected. There was no claim that  he  had  any
    family life in the United Kingdom. The Appellant  had  also  based  his
    claim on medical grounds. He had  been  diagnosed  with  Post-Traumatic
    Stress Disorder. The Respondent rejected this  claim  as  well  as  his
    further submissions by way  of  reference  to  paragraph  353B  of  the
    Immigration Rules and proposed to remove him to Uganda.

4.   The Respondent referred to the  evidence  including  a  country  expert
    report and medical  evidence  obtained  after  the  decision  of  Judge
    Whitcombe was promulgated on 22 June 2016. The Respondent relied on the
    adverse credibility findings made by Judge Whitcombe.

5.   The country expert report  was  rejected  because  the  fact  that  the
    expert "is an expert in Ugandan country  conditions  does  not  detract
    from the fact that his findings are not based on any form  of  face-to-
    face interview with  you  or  any  new  credible  evidence  that  would
    corroborate your claims". The Respondent did not seek to challenge  the
    expert's conclusions that "general aspects surrounding your claims with
    respect to the ADF are plausible, it is not accepted that his  findings
    provide credible  evidence  to  show  that  you  personally  have  been
    mistreated....".





Grounds of Appeal

6.   On 28 August 2018 the Appellant through his  solicitors  lodged  notice
    of appeal under s.82 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended (the 2002 Act). The grounds assert his fear of  persecution  on
    return due to his connection  to  the  ADF  and  rely  on  the  Refugee
    Convention and Article 3 of the European Convention.

Hearing History

7.    On  25  November  2015  the  Respondent   rejected   the   Appellant's
    application and by a decision promulgated on 22 June 2016 Judge of  the
    First-Tribunal Whitcombe found the Appellant is the half-brother of the
    late XY and that he had adopted XY's two children. He  did  not  accept
    the Appellant's claim to have received maintenance from the ADF for the
    maintenance of the two children or that he had been or would on  return
    be ill-treated by the Ugandan authorities. He dismissed the Appellant's
    appeal. Permission for the Appellant to  appeal  was  refused  and  his
    appeal rights became exhausted on 21 September 2016.

8.   On 29 November 2016 the Appellant made further submissions which  on  5
    December 2016 were rejected with no right of appeal.   He  applied  for
    judicial review which in April 2018 was withdrawn upon  the  Respondent
    agreeing to reconsider the further submissions.

9.   On 14 August 2018 the Respondent refused to  grant  the  Appellant  any
    form of leave to remain and on 28  August  2018  the  Appellant  lodged
    notice of appeal.

10.  By a decision promulgated on 27 September 2018 Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Suffield-Thompson dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  On  11
    October 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dineen granted permission
    to appeal.  He set out the lengthy hearing history and found  that  the
    Judge had arguably erred in:

      a) failing properly to apply the jurisprudence in Devaseelan *  [2002]
         UKIAT 00702

      b)  making  apparently  inconsistent  findings  whether  XY  was   the
         Appellant's brother

      c) failing to have proper regard to the reports of  a  country  expert
         and of a Cognitive Behaviour Therapist and

      d) assessing why the Appellant failed to claim asylum  immediately  on
         arrival.

11.  By a decision promulgated on 10 January 2019 I found that the  decision
    of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Suffield-Thompson   contained
    material errors of law and set it aside in its  entirety  and  directed
    the appeal be heard afresh with no findings preserved. Further,  having
    regard to the hearing history I directed  that  the  appeal  should  be
    heard in the Upper Tribunal. It came before me on 14 February 2019.



Burden and Standard of Proof

12.  The standard and burden of  proof  in  relation  to  claims  under  the
    Refugee Convention, for humanitarian protection under the Qualification
    Directive and under  the  European  Convention  are  for  all  material
    purposes one and the same; that is the Appellant must  show  there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that if returned to  her  country  of
    origin he will be persecuted for a  Refugee  Convention  reason  or  if
    removed from the United Kingdom will be subjected  to  treatment  which
    for the purposes of humanitarian protection  as  defined  by  paragraph
    339C of the Immigration Rules will amount to serious harm  or  will  be
    subjected to treatment which will violate his rights under the European
    Convention.  This is  known  as  the  lower  standard  of  proof.   The
    effective date for assessment of the evidence in support of each  claim
    is the date of the hearing.

Documentary Evidence

13.  In addition to the documents already  referred  to  or  mentioned,  the
    Tribunal file includes: -

    1)   the record of an initial interview with and Immigration Officer on
         15 June 2015

    2)   the record of a substantive interview with an immigration  officer
         on 6   November 2015

    3)   statements signed  by  the  Appellant  on  12  November  2015,  28
         November 2016 and 6 February 2019

    4)   a statement signed by the Appellant's wife on 22 March 2016

    5)   documents relating to the adoption and schooling of XY's children

    6)   a country expert report by Daniel Fahey (the expert report)

    7)   the GP's medical records for the Appellant

    8)   and assessment dated 12 December 2016 of the Appellant prepared by
         Sonia Halliday, a  CBT  therapist  with  Oxford  Health  NHS  Trust
         following an interview of the Appellant with Dr R McKnight.

The Hearing afresh

14.  The Appellant attended the hearing accompanied by a friend who took  no
    part. I explained the purpose and procedure to be followed.  There  was
    some preliminary discussion whether the  Appellant  would  require  the
    services  of  an  interpreter,  particularly  in  the  light   of   the
    Appellant's claims  about  having  previously  been  misunderstood.  Mr
    Joseph took time outside the hearing room  to  discuss  this  with  the
    Appellant. He confirmed that the Appellant was content to give evidence
    in English without the benefit of an interpreter and expressed  a  view
    that the claimed misunderstandings were principally not because of  any
    difficulty the Appellant may have  had  in  understanding  the  English
    language  but  because  of  his  difficulties  with  working  out  what
    information the questioner  was  seeking  and  how  to  articulate  any
    answer. During the course of the hearing the Appellant's  responses  to
    questions put,  particularly  during  cross-examination,  confirmed  Mr
    Joseph's view.

15.  Although it was evident during  the  hearing  that  the  Appellant  had
    difficulty in coping with some questions and articulating  a  response,
    this appeared to be generally  in  relation  to  complex  questions  or
    questions which were not sufficiently specific. There was no  point  at
    which either the Appellant or Mr Joseph indicated  that  the  Appellant
    did not wish to proceed or that the  proceedings  were  unfair  to  the
    Appellant on these or any other grounds.

16.  At the outset, both parties agreed that  the  Appellant  is  the  half-
    brother of the late XY who had been a senior commander in the ADF.

The Evidence

17.  Examination-in-chief comprised the Appellant's adoption of  his  latest
    statement signed on 6 February 2019.  In  a  cross-examination  he  was
    asked about his wife. He said that he was not in  direct  contact  with
    her and communicated through a third party with whom his  last  contact
    had been some 6-8 months before the hearing. He said he  and  his  wife
    were not in direct contact  because  she  was  under  surveillance  and
    subject to a reporting condition. For a similar  reason,  none  of  his
    children were in contact with him: see hearing replies 6-14 and  57-58.
    He remained in contact with a schoolfriend whose  name  he  would  only
    write down for fear of it becoming known: see  hearing  replies  20-24.
    The intermediaries through whom he was in contact with  his  wife  were
    three different women: see hearing replies 26-28. His wife continued to
    look after XY's twins as well as their other children. He  thought  the
    twins were now about 18: see hearing  replies  32-34.  He  remained  in
    contact with the brother of his first wife but their conversations  did
    not include anything political: see hearing replies 36-40.  His  escape
    from Luzira prison was arranged by a brother of his present  wife.  She
    has three brothers and he remains in contact with one of them  but  not
    the one in the intelligence service who arranged his escape  with  whom
    he has not been in touch: see hearing replies 48-51.

18.  He was asked why he thought he would be at risk on return.  He  replied
    that the Ugandan military had tortured him and  having  regard  to  his
    subsequent escape would remain interested in him. If he returned to his
    family both he and his family would be in danger.

19.  The Appellant was  asked  about  his  previous  visits  to  the  United
    Kingdom. He said he had first come  in  2005  or  2006  as  a  business
    visitor with entry clearance for six months and overstayed. He had left
    12-18 months after arriving: see hearing replies  63-69.  Ms  Isherwood
    referred to the Appellant's medical history from his GP. She considered
    this relevant  because  the  records  noted  on  19  October  2011  the
    Appellant had an active problem of a benign prostatic  hypertrophy  but
    the Appellant had claimed to have left the United Kingdom in about 2006
    and not returned until 30 May 2015.

20.  The Appellant explained that when he had visited the doctor in 2015  he
    had reported that he had had trouble with his  prostate  in  Uganda  in
    2011 for which he had received treatment there. He had been accompanied
    to the GP's surgery by Dr Barbara Harrell-Bond, a member of the Refugee
    Legal Aid Information Centre in Oxford. She had  been  very  pro-active
    during his interview at the surgery. He believes her doctorate  is  not
    in a medical field. I noted that the  relevant  entry  about  the  2011
    complaint was in the section of  the  GP's  records  headed  "Problems,
    Active". The was no other record of treatment for a prostate  complaint
    in the United Kingdom referred to in the GP records. The  next  section
    in the records  is  entitled  "Significant  Past".  At  the  hearing  I
    remarked that it was the obligation of  any  doctor  on  seeing  a  new
    patient to take a medical history.

21.  Ms Isherwood explored the payments  which  the  Appellant  claimed  had
    been made by the ADF to maintain XY's children. The Appellant explained
    his last contact with XY  had  been  in  about  1996/7  and  that  XY's
    children had been cared for by their mother until she had died in 2007.
    Thereafter, he had been approached by someone who told him of the death
    of the children's mother and that he would be given money to pay  their
    school fees which he received until about the time he was  arrested  in
    May or June 2014: see hearing replies 83-91.

22.  The Appellant was then questioned about the  bank  account  into  which
    the money for the school fees for XY's  children  had  been  paid:  see
    hearing replies 92-108. The documentary  evidence  included  statements
    from two different bank accounts, Opportunity Bank and Crane Bank. I am
    satisfied that in the course of cross-examination the Appellant  became
    confused  into  which  account  this  money  had  been  paid.  Although
    initially he was adamant the relevant account was Opportunity Bank,  he
    was clear that the receipts marked "Eria" represented  this  money  and
    these  are  to  be  found  in  the  statements  from  Crane  Bank.  The
    Appellant's evidence was that at around the time he had been  arrested,
    his account at Crane Bank had been  frozen.  It  was  only  after  some
    further questioning that it emerged that it was not just his account at
    Crane Bank which had been frozen but that the Government had closed the
    bank because it had issues with it.

23.  Ms Isherwood noted it was not until  some  seven  years  after  he  had
    taken responsibility for XY's children that the authorities  had  shown
    any interest in him. The Appellant stated he had never been politically
    active and explained the authorities had found documents that  the  ADF
    were paying money to him and this had resulted in his being detained by
    the authorities: see hearing replies 109-111.

24.  The Appellant explained his  wife  had  been  released  from  detention
    after a month and had then sought legal  assistance  for  him.  In  the
    meantime, after  three  months  in  the  custody  of  Central  Military
    Intelligence where he had been tortured, he  had  been  transferred  to
    Luzira prison. He could not seek further help from the  lawyer  because
    his fees had not been paid. The lawyer had not been able  to  represent
    him in court in 2014-2015 because the proceedings related to charges of
    treason: see hearing replies 112-124. There was no re-examination.

Submissions for the Respondent

25.  Ms Isherwood relied on the reasons for refusal letter. The  Appellant's
    account was to some degree consistent with his statement but in  giving
    oral testimony he had been contradictory,  vague  and  evasive  in  his
    answers.

26.  Notwithstanding the Appellant  continued  to  be  legally  represented,
    there was no current evidence to show that on return  he  would  be  at
    risk, his witness statement had not been updated. It was  not  credible
    that while he remained in contact  with  people  in  Uganda  he  needed
    intermediaries to contact his wife.

27.  The Appellant's wife had referred at page 3 of her  2016  statement  at
    AB p.15 to a second arrest and her subsequent relocation  but  made  no
    reference to any further difficulties and the Appellant  had  not  said
    anything about this until this hearing.

28.  The Appellant had failed adequately to address the issue  of  the  risk
    to him on return, claiming that although in the past he had  been  able
    to obtain documents from Uganda, he no longer could. He had  not  known
    into which bank the school fees money  had  been  paid.  There  was  no
    statement from the brother-in-law  who  had  enabled  his  escape  from
    prison.

29.  The evidence of torture is referred to or comprised in  the  letter  of
    12 December 2016 at AB pp. 57-60 from a Cognitive Behavioural Therapist
    after an assessment interview of the Appellant with a middle or  junior
    ranking doctor. She criticised the letter as a medical  report  on  the
    ground it lacked formal structure and did not address any of the  usual
    forensic requirements for medical evidence. Further, it had been  based
    entirely on what the Appellant had said.

30.  Turning to the expert report at AB pp. 39-51,  Ms  Isherwood  submitted
    that there was nothing in the report which specifically  addressed  the
    type of money transfer of which the Appellant claimed to  have  been  a
    recipient, there was nothing to link the arrest of the Appellant to the
    discovery by the Ugandan authorities of information  about  ADF  agents
    and money transfers consequent upon  Operation  Sukola  and  there  was
    nothing specific on the reasons for  the  Appellant's  claimed  arrest.
    Additionally, it did not address the present  situation  in  Uganda  or
    explain the relevance of the reference at AB pp.50-51 to escape to  the
    DRC.

31.   She  emphasised  the  lack  of  evidence  subsequent  to   2016,   the
    unsatisfactory manner in which the Appellant had given oral  testimony,
    the lack of evidence subsequent to his arrival in the United Kingdom of
    treatment for the effects of torture and the lack of contact  with  any
    of his immediate or close family in Uganda. She submitted that that the
    Appellant should be found not credible and the appeal dismissed.

Submissions for the Appellant

32.  Mr Joseph confirmed  that  the  Appellant  was  not  making  any  claim
    relying on protected rights to a private and family life under  Article
    8 of the European Convention. The claim was for  subsidiary  protection
    based on the Appellant being the  half-brother  of  XY,  a  senior  ADF
    commander who had been killed. He referred me to the order of  Blake  J
    of 30 April 2018 in the Appellant's proceedings for judicial review  in
    which he had described the expert  report  as  "extremely  helpful  and
    careful .... and the anodyne response" in the Respondent's reasons  for
    refusal: see  AB  p.81.  He  submitted  the  expert  report  should  be
    accepted.

33.  In effect, the  issues  to  be  determined  were  those  identified  at
    paragraphs 42ff  of  Judge  Whitcombe's  decision.  The  expert  report
    supported the Appellant's claim that he had received money from the ADF
    by way of bank transfers to pay the school fees for XY's  children  and
    included references to Eria Fanta and the ADF policy  towards  members'
    children.

34.  The Crane Bank statements showed payments every  four  months  and  the
    Appellant had given an adequate explanation for the absence of  earlier
    statements, namely that his house had been raided and  the  authorities
    had subsequently closed Crane Bank.

35.  The timing of the arrest of the Appellant and his wife dovetailed  with
    the discoveries made by  the  Ugandan  authorities  in  the  course  of
    Operation Sukola, described in the expert report.

36.  The Appellant had never relied on any physical scars of torture but  on
    the psychological consequences. In oral evidence he had  described  the
    torture as "inside me". The Appellant  had  described  the  torture  he
    endured at  paragraphs  11-13  of  his  statement.  The  expert  report
    referred at AB p.49 to the  practice  of  the  Ugandan  authorities  of
    torturing people involved with the ADF and at p.50 to the  plausibility
    of the Appellant's account of his escape from Luzira prison.

37.  The Appellant's lack of contact  with  his  family  was  plausible  and
    consistent with his and their fears for their safety. He  had  given  a
    plausible and credible account of his other contacts with Uganda.

38.  The Appellant had given a credible account of previous persecution,  of
    being charged with treason because of his perceived connection with the
    ADF and of his escape from prison such as to give rise to a  real  risk
    to him on return. The passage of time since his departure  from  Uganda
    will not have had a material effect on the likely risk to him. The  ADF
    remained active in Uganda.

39.  At the close of the hearing I enquired how  many  years  schooling  the
    Appellant had received and he told me that he had spent seven years  in
    primary education. Neither representative had any point arising.

Findings and Consideration

40.  The expert report refers  to  the  ADF  as  a  rebel  group  which  has
    operated along the DRC-Uganda border and the reason given by Uganda for
    its invasion and occupation of north-eastern DRC between 1998 and  2003
    was that this was an act of self-defence against  the  ADF.  It  relies
    extensively on the UN Security Council Mid-term Report of the group  of
    experts on the DRC of June 2014 in the drafting of which the expert was
    involved. The Ugandan authorities see the ADF as an Islamist  terrorist
    group. The Ugandan authorities have arrested its leader but it  remains
    active.

41.  Subsequent to the decision of Judge  Whitcombe,  the  medical  evidence
    from Ms Halliday and the expert report have become available.  While  I
    must take the decision of Judge Whitcombe as my starting point,  I  may
    take into account evidence  which  has  subsequently  become  available
    which if sufficiently compelling may  be  justification  for  departing
    from the conclusions reached in the earlier decision.

42.  The medical evidence is not a formal expert report. It  is  the  record
    of an assessment at a single  interview  of  the  Appellant  by  mental
    health practitioners upon referral from the Appellant's GP. The purpose
    would have been to give guidance to the GP on the future  treatment  of
    the Appellant as evidenced by the part headed "Plan  agreed..."  to  be
    found at the end of the assessment. The assessment notes the  Appellant
    had no psychiatric history prior to his claimed detention  and  torture
    and that he exhibited sufficient symptoms  of  Post-  Traumatic  Stress
    Disorder (PTSD) to support a diagnosis of  PTSD.  The  assessment  also
    noted that he has few social contacts and is "socially vulnerable... as
    he is completely dependent on the refugee resources available for money
    and food".

43.  The expert report corroborates the Appellant's account  of  receipt  of
    money for XY's children and the manner in which the arrangement for him
    to look  after  the  children  and  receive  the  money  was  made.  It
    identifies Eria Fanta as an ADF commander in charge of  an  effort  "to
    exfiltrate the wives and children of ADF commanders from the forest  in
    Beni....." and notes the ADF "had a well-development  financial  system
    that used money transfers and personal careers as well as an  extensive
    support network in DRC and Uganda... (and) regularly used Western Union
    to transfer money for many years, despite the risks of  the  detection.
    It also refers to the ADF's support for ADF children": see AB pp.42-44.

44.  The expert report explains the timing of the Appellant's arrest  at  AB
    p 47. The expert records: -

         The timing of (the Appellant's) arrest is noteworthy.  Starting  in
         January 2014, the DRC army attacked ADF in Operation Sukola. In mid-
         April 2014, the DRC army captured ADF's headquarters  base.........
         I personally visited  less  than  a  week  after  its  capture  and
         collected hundreds of pages of  documents.......  In  addition,  my
         team had access  to  hundreds  of  pages  of  additional  documents
         collected by the DRC army.

         Based on the documents I collected and reviewed.... I was  able  to
         identify ADF agents and money transfers...... Moreover, the Ugandan
         officers.... Were also collecting  documents  from  ADF  killed  in
         battle, and from captured ADF camps;  that  Ugandan  officers  were
         also co-operating with DRC army officers. These facts suggest  that
         the Ugandan army was  analysing  new  information  obtained  during
         Operation Sukola that helped it to identify ADF  agents  and  money
         transfers...... The.... arrest is  therefore  notable,  because  it
         took  place  approximately  six  weeks  after  Uganda   authorities
         collected or had access to a treasure trove of documents about  ADF
         and its networks, including financial networks.

              The pattern that emerges is that the Ugandan government has  a
         history of arresting people, alleging their involvement with ADF or
         other terrorist movements, and then treating  these  people  poorly
         and even torturing them without credible evidence of violating  any
         laws.

45.  The expert report concludes with the view that the Appellant  would  be
    at risk on return. I take into account that the expert was at the  time
    of writing the report a doctoral  candidate  researching  the  role  of
    natural resources in armed conflict in north-eastern DRC. He has worked
    as a finance expert and coordinator of the UN Group of Experts  on  the
    DRC reporting to the Security Council  on  amongst  other  matters  the
    status of armed groups and has spent some 2 � years in Uganda  and  the
    DRC. Any putative lack of higher  academic  credentials  is  more  than
    outweighed by his practical and first-hand experience. I see no  reason
    to depart from Blake J's assessment of the report as "extremely helpful
    and careful".

46.  The Respondent's submissions  on  the  expert  report  to  some  extent
    reflected those criticisms of it made by  Judge  Suffield-Thompson  and
    for the reasons given in my error of law  decision  promulgated  on  18
    January 2019, in particular at paragraph 30, I give  little  weight  to
    them.

47.  The Appellant is a man of limited education and  the  medical  evidence
    indicates he has had limited social contacts for some  time,  at  least
    partly on account of his lack  of  residential  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom. I find that these matters will have resulted in some degree of
    isolation which will have had some impact on his facility to articulate
    replies to questions at the hearing. On several occasions I  intervened
    to simplify or to refine the wording or substance of the questions  put
    to the Appellant  and  found  that  once  he  appeared  to  grasp  what
    information the question was designed to elicit, he was able to give  a
    reasonably  clear  and,  often,  confident  answer.  Examples   include
    ascertaining whether the question referred to the Appellant's first  or
    second wife, to the Appellant's brother-in-law by his first  or  second
    wife or the reason for freezing or closure of his  account  with  Crane
    Bank.

48.  Looking at the evidence in the round, the facts  which  the  Respondent
    has accepted  or  conceded  and  taking  into  account  the  background
    evidence contained in the expert report, I find to the  lower  standard
    of proof and notwithstanding Ms Isherwood's extensive cross-examination
    that the Appellant is a credible witness. I therefore accept  the  core
    elements of his account, including his claims about  his  treatment  in
    prison and the lack of representation at the court  hearings  which  is
    reflected in the background evidence on Uganda.

49.  There remains the question whether the Appellant will  be  at  risk  on
    return to Uganda. The expert report concludes that  the  Appellant  "is
    more likely than not" to  be  at  risk  of  adverse  treatment  by  the
    authorities on return. I have given substantial weight  to  the  report
    and note that "more likely  than  not"  is  a  higher  than  the  lower
    standard of proof applicable to subsidiary protection claims. I  accept
    that there is little  or  no  evidence  before  me  about  the  current
    approach of the Ugandan authorities to those perceived to be  connected
    to the ADF. The evidence is that such people have in the past  been  of
    interest as outlined in the expert report and  there  was  no  evidence
    before me that there has been any material change in  the  attitude  of
    the Ugandan authorities towards  the  ADF.  Consequently,  I  find  the
    Appellant is at real risk of persecution on return to Uganda because of
    his actual or perceived connection to the ADF. The appeal  succeeds  on
    asylum grounds and for the same reasons under Article 3 of the European
    Convention.

Anonymity

50.  Notwithstanding the direction made in the error of law decision,  there
    were no submissions whether the  anonymity  direction  previously  made
    should be  continued.   In  the  circumstances  I  direct  that  it  be
    continued.

notice of decision

    The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3)

    Anonymity direction continued.


Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   14.
iii. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid so no fee award can be made.


Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   14.
iii. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
