
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10293/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 August 2019                    |On 27 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     KR
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U Miszkiel, Counsel, instructed by Aschfords Law
For the Respondent:    M D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  Connor  (the  judge),  promulgated  on  10   June   2019,
         dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
         dated 16 August 2018  refusing  his  protection  and  human  rights
         claim.

      2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan born in April  1989.  He
         claims to have entered the UK on 6 April 2018 hidden in the back of
         a lorry. He made an asylum claim based on his alleged fear  of  the
         Taliban. I briefly summarise his claim.

      3. The Taliban targeted the appellant and his  other  younger  brother
         because their older brother worked for an NGO (Shelter  Now)  as  a
         chef in 2006. The Taliban believed the NGO promoted  Christian  and
         western values. From 2006 onwards the Taliban have  tried  to  take
         revenge on the appellant  and  his  younger  brother.  The  younger
         brother was shot and killed by the Taliban in September  2013.  The
         appellant himself was attacked on several occasions. As a result of
         two of the attacks the appellant transferred from the University of
         Baghlan to Takhar University in his  third  year  of  study.  After
         completing his studies the appellant still did not  feel  safe  and
         eventually left Afghanistan in 2017.

      4. A psychiatric report (prepared by Dr Persuad)  concluded  that  the
         appellant suffers from PTSD and depression, and a  scarring  report
         (prepared by Dr Lingam) concluded  that  scars  on  his  body  were
         consistent with his account of the Taliban attacks. Within the same
         month of his arrival in the UK the appellant was able to locate his
         father's cousin and get engaged to  this  person's  daughter.  They
         married in July 2018 are were expecting their first child  in  July
         2019. The appellant was also able to contact his older brother soon
         after his arrival. The older brother claimed he was recognised as a
         refugee by the Bulgarian authorities and that he entered the UK  in
         2015 with his Bulgarian wife.

      5. The respondent accepted the  appellant's  claimed  nationality  and
         identity but rejected his account of his older brother's employment
         with Take Shelter and rejected the  appellant's  account  of  being
         targeted and attacked by the  Taliban.  The  respondent  noted  the
         applicant's claim to have lived in Baghlan and Takhar and relied on
         background information indicating that Baghlan was a contested area
         of Afghanistan, as were parts of Takhar  province  (paragraph  98).
         The respondent was however unable to establish that  the  applicant
         lived in either area and  considered  that  he  could  relocate  to
         Kabul. The respondent was not satisfied that  the  refusal  of  the
         applicant's human rights claim would breach Article 8.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      6. For reasons that will become apparent it is not necessary for me to
         consider the judge's decision at length. The judge  summarised  the
         appellant's claim and the respondent's  position  and  set  out  in
         detail the evidence given at the  hearing  by  the  appellant,  his
         wife,  her  father  and  the  appellant's  older  brother.   Having
         summarised the representative's  submissions  and  having  directed
         herself on the burden and standard of proof the judge set  out  her
         findings from [96] onwards. The judge did not find the appellant or
         his witnesses to be credible. Whilst the judge  took  into  account
         the diagnosis of PTSD and depression she found  that  a  number  of
         significant  inconsistencies  could  not  be  attributed   to   the
         appellant's mental state. The judge noted inconsistencies  relating
         to when the appellant contacted his older brother in the UK and the
         nature of his relationship with his older brother.  The  judge  did
         not find it plausible that the appellant would have  been  able  to
         locate his father's cousin  and  become  engaged  to  the  cousin's
         daughter within the space of about  2  weeks.  The  judge  drew  an
         adverse inference based on amendments made  to  various  statements
         that deleted references to the  appellant's  wife  and  her  father
         visiting the appellant in Afghanistan. The judge did  not  find  it
         plausible that the appellant would  wait  so  long  before  leaving
         Afghanistan if he had been constantly targeted since 2006.

      7. At [100] the judge stated,

             "In relation to the injuries the appellant says  he  sustained
             when he was attacked by the Taliban, he has produced a  report
             from Dr Lingam. Dr Lingam finds the scars are consistent  with
             the history of abuse described by the appellant  but  all  are
             non-specific and can be from other causes. I  have  considered
             the report of Dr  Lingam  in  accordance  with  KV  (Scarring-
             medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC)."

      8. Having given a number of reasons why the judge  did  not  find  the
         appellant's account of events in Afghanistan to  be  credible,  the
         judge stated, at [119],

             "The appellant's credibility is damaged as  a  result  of  the
             above. I have considered as part of the evidence  the  reports
             of Dr Persuad and Dr Lingam but in light  of  the  credibility
             findings I have made in  the  inconsistencies  in  evidence  I
             place limited weight on the reports. I do accept the appellant
             has a mental health condition and I have viewed and considered
             his evidence in light of that condition."

      9. The judge then considered  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG
         [2018] UKUT 00118 and concluded that the appellant could internally
         relocate to Kabul. Although the judge made  several  references  to
         the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for  Assessing  the  International
         Protection Needs of Asylum-seekers from Afghanistan dated 30 August
         2018 she did  not  engage  with  the  submission  in  the  skeleton
         argument  prepared  by  the  appellant's  representative  that   AS
         (Afghanistan) could be distinguished  by  reference  to  the  UNHCR
         Guidelines. The judge dismissed the appeal on protection and  human
         rights grounds.

The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision and the 'error  of  law'
hearing

     10. Permission was granted to the appellant  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal on the basis that it was  arguable  the  judge  failed  to
         adequately consider the UNHCR Guidelines, particularly  given  that
         the appellants wife's family had been granted refugee status in the
         UK, and the judge failed to adequately assess the  scarring  report
         and improperly followed the Upper Tribunal guidance  issued  in  KV
         when, at the date of the hearing, the Court of  Appeal  had  stated
         that the guidance in KV was of no effect and that, at the  time  of
         the promulgation of the judge's decision, the Supreme Court had not
         followed the Upper Tribunal's  decision  (KV  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD
         [2019] UKSC 10).

     11. At the outset  of  the  'error  of  law'  hearing  Mr  Clarke,  the
         Presenting Officer, conceded that the  judge's  decision  contained
         two material error of law requiring it to be set aside.  Mr  Clarke
         accepted that the judge erred in law in failing to engage with  the
         submission made on behalf of the appellant  that  AS  (Afghanistan)
         should now be distinguished in  light  of  the  August  2018  UNHCR
         Guidelines as to the availability of internal relocation to  Kabul.
         Mr Clarke was  additionally  concerned  that  the  judge  may  have
         misdirected herself when assessing the appellant's  credibility  by
         placing limited weight on the two expert reports "in light  of  the
         credibility findings" she had already  made.  Mr  Clarke  described
         this as a Mibanga v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  367  type  point.  He
         additionally accepted that, although Dr Lingam found that the scars
         were  'consistent'  with  the  appellant's  account  (applying  the
         Istanbul Protocol) Dr Lingam  nevertheless  ruled  out  alternative
         causes and that the judge failed to consider  this  aspect  of  the
         scarring report. Both parties agreed that the identified errors  of
         law required the decision  to  be  set  aside  and  that,  as  they
         affected the judge's  adverse  credibility  findings  it  was  most
         appropriate for the matter to be remitted for a fresh hearing.

Discussion

     12. For the reasons outlined above I agree  with  both  representatives
         that the decision is unsustainable. It  is  readily  apparent  from
         this detailed  decision  that  the  judge  generally  paid  careful
         attention to the evidence before her and that she gave a number  of
         cogent reasons for doubting the appellant's account. Paragraph  119
         however gives the impression that the  judge  placed  only  limited
         weight on the two expert medical reports because  she  had  already
         found the appellant to be an incredible witness. This was expressly
         conceded by Mr Clarke. As a consequence there is a danger that  the
         judge 'pulled the cart before the horses' by finding the  appellant
         was an incredible witness before taking adequate  account  of  both
         medical reports. There is the additional concern that the judge may
         have attached less  weight  to  the  scarring  report  because  she
         considered that report by reference to the Upper Tribunal  decision
         in KV. Both the Court of Appeal and then  the  Supreme  Court  held
         that the guidance  given  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  not  be
         followed. Ms Miszkiel accepted that there was a tension within  the
         scarring report as Dr Lingam found, on the one  hand,  that  the  3
         scars on the appellant's body were consistent with the  history  of
         abuse described by him, necessitating a finding that their clinical
         features were all non-specific and could be from  any  accident  or
         injuries, and then, on the other hand, discounting the  possibility
         of a number of  possible  causes,  including  accident.  The  judge
         failed to refer to all take into account this inherent tension.

     13. I also agree with the parties that the judge failed to engage  with
         the submission made  by  Ms  Miszkiel  that  the  Country  Guidance
         decision in AS (Afghanistan) could be distinguished  following  the
         publication of the latest UNHCR Eligibility  Guidance  relating  to
         Afghanistan in August 2018. The appellant claimed to have lived  in
         two areas outside Kabul and to have never lived in Kabul.  Although
         the respondent was unable to establish whether  the  appellant  had
         lived in Baghlan and Takhar she appeared to accept in  her  Reasons
         for Refusal Letter that these were both contested  areas.  Internal
         relocation to Kabul was therefore a live issue. The  judge  applied
         the guidance given in AS (Afghanistan) but did not engage with  the
         submission before her that  the  Country  Guidance  case  could  be
         distinguished.  Nor  did  the   judge   adequately   consider   the
         possibility of internal relocation to Kabul given that  the  family
         of the appellant's wife, who originated from Kabul, were recognised
         refugees.

     14. Both representatives agreed  that  the  identified  errors  of  law
         required the decision to be set aside and remade afresh. Mr  Clarke
         submitted that it should be open to both parties  at  the  remitted
         hearing to refer to the oral evidence given in  open  court  during
         the hearing on 5 March 2019. Ms Miszkiel expressed concern with the
         potential accuracy  of  the  evidence  recorded  by  the  judge  in
         paragraphs 8 to 69. I indicated that she would have an  opportunity
         of checking her own notes of the hearing with that recorded by  the
         judge in his decision, and that the respondent would also  have  an
         opportunity of considering the accuracy of those paragraphs of  the
         judge's decision. There is in  principle  no  reason  why  evidence
         given in open court during a hearing and accurately recorded  in  a
         judge's decision should be discounted simply  because  the  judge's
         decision has been found to be unsafe.

Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved  the  making  of
errors on points of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Connor.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.BLUM                              20 August 2019

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
