
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10356/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 January 2020                    |On 14 January 2020                   |
|Extempore                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     J H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Khan, Counsel, instructed by Haque & Hausmann
                    Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Abebrese ("the judge"), promulgated on 26 April 2019, by
which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal
of his protection and human rights claims.

In essence, the Appellant, a national of Bangladesh, had asserted that he
had been politically active whilst in Bangladesh as a result of which he
had come to the adverse attention of his political opponents, namely the
Awami League.  Over the course of time it was said that the Awami League
had instigated false cases against him, leading to legal proceedings and
ultimately warrants for his arrest.  The Appellant had also alleged that he
had been ill-treated whilst in Bangladesh and had sustained injuries as a
result.  Without in fact having been arrested, the Appellant came to this
country at the beginning of April 2014 as a student. Leave in that category
was subsequently curtailed and the Appellant remained here without status.
Following his detention in this country in 2017, he made his protection and
human rights claims.

In support of his case on appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the Appellant
provided a number of items of documentary evidence including: letters from
his political party in Bangladesh apparently attesting to his political
activity and role within the organisation; First Information Reports;
charge sheets; warrants of arrest; and a letter from a Bangladeshi advocate
who purported to confirm that there were active cases against the Appellant
in his home country.  Medical evidence in the form of a detailed medico-
legal report from Dr Sinha was also provided.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The judge made a number of adverse findings on the Appellant's credibility.
 He found that the timing of the protection and human rights claims was
damaging, given that this action was only taken following his detention in
the United Kingdom and after having remained in this country unlawfully
after the curtailment of his student leave.  The judge did not accept it as
credible that the Bangladeshi authorities had not in fact arrested the
Appellant whilst he was still in that country, given his claim that there
were legal proceedings against him at the time. The judge was also
decidedly unimpressed by the Appellant's lack of any political activity
whilst in the United Kingdom.  The combination of these matters led the
judge to reject the core of the Appellant's account.

Following this, the judge purported to consider the Appellant's case "at
its highest" and concluded that even if the account had been credible he
would have been able to receive sufficient protection from the Bangladeshi
authorities and would not be at risk of either persecution or Article 3 ill-
treatment.  The appeal was duly dismissed.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The grounds of appeal assert that the judge failed to consider a number of
aspects of the Appellant's evidence including the items of documentary
evidence I have referred to previously.  Permission to appeal was initially
refused by the First-tier Tribunal but was subsequently granted by Upper
Tribunal Judge Finch on 25 November 2019.



The hearing

At the hearing before me, Mr Khan quite properly accepted that taken in
isolation the adverse credibility findings stated by the judge were open to
him.  However, and with reference to the grounds of appeal, he submitted
that the judge's failure to consider the various items of documentary
evidence fatally undermined the credibility findings as a whole.
Particular emphasis was placed upon the advocate's letter and the report of
Dr Sinha.  He submitted that the judge's alternative finding on the
Appellant's case at its highest was insufficiently thorough.

Ms Everett accepted that the alternative scenario finding was indeed
inadequate, but she submitted that read as a whole, the judge's credibility
findings were sufficient notwithstanding an accepted failure to have had
specific regard to certain items of documentary evidence.



Error of law decision

This case is not clear-cut.  However, by a relatively narrow margin I
conclude that the judge has materially erred in law, specifically in
failing to have considered at all, or at least not adequately, what I
regard as material aspects of documentary evidence which were before him
when reaching his overall credibility findings on the Appellant's claim.

The judge was entitled to make the adverse findings in respect of the
timing of the claim in this country, on the absence of political activity
whilst here, and on the failure of the Bangladeshi authorities to have
actually arrested the Appellant whilst he was still in that country.  The
question is whether these adverse findings are sufficient of themselves to
amount to a sustainable overall conclusion on the evidence, notwithstanding
what in my view is a clear failure to have had any or any adequate regard
to documentary evidence.

In respect of that evidence, the committee meeting notes naming the
Appellant as President of the youth wing of the party in question would
have borne at least some relevance to his overall claim to have been not
simply politically active, but at a relatively high level, seen in the
proper context.

Of greater significance in my view was the advocate's letter and the
medical evidence.  In respect of the former, the letter purported to come
from a Bangladeshi lawyer. There is no finding by the judge to the effect
that the author was not who he said he was or that he was in some way
unqualified to pass comment on the Appellant's circumstances.  Whilst the
advocate did not specifically state how he came to know that there were
"active" cases against the Appellant in Bangladesh, he did give several
case references which match up with the other documentation before the
judge, and the advocate did state in terms that proceedings were live.  In
my view, this evidence was clearly material and required specific
attention, with adequate reasons should the letter have been rejected as
being unreliable.

In respect of Dr Sinha's report, no reference to it is made in the judge's
decision whatsoever.  There is reference in [30] to medical evidence
(described by the judge as "generic") that I cannot find on file. Neither
representative could identify what this evidence consisted of. In any
event, Dr Sinha's report was detailed and specific to the Appellant.  It
sets out a number of scars on the Appellant's body and in line with the
Istanbul Protocol, attributes the label of "highly consistent" with the
majority of these marks.  This lent support to the Appellant's case to have
been targeted by political opponents and ill-treated whilst in Bangladesh.
This part of his claim tied in with his assertions to have subsequently
become the subject of false cases.  Thus, the medical evidence was
potentially corroborative of the Appellant's overall case.  The failure to
have regard to this evidence in any way is a further error and one that I
regard as being material.

It is right also that the judge failed to have regard to the Rule 35
report.  Whilst this evidence would have been of less probative value, it
was nonetheless of some relevance and should have been specifically dealt
with in conjunction with the report of Dr Sinha.

For the avoidance of doubt, the judge's purported "at its highest"
conclusion is inadequate. Nothing is said about the possible consequences
of the alleged false cases brought by political opponents against the
Appellant. Nothing is said about possible ill-treatment in detention. If
alternative conclusions on a protection claim are to be reached, care must
be taken to ensure that all aspects of the evidence (which will have been
deemed to be credible) are carefully considered in the context of the
country information and case-law, and the submissions made thereon.

In light of the above, the omissions by the judge sufficiently undermine
his overall credibility assessment of the Appellant's case to the extent
that his decision should be set aside.  That I do.

Given the interconnectedness of the errors with the issue of credibility,
there should be no preserved findings of fact when this appeal is
reconsidered.

In respect of disposal, whilst the default position is for matters to be
retained in the Upper Tribunal, this is a case in which there needs to be a
wholesale reassessment of the Appellant's case involving what I consider to
be extensive fact-finding.  With reference to paragraph 7.2 of the Practice
Statement and with a degree of reluctance, I conclude that this matter
should indeed be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reconsidered
afresh.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

   1) The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Hatton  Cross
      hearing centre) for a complete rehearing, with  no  findings  of  fact
      preserved;



   2) The remitted hearing shall not be  conducted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Abebrese.





Signed   [pic]             Date: 8 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

