
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10029/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2019                   |On 25 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    SKAK
                             (ANONYMITY GRANTED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr K Gayle (Solicitor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  On 27 September 2017 the Secretary  of  State  refused  to  grant  the
    claimant international protection. The claimant appealed to the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the tribunal). Although the  tribunal  did  not  believe
    much of what the claimant had said, it nevertheless allowed his  appeal
    in a decision which was sent to the parties on 10  February  2018.  The
    Secretary  of  State  obtained  permission  to  appeal  the  tribunal's
    decision and, in a  decision  of  8  October  2018,  I  set  aside  the
    tribunal's decision (whilst preserving certain findings)  and  directed
    that the decision should be  remade  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  after  a
    further hearing. That hearing took place on 8 February 2019. What I say
    below constitutes an explanation as to how I have remade  the  decision
    and why I have done so in the terms that I have.

 2. By way of background, the claimant was born on 15 August 1980. He is  a
    national of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity. He says that he is  from  Kirkuk
    in Iraq and that contention has not been the  subject  of  any  serious
    challenge. He is married and has two infant children. His wife and  the
    children are all Iraqi nationals. He says that he,  his  wife  and  his
    eldest child (the youngest not having been born at that time) left Iraq
    in August 2013 and stayed in Iran for a  period  of  three  years.  The
    youngest child was born in Iran. He says that they left that country in
    June 2016 and embarked on a journey through Turkey,  Bulgaria,  Serbia,
    Hungary and France before  entering  the  UK  in  March  of  2017.  The
    claimant made his claim for international protection on 29 March  2017.
    His wife and children were dependents upon that application.

 3. In seeking international protection, the claimant asserted that he  had
    made enemies in consequence of his refusal to work as a tile fitter for
    any of the local Mosques in Kirkuk.  As  a  consequence,  he  had  been
    abducted and physically assaulted. The Iraqi police had not  been  able
    to assist him. So, fearing for his own safety and that  of  his  family
    members, he secured the services of a people smuggler and that  is  why
    and how he and his family left Iraq. He says that they  then  lived  in
    Iran without incident until a time when he noticed a person  attempting
    to take a photograph of him in suspicious circumstances. He  says  that
    he thought that this incident might be linked to his problems  in  Iraq
    and that the photographer might be linked to his enemies in  Iraq.  So,
    he and his family left Iran and embarked upon the above  difficult  and
    extensive journey.

 4. The claimant's case, when put to the tribunal, had a number of  strands
    to it. He asserted he would be harmed, once again, by the  persons  who
    had previously harmed him, or by their associates, if he were  to  have
    to return to his home area of Kirkuk. But anyway, he contended that the
    instability in Kirkuk meant it was a "contested  area"  such  that  the
    test contained within Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive  was
    met. So, he said, if returned he  would  for  one  or  other  of  these
    reasons have to relocate  away  from  his  own  area.  He  argued  that
    requiring him to go to Baghdad or the  region  of  Iraq  under  Kurdish
    administration and control (the IKR) would be  unreasonable.  That  was
    particularly so, he asserted, because he no  longer  possessed  a  CSID
    card (a crucial identity document in Iraq) and w0uld not be able to get
    one.

 5. The tribunal disbelieved the claimant's account concerning the  refusal
    to work for local Mosques and the consequent abduction and assault.  It
    allowed his appeal, though, primarily because it accepted  he  did  not
    have a CSID card and would not be able to  obtain  one.  That  rendered
    internal flight unreasonable or unduly harsh.  When  I  set  aside  the
    tribunal's decision I did so because I thought against  the  background
    of its disbelief of the  account  of  persecution  in  Kirkuk,  it  was
    required to say more than it did about why it was believing him when he
    asserted he did not possess a CSID card and did not have the ability to
    obtain one upon return to Iraq. So, at the hearing of 8 February  2019,
    that was the issue with which I was primarily concerned.

 6. The claimant, as was permitted by the directions I had issued, provided
    a witness statement on 29 January 2019. In that statement he said  that
    he and his family's identity documentation had been taken by  a  people
    smuggler who they had met in Istanbul. He said he  had  previously  had
    close family members living in Iraq being his parents,  a  brother  and
    two sisters. But he had had no contact with any of those family members
    since he had left Iraq in 2013. As to his wife's  family,  her  parents
    were deceased and she has four siblings but none  of  those  remain  in
    Iraq. Two are in Turkey and two are in Germany. He had had a  telephone
    number for an uncle in Iraq but attempts to contact  him  by  telephone
    had been unsuccessful.

 7. The claimant gave oral evidence at the hearing before me. In  so  doing
    he reiterated that he was no longer in contact with any  family  member
    in Iraq. He could not return to Kirkuk. He could not live  in  the  IKR
    because he has no family there. He thought he might be able to obtain a
    CSID card but then said, in effect, he might  not  be  able  to  do  so
    because he does not know "if everything has been destroyed or  not"  in
    Kirkuk.

 8. In remaking my decision, I have taken full account of the oral evidence
    I have heard and all of  the  documentation  before  me  including  the
    documents which were before the tribunal when it heard  the  appeal.  I
    have reminded myself  of  and  applied  the  lower  standard  of  proof
    applicable in international protection cases  and  which  is  sometimes
    referred to as the real risk test.

 9. In this case I have preserved findings, as noted above, to  the  effect
    that the claimant has sought to deliberately mislead  with  respect  to
    the claimed events in Kirkuk. That means I  must  treat  what  he  says
    about other matters with a good deal of caution. But it  does  not,  of
    itself, mean that I should  automatically  disbelieve  everything  else
    which he claims. But I must scrutinise what he says carefully.

10. The claimant asserts that he does not have a CSID card. Clearly,  given
    the accepted importance of such documentation,  the  claimant  and  his
    wife will each have had such documentation when living in Iraq. Indeed,
    the claimant accepts that. But he says that those CSID cards and  other
    identification documents were all taken from him by a people smugger in
    Turkey. His contention as to that particular detail  was  not  directly
    challenged in cross-examination. But I do  not  regard  that  as  being
    indicative of any implied acceptance of what he says by  the  Secretary
    of State. Nevertheless, I think it plausible  that  a  people  smuggler
    might wish to take identity documentation away from those who are being
    smuggled perhaps in order to secure  or  maintain  control  over  them.
    Accordingly, notwithstanding the claimant's having misled  about  other
    matters, I have concluded that, to the lower standard,  I  am  able  to
    accept what he says about that.

11. I need to make findings as to whether the claimant or his wife do  have
    family members in Iraq who might be able to assist with respect to  the
    obtaining of a CSID card. Again, I must take into account with  respect
    to this, the claimant's previous dishonesty. But he has been consistent
    with respect to the lack of content with family members  in  Iraq.  The
    claim that his wife's siblings have left Iraq and  are  in  Turkey  and
    Germany is not at all implausible given the instability seen in Iraq in
    recent years and the consequent movement of people out of that country.
    Given that same instability, particularly in Kirkuk, the claim that  he
    is no longer in touch with  his  own  family  members  is  not  at  all
    implausible either. The consistency of what he has  had  to  say  about
    this and the plausibility of it has led me to  conclude  that,  to  the
    lower standard of proof applicable in such cases, I should believe him.

12. Having reached the above findings, I  must  now  consider  whether  the
    claimant will be able to obtain a CSID card within a reasonable time of
    his return to Iraq. As to that I have borne in mind what  was  said  by
    the Upper Tribunal in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation)  Iraq  CG
    UKUT 00212 (IAC). As to the relevant considerations identified  in  AAH
    relevant to obtaining CSID cards, I accept that the  claimant  and  his
    wife do not possess any documentation of any sort. I accept  that  they
    are from Kirkuk which has,  whether  it  does  or  does  not  remain  a
    "contested area" seen much upheaval in the past. There  is  nothing  in
    the material before me to suggest that the  civil  registry  office  in
    Kirkuk is open and functioning. I would conclude that it is not. I have
    accepted that the claimant does not have family  members  in  Iraq  and
    that his wife does not have family members  there  either.  That  means
    there will be no male family members to assist either of them in  order
    to seek to obtain a CSID card.

13. In the circumstances I would conclude that neither the claimant nor his
    wife will be able to obtain a CSID card within a reasonable time frame,
    if at all, upon return to Iraq. The point  of  return,  following  AHH,
    will inevitably be Baghdad. I do not consider it reasonable to  require
    or expect the claimant and his wife, with two young children,  to  take
    advantage of an internal flight alternative in Baghdad. That is because
    without a CSID card they  will  not  be  able  to  access  services  or
    legitimate employment, they will be absent family support  in  Baghdad,
    they will be seeking to settle in  a  city  with  which  they  are  not
    familiar, they will have nobody to assist them  in  finding  employment
    and will have no means of  supporting  themselves  or  their  children.
    Further, without a CSID card they will not be able to board a  domestic
    flight from Baghdad to the IKR. Such was stated in AAH. I do  not  have
    any reason to think, even if return to  Kirkuk  were  to  be  otherwise
    feasible, they would be able  to  take  a  domestic  flight  to  Kirkuk
    without a CSID card and it has not been  argued  before  me  that  they
    could do that. Any attempt to travel by road to the IKR  or  to  Kirkuk
    would be fraught with difficulty and such was also stated in AAH.

14. In the above circumstances I would conclude that the  claimant  is  not
    able to relocate either to the IKR or Baghdad. It has not in fact  been
    argued before me that he will be able to return to Kirkuk  or  that  he
    will no longer face an Article 15(c) risk if he does manage  to  return
    there. The claimant is not a refugee within the  meaning  of  the  1951
    Refugee Convention because any ill treatment he would receive  in  Iraq
    would not be for a 1951 Convention reason. But in light  of  the  above
    his appeal, nevertheless, succeeds on humanitarian  protection  grounds
    and under Article 3 of the ECHR.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and  has  been  set  aside.  In  remaking  the  decision,  I  allow  the
claimant's appeal from the Secretary of State's  decision  of  27  September
2017  refusing  to  grant  him  international  protection.  I   do   so   on
humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.


Signed:     Dated: 19 March 2019

M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal granted the  claimant  anonymity.  I  continue  that
grant under rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
Accordingly, no report of these proceedings shall identify the  claimant  or
any member of his family.  Any  breach  may  result  in  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Signed:     Dated: 19 March 2019

M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

To the Respondent

Fee award

Since no fee is payable and since, in any event, the claimant has  succeeded
in his appeal, there can be no fee award.


Signed:     Dated: 19 March 2019

M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


