
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/10047/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Birmingham                  |          Decision and Reasons       |
|On 10th August 2017                   |Promulgated                          |
|                                      |On 15th August 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     RFA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Barnfield, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a male national of Iraq born in 1994.




    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal concerns a claim for international protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The Appellant is accepted to be a national of Iraq.  The basis  of  his
    claim for international protection is that his home area in the Nineveh
    governate is 'contested', that is to say that there is there a conflict
    between ISIS (or Daesh) and  the  government  of  Iraq  and  associated
    forces. This conflict results in indiscriminate violence that  presents
    a real risk of harm to civilians. The Appellant further stated that  he
    could not avail himself of 'internal flight' anywhere else in Iraq.  He
    claimed that as an undocumented Kurdish man with no connections to  the
    city, life in Baghdad would be unduly harsh. He was  unable  to  safely
    move to the Independent Kurdish Region (IKR) because  of  his  family's
    historical links  to  the  Ba'athist  regime  of  Saddam  Hussain.  The
    Appellant stated that an uncle who had ventured into the IKR  had  been
    killed by members of the Muziri tribe because of that association.


 4. In her refusal letter dated 7th September 2016 the Respondent  accepted
    [at paragraph 35] that the Appellant is from Qabussi village, Shinghal,
    Nineveh province. She further accepted that  his  detailed  account  of
    events, in  particular  the  advance  of  Daesh  in  August  2014,  was
    consistent with the background  information.  The  Respondent  accepted
    that the Appellant's home is in an area where Article 15(c) is engaged.
    The claim was refused however, on the grounds that the Appellant  could
    avail himself of a safe and reasonable internal flight alternative. His
    claim that  he  was  in  danger  in  the  IKR  because  of  his  family
    associations was expressly rejected.

 5. When the matter came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant
    relied on both asylum and humanitarian protection grounds. He submitted
    there to be a currently well-founded fear of harm because of his family
    association with the Ba'athist regime, and averred that he would not be
    able to live in safety in the IKR. In  the  alternative,  he  submitted
    that as an undocumented Iraqi national with no connections to  the  IKR
    he  would  face  considerable  civil,  political   and   socio-economic
    difficulties in re-establishing himself there.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 7. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal on the 12th May 2017  by
    Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shaerf  who  considered  it
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had not engaged with the case  as
    put by the Appellant. The decision had failed to refer to  the  country
    guidance, or apply the appropriate tests in consideration  of  internal
    flight.
    Discussion and Findings

 8. I need say little about the detailed substance of the  grounds  because
    before me Mrs Aboni recognised that  she  was  in  some  difficulty  in
    defending this decision. In particular, she conceded that the  Tribunal
    had not turned its mind at all to  the  question  of  internal  flight,
    apparently proceeding on the assumption that the brief rejection of the
    refugee claim disposed of the entire appeal.


 9. Having heard from both parties I am satisfied that the decision must be
    set aside for the following errors of law:

              i) Failing to make findings on relevant matters.


                 The determination makes no finding on  whether  or  not  it
                 would be unduly harsh to expect the Appellant  to  relocate
                 within Iraq, for instance to the IKR.  Even if  the  asylum
                 element of the claim was properly rejected, this remained a
                 relevant question in respect of Article 15(c).


             ii) Failing to take relevant evidence into account.


                 The Appellant's claimed fear of armed elements in  the  IKR
                 is rejected on the basis that his  grandfather  and  father
                 had not to date been  harmed.  No  consideration  was  here
                 given to the evidence that these gentlemen were not  living
                 in the IKR, and so were out of the reach  of  the  elements
                 feared.


                 At paragraph 13 the  Tribunal  states  that  there  is  "no
                 evidence" to suggest that the Appellant's family  have  had
                 any difficulties since  the  fall  of  Saddam.  This  would
                 appear to overlook his claim that his uncle was  killed  by
                 the Muziri tribe in the IKR  because  of  his  associations
                 with the former regime.


            iii) Perversity


                 At paragraph 15 the Tribunal  finds,  on  the  basis  of  a
                 sojourn in France, that the Appellant was not truly seeking
                 international protection, and that he simply wanted to come
                 and live in the UK.  Given that the Respondent had accepted
                 that Daesh had taken over the Appellant's  home  town,  and
                 that his account of fleeing the  Mount  Sinjar  area  along
                 with many thousands of others was detailed and credible,  I
                 cannot be satisfied that this was a finding reasonably open
                 to the Tribunal. The Appellant's claim  may  in  the  final
                 analysis  be  defeated  by  other  issues,  but  it  cannot
                 rationally be said that he had left Iraq  just  because  he
                 wanted to come to the UK.


             iv) Failure to give the claim anxious scrutiny

                 This was a  detailed  account  very  largely  supported  by
                 objective  background   information.   This   determination
                 entirely fails to engage with the account  itself,  and  as
                 noted by Judge Shaerf, makes no  attempt  to  evaluate  the
                 claim in the context of the  country  background  material,
                 nor indeed the extant country guidance.

10. The parties were in agreement that the  appropriate  course  of  action
    would be for the matter to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that the decision can be re-made de novo.  Having  had  regard  to  the
    extent of judicial fact finding required, I accept that  this  must  be
    so.




    Decisions


11. For the reasons set out above I am satisfied that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law. The  decision  is
    set aside in its entirety.


12. There is an order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            10th August 2017


