
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10132/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 11.1.19                           |On 4.2.19                            |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                     A M
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel, instructed by Broudie Jackson
                    Canter Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the
      First tier Tribunal  Brookfield  dated  14  May  2018  dismissing  the
      appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  dated  20
      September 2017 refusing his protection  claim.   The  appellant  is  a
      national of Iran, and has been present with his  wife  in  the  United
      Kingdom since October 2013. He had previously claimed  asylum  on  the
      basis that the Iranian authorities had found material on a computer CD
      in his shop (which  provided  computing  services),  relating  to  the
      Baha'i faith. By the time that his earlier appeal was heard in January
      2015 it was also asserted that both he and his wife were then actually
      interested  in  the  Baha'i  faith.  The   appellant's   account   was
      disbelieved and his appeal dismissed. An appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
      was also dismissed. It would appear  that  the  appellant  pursued  an
      appeal to the Court of  Appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  First  tier
      Tribunal had not adequately considered a potential risk on  return  to
      the appellant as an undocumented failed asylum seeker (see summary  of
      those events in the second paragraph of a letter from the  appellant's
      solicitors dated 25 April 2017 at  B8  of  the  Respondent's  bundle).
      However, that appeal was withdrawn by the appellant by consent.

2     In time, the appellant made a fresh claim for asylum  (in  the  letter
      dated 25 April 2017 referred to above). Evidence  that  the  appellant
      relied upon, postdating the original First-tier Tribunal  decision  of
      2015 included two letters, both dated 24 August 2015, relating to  the
      appellant and his  wife  respectively,  from  the  National  Spiritual
      Assembly of the Baha'i is (hereafter, 'NSA'), which provide:

           "It is with great  joy  that  the  National  Spiritual  Assembly
           welcomes you as a member of the Baha'i community. We are pleased
           to enclose two small books as a gift,  including  a  prayer-book
           ..."

3     Since the first hearing, the appellant and his wife had also  had  two
      children born to them in the United  Kingdom,  in  January  2015,  and
      March 2017 respectively. The appellant asserted that he and  his  wife
      were, notwithstanding the adverse findings of the  Tribunal  in  2015,
      genuine adherents of the faith, and would be at real risk  of  serious
      harm on return to Iran.

4     The respondent refused that protection claim, but did not certify  it,
      and hence the appellant was entitled to appeal against  that  decision
      to the Tribunal.

5     The appeal came before the judge on 30  April  2018.  The  appellant's
      children were then aged one and  three  years  old  respectively.  The
      judge noted at [8(v)-(vii)] that the evidence before her included  the
      oral evidence of three witnesses who were themselves  members  of  the
      Baha'i community.  The appellant also relied on an  additional  letter
      from the NSA, dated 25 October 2017.

6     In her decision, the judge set out at [10(i)-(vi)] the history of  the
      appeal, including the adverse credibility findings made in  2015,  and
      treated those findings as her starting point, applying  the  authority
      of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702. The judge then set out her  findings
      relevant to her own assessment of the credibility of  the  appellant's
      protection claim, her  most  relevant  finding  being  at  10(vii)  to
      (xiii). I do not set them out in full, but I mention the following:

           "(vii)      I  note  the  letter  from  the  National  Spiritual
                 Assembly of the Bahais of the United Kingdom, advises  that
                 appropriate and careful steps  were  taken  to  ensure  the
                 appellant  and  his  wife  were  genuine  convert  to  this
                 religion.  It does not explain what the steps were or  what
                 the process is for a person to register within this  faith.
                 It does not identify that any members of  the  group  which
                 the appellant and his wife attend  were  interviewed  about
                 the level of the appellant's and his wife's  attendance  at
                 their local group, or identify  with  actual  evidence  the
                 nine people on the National Council, who have never met the
                 appellant or his wife, used to conclude the  appellant  and
                 his wife were genuine converts to the Bahai  faith.  I  did
                 not find the assurance of the  National  Assembly  that  it
                 takes appropriate and careful steps to assess  whether  the
                 person's desire to register as a Bahai has arisen from  his
                 or  her  genuine  belief  in  the  Bahai  faith,  or   that
                 confirmation that such steps were taken in the  appellant's
                 and his wife's registration to be  reliable  evidence  that
                 their conversion to this faith is genuine, when there is no
                 explanation in the letter of the  registration  process  or
                 what it involves or the actual evidence  the  nine  members
                 and the National Council considered to reach  the  decision
                 to register the appellant and his wife as members  of  this
                 faith.

           ...

           (xii) The appellant called three witnesses to  provide  evidence
                 of  his  attendance  at  Bahai  gatherings,  meetings   and
                 celebrations.  Each  of  the  witnesses  advised  that  the
                 appellant and his wife were good people who held  devotions
                 at their home and were kind had accepted the founder of the
                 Bahai faith and had registered their children in the faith.
                 These witnesses are all friends of the  appellant  and  his
                 wife. They are therefore  not  independent.  I  accept  the
                 appellant and his wife attend Bahai gatherings and meetings
                 and have gleaned  sufficient  knowledge  about  this  faith
                 since they arrived in the UK.  I  also  accept  that  their
                 friends in this faith  believe  their  acceptance  of  this
                 religion to be genuine. However, unlike  the  witnesses,  I
                 have to view the evidence in the round."

7     Due to those and other reasons given between 10(vii)-(xiii) the  judge
      held that she did not find it reasonably likely that the appellant  or
      his wife would practice or would intend to practice the  Baha'i  faith
      on their return to Iran, and dismissed the appeal on  asylum  grounds.
      She considered the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds  between
      10(xiv)-(xx) and held that the removal of the family members  to  Iran
      would not be unlawful under section 6 Human Rights Act 1998.

8     The appellant appeals against that  decision  on  renewed  grounds  of
      appeal dated 29 June 2018 which argue that the judge erred in law,  in
      summary, as follows:

      (i)   failing to have adequate regard to the letter of the  NSA  dated
           25 October 2017; the judge  noted  that  the  document  did  not
           provide an explanation of what the registration process involved
           or what evidence had been considered to make  the  decision;  it
           was argued that  the  judge  had  failed  to  explain  why  this
           information was relevant  to  her  finding  that  the  NSA  'are
           unreliable as a source of evidence';

      (ii)  failing to give anxious scrutiny and sufficient  weight  to  the
           witness evidence of three supporting witnesses who attended  the
           hearing; the Baha'i faith does not have ministers,  and  in  the
           absence of  any  possible  Dorodian  witness,  those  witnesses'
           evidence should have been given greater weight;

      (iii) confining her consideration to the issues which were before  the
           Tribunal in January 2015, and  incorrectly  recording  that  the
           Court of Appeal dismissed the appellant's previous appeal;

      (iv)  failing to give anxious scrutiny to the appellant's evidence  of
           his continued four year practice of  the  Baha'i  faith  in  the
           United Kingdom;

      (v)   failing to  consider  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
           children, in failing to consider what  impact  would  result  to
           their no longer being able to practice their faith in the UK;

      (vi)  failing to consider the country guidance  case  of  SSH  and  HR
           (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran (CG) [2016]  UKUT  308
           (IAC), and what treatment the appellant  and  his  family  would
           face on return to Iran as undocumented failed asylum seekers; it
           was asserted that the appellants would be questioned  on  return
           to Iran,  and  the  judge  was  required  to  consider  how  the
           authorities would deal with the undisputed facts that  they  had
           been practising the Baha'i faith in the UK  for  4  �  years;  a
           significant period of time, and they were registered members  of
           the Baha'i; it was said that these were issues likely  to  arise
           during an initial questioning of the appellant on return,  which
           could lead to further questioning likely to cause serious harm.


9     Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  21  September  2018  by  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Chalkley on the basis that the ground were arguable.

10    I heard submissions from the parties

      Discussion

11    Mr. Brown drew my attention to the content of the initial two  letters
      from the NSA dated 24 August 2015, and to the  letter  of  25  October
      2017. That letter provides, on the issue of the appellant's membership
      of the faith, as follows:

           "We confirm the status of Mr. (AMM) and Mrs. (LM) as  registered
           Baha'is in good standing since  24  August  2015.  The  National
           Spiritual Assembly is aware that individuals may seek to use the
           formal registration process as one of possibly a number of means
           of attempting to  obtain  refugee  status  within  the  UK,  and
           therefore takes appropriate and careful steps to assess  whether
           a person's desire to register as a Baha'i has arisen from his or
           her genuine belief in the Baha'i Faith. We can confirm that such
           steps were taken in this case.
           It may be helpful for you to know that as the governing body  of
           the Baha'i faith in the United Kingdom, it falls to  this  body,
           and to  this  body  alone,  to  determine  through  a  carefully
           considered protocol, whether one  is  a  member  of  the  Baha'i
           community or not. It is not in the interest of this Assembly  to
           register as Baha'is those who are not genuine in their desire to
           be Baha'is. Indeed it would be contrary to our  interest  to  do
           so.

           As a matter of policy,  the  National  Assembly  does  not  send
           representatives as witnesses to attend court hearings  for  such
           matters, however, we understand that Mr. (M) Mrs. (M) have  been
           in touch with Baha'i friends within their local  community,  and
           they may be able to  testify  and  support  them  at  the  court
           hearing should their circumstances permit them to do so."

12    The remainder of the letter largely draws the  reader's  attention  to
      human rights reports about the position of the Baha'i in Iran.

13    Mr. Brown argued that the content  of  the  letter  should  have  been
      sufficient to satisfy the  judge  that  the  appellants  were  genuine
      followers of the Baha'i faith in the United Kingdom, and the judge was
      not entitled to complain about the lack of description of the protocol
      or methods by which the Assembly had determined that the appellant and
      his wife were genuine adherents of the faith.

14    I find that the judge  was  entitled  to  have  regard  to  the  clear
      deficiencies in the letter from the NSA. Even accepting at face  value
      Mr. Brown's point that the Baha'i community do not  appoint  ministers
      to lead specific congregations, and therefore an appellant  is  unable
      to invite any such person to attend court  to  give  evidence  of  the
      genuineness of their beliefs, I find that the judge  was  entitled  to
      have regard to the absence within  the  NSA  letter  of  any  kind  of
      explanation as to their methodology. Whereas the NSA  states  that  it
      fell to that body, and to that body alone, to determine whether or not
      the person is a member of the Baha'i community in the  United  Kingdom
      or not, I accept that may well be the case  for  their  own  purposes.
      However that stricture cannot bind a decision maker  in  a  protection
      claim. A decision maker such as the judge in the present  is  entitled
      to be satisfied not only whether an individual takes  part  activities
      within the in Baha'i community, but whether this activity has  'arisen
      from his or her genuine belief in the Baha'i Faith', to use the  NSA's
      own expression. There is nothing within the letter which  explains  to
      the reader, such that the  reader  can  place  proper  weight  on  the
      letter, which explains how the NSA was satisfied of that issue.

15    The  NSA  has  also  consciously  adopted  a  policy  of  not  sending
      representatives  as  witnesses  to  attend  court  hearings  for  such
      matters. The combination  of  adopting  that  position,  providing  no
      information about the protocol that is used for them to  be  satisfied
      that the person has a belief in the Baha'i  faith,  and  providing  no
      details of the evidence actually considered by the NSA  to  reach  its
      decision, resulted in the judge  being  fully  entitled  to  find  the
      letter not to be 'reliable evidence  that  their  conversion  to  this
      faith was genuine' at [10(vii)]. More weight could have been  attached
      to the NSA's assertions if, for example, they had provided details  of
      evidence considered and the protocol applied, and/or sent a witness.

16    Mr Brown does not argue that the judge should simply  have  taken  the
      letter of the NSA at face  value,  there  being  no  other  reason  to
      disbelieve the appellant's claim to be a genuine convert to the Baha'i
      faith. The judge did have other reasons to doubt that, which  are  not
      challenged in this appeal: the judge did not believe  the  appellant's
      evidence regarding his motivation for, and timing of,  his  conversion
      [20(ix)-(x)] (and [10(xiii)] - his pathway to the Baha'i faith was not
      credible); there was  also  a  discrepancy  in  the  evidence  of  the
      appellant's wife as to whether not she  had  converted  to  the  Bahai
      faith in Iran [10(xi)]. The appellant's grounds  of  appeal  have  not
      established any error of approach to the NSA evidence.

17    Further, Mr. Brown argued that the judge had failed to  take  adequate
      account of the evidence given by the supporting witnesses. He drew  my
      attention in particular to the witness statement of Dr. Farshid Taleb,
      at page 12 of the appellant's bundle. The  witness  describes  how  he
      became friends with the appellant and his wife, then states:

           "During this period, I have observed that the family  have  been
           systematically and continuously active  in  all  the  activities
           offered by the Trafford Baha'i  community.  They  have  attended
           Baha'i study groups, devotional gatherings, Baha'i  monthly  the
           gatherings  (19  Day  Feasts),  Baha'i  Holy  Days,   Reflection
           Meetings, Unit Conventions, National Conventions may  have  held
           several gatherings at their own game as well.

           I remember Mr. (M) initially telling me that he did not have any
           religion and any believed in God, although his  wife  considered
           herself as a Baha'i in Iran following her associations with some
           of her Baha'i friends there. Over time  though,  as  he  learned
           more about the Baha'i teachings and studied the Baha'i Writings,
           he became more and more interested to such extent that he became
           a very active support of the Faith  and  eventually  decided  to
           become a Baha'i.

           I am well aware that the  National  Spiritual  Assembly  of  the
           Baha'is of United Kingdom, the  governing  body  of  the  Baha'i
           faith the United Kingdom, takes appropriate and careful steps to
           assess whether the person's desire to register as a  Baha'i  has
           arisen from his or her genuine belief in  the  Baha'i  faith  or
           not, and  I  have  no  doubt  whatsoever  that  they  must  have
           carefully considered Mr. (M)'s case before registering him as  a
           member of the Baha'i community."

18    Mr. Brown at one point appeared to  argue  that  the  evidence  of  Dr
      Taleb had been that he was himself aware of the  steps  that  the  NSA
      took to determine whether a person  was  a  genuine  adherent  of  the
      Baha'i faith, and that he should have been asked questions about  that
      if any further information had been required. However, as can be  seen
      from his letter quoted above, Dr Taleb makes  no  such  assertion;  he
      merely states that the  governing  body  of  the  Baha'i  faith  takes
      appropriate and careful steps to assess that matter,  and  he  had  no
      doubt that they must have carefully considered  the  appellant's  case
      before registering him. That, of itself, says  nothing  at  all  about
      what those methods were and does not establish that Dr Taleb knew what
      they were.

19    Further, it cannot properly be argued that it was procedurally  unfair
      for the judge not to have asked Dr. Taleb questions as  to  the  NSA's
      methodology; firstly, because there is nothing  in  his  letter  which
      suggests he knew what they were; and secondly, because  the  appellant
      has been on  notice  for  a  considerable  period  of  time  that  the
      respondent was not satisfied as to the genuineness of  his  conversion
      to the Baha'i faith. It was for the appellant to establish  his  case,
      on whatever evidence he chose to put forward.

20    Further, it is to be noted that Dr. Taleb  does  not  assert  that  he
      himself has had any conversations, in-depth  or  otherwise,  with  the
      appellant in order to come to a view of his  own  as  to  whether  the
      appellant's participation in Baha'i activities or his registration  as
      a member of the Baha'i community had arisen from a genuine  belief  in
      the Baha'i faith. The judge does not at [10(xii)] find the evidence of
      Dr Taleb and the other witnesses incredible; she  accepts  that  these
      friends may believe the conversion of the appellant and his wife to be
      genuine, but I find that the judge was entitled to find at  [10(xiii)]
      that she was unable to conclude that the appellant  or  his  wife  had
      established that there was a reasonable degree of likelihood that they
      were genuine converts to  the  Baha'i  faith.  I  find  no  procedural
      irregularity in the way that the judge dealt with the evidence of  the
      supporting witnesses.

21    There is nothing  in  the  suggestion  that  the  judge  confined  her
      consideration to the issues which were before the Tribunal in  January
      2015. The judge had regard to the evidence before her post dating that
      decision. Further, I cannot see that it is  material  to  the  judge's
      assessment of the appellant's credibility that the judge recorded that
      the appellant's previous appeal to the Court of Appeal  was  dismissed
      rather  than  withdrawn.  Further,  the  judge  had  regard   to   the
      appellant's participation in Baha'i activities in the UK,  and  indeed
      found that he had participated in such activities [10(xiii)], but  she
      found that such attendance was not out of  genuine  adherence  to  the
      faith.

22    Mr. Brown did not seriously pursue the suggestion that the  judge  had
      erred  in  failing  to  consider  what  impact  might  result  to  the
      appellant's children, being one and three years old  respectively,  no
      longer being able to  practice  their  faith  in  the  UK.  Given  the
      children's ages, and given that the judge's findings of fact were that
      the children's parents were not genuine convert to the faith,  he  was
      right not pursue the point.

23    In relation to the ground of appeal  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
      consider what questions the appellant may face at the pinch  point  of
      return to Iran, and whether any questioning would be likely to  result
      in it being disclosed that  the  appellant  had  been  practising  the
      Baha'i faith in the United Kingdom, I asked Mr. Brown  to  demonstrate
      whether this issue had actually been raised in the appellant's grounds
      of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the   respondent's
      decision, or in any witness evidence or skeleton argument  put  before
      the judge. He was unable to do so.  He  invited  me  to  consider  the
      judge's record of proceedings, to  see  if  Ms.  Mason,  who  appeared
      before the judge, had advanced any such argument. I find that this  is
      something of  a  fishing  expedition.  Nonetheless  I  considered  the
      judge's record of the submissions, and there was nothing  recorded  to
      indicate that Ms. Mason had made such an argument.

24    I find that the judge did not err in  failing  to  consider  a  matter
      that was not put to her.

25    Further, I find that it is doubtful,  having  regard  to  the  country
      guidance given in SSH and HR, that the judge was obliged  of  her  own
      motion to consider what the appellant might say  if  asked  on  return
      about their time and activities in  the  United  Kingdom.  I  find  on
      balance the judge was not under any obligation to consider that  issue
      in the present case. The judge therefore is not  err  in  law  in  the
      having failed to consider the matter.

26    However, if I am wrong in my assessment in that regard,  I  find  that
      what the appellant that might say, speaking truthfully to the  Iranian
      authorities, was not that they were 'practising' the Baha'i  faith  in
      the United Kingdom, but rather, applying the judge's findings of fact,
      which are not vitiated by error of law, that  they  were  involved  in
      activities with the Baha'i community, but were not  genuine  adherents
      to the faith. They would not be able to  genuinely  assert  that  they
      were converts to the Baha'i faith.

27    In those circumstances, I find that there is nothing  within  SSH  and
      HR which would suggest that appellant or his wife  would  be  at  real
      risk of serious harm on return. As per SSH and HR  at  [30];  "We  can
      understand the sensitivity  that  the  Iranian  authorities  may  have
      towards perceived slights against their  own  state  in  the  form  of
      untruthful allegations about the conduct of the state, but equally one
      can expect a degree of reality on their part in relation to people who
      in the interests of advancing their economic circumstances would  make
      up a story in order to  secure  economic  betterment  in  a  wealthier
      country."  Mr. Brown did not draw to my attention any country guidance
      or country evidence suggesting that a person who had  associated  with
      members of the Baha'i community in the UK, but who was not  a  genuine
      convert to the Baha'i  faith,  and  who  would  not,  on  the  judge's
      findings, practice or intend to practice the Baha'i faith on return to
      Iran, would face any real risk of serious harm on return to Iran.

28    Therefore, even had the judge been obliged to consider this  point,  I
      find that she would,  on  her  own  findings  as  to  the  appellant's
      account, have held that the appellant would not face any real risk  of
      harm.

      Decision

      The decision did not involve the making of any material error of law.

      I do not set aside the judge's decision.

      The  judge's  decision  is  upheld,  and  the  appellant's  appeal  is
      dismissed.


Signed:                                            Date: 17.1.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

This appeal concerns a protection claim. Unless  and until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them or  any  member
of their family. This direction applies both to the appellants  and  to  the
respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.


Signed:                                            Date: 17.1.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

