
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10577/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Wednesday 24 March 2021                 |On Wednesday 07 April 2021      |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                                     F S
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity order was not made by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  this
is an appeal on protection grounds.  It is  therefore  appropriate  to  make
that order.  Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant (as she was in the First-tier Tribunal) is granted  anonymity.  No
report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  her  or
any member of her family. This direction applies, amongst  others,  to  both
parties. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Fisher, Counsel instructed by  Malik  and  Malik
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1. The Secretary of State is the appellant in this appeal.  For ease of
   reference, however, I refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier
   Tribunal.  The Respondent appeals against the decision of First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Daldry promulgated on 19 October 2020 ("the Decision"). By
   the Decision, the Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal against the
   Respondent's decision dated 21 October 2019, refusing her protection and
   human rights claims.


2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  She came to the UK on 12
   March 2015 with leave to enter to 1 December 2017 as the spouse of a
   British citizen.  Her husband is of Afghani origin.  They met in
   Afghanistan in 2012 and married there in 2014.  On 30 November 2017, the
   Appellant applied for further leave.  That application was refused on the
   basis that her husband did not meet the financial requirements of the
   Immigration Rules.

3. On 9 August 2018, the Appellant claimed asylum.  She claimed to be at
   risk on return as a lone woman.  The Respondent refused that claim on the
   basis that the Appellant still has family in Afghanistan or in the
   alternative could return with her husband who would therefore support
   her.   The Respondent asserted that the Appellant's family life with her
   husband could be expected to continue in Afghanistan.

4. As I will come to below, at some point following the refusal of her
   claim and lodging of appeal, the Appellant modified her protection claim.
    For ease of reference, I refer to that hereafter as "the New Claim".
   The Appellant now claims that there is a specific risk to her on return
   due to the association which her brother, [D], has with prominent figures
   in Afghanistan.  As a result, it is said that [D] is at risk from the
   Taliban and that the Appellant and her husband (if he chose to accompany
   her on return) would be at risk due to their association with [D].  The
   Appellant claims that her sister has had to leave Afghanistan following
   the disappearance of the sister's husband.  It is suspected that his
   disappearance may be linked to a perceived association with [D].

5. The Judge accepted the New Claim as credible.  She found therefore that
   the Appellant would be at risk on return to Afghanistan.  She also found
   that the Appellant would be at risk on return as a lone woman (in other
   words on the basis of her original claim) but including on the basis that
   the Appellant's husband could not be expected to accompany her as he too
   might be put at risk due to his association with [D].

6. The Respondent challenges the Decision on three grounds as follows:

       Ground one: The New Claim amounts to a "new matter".  The Judge was
       therefore precluded from dealing with it, absent consent of the
       Respondent.


       Ground two: The Judge has failed to make a finding about an
       inconsistency in the New Claim in relation to the obtaining of
       documents from Afghanistan.


       Ground three: The Judge has failed to note that the Appellant's
       husband has returned to Afghanistan on two occasions when
       determining that he would be at risk and therefore could not
       accompany the Appellant.  Further, the Judge has failed to have
       regard to the country guidance in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan
       CG [2020] UKUT 130 (IAC) ("AS (Afghanistan)") concerning the reach
       of the Taliban in Kabul.

7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio on 16
   November 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:


         "... 2.  With regards to the issue of the judge erring by dealing
         with a matter which had not been raised previously and should not
         have been dealt with, the Respondent was at the hearing to object
         if it was perceived that any matter was a new matter.  There is
         nowhere in the determination where the judge records that such
         occurred, that this was not part of the Applicant's case.  With
         regards to the second issue the inconsistencies concerning the
         Applicant's claim to have obtained her brother's documents by
         WhatsApp, the Respondent raises the issue that the judge has not
         resolved this matter in view of the fact that the Applicant claims
         to have lost contact with the brother.  Furthermore, with regards
         to the issue of the Applicant not being able to return with her
         husband because he too would be at risk due to his association with
         the Applicant's brother, the Respondent points out that the
         Applicant's husband has returned to Afghanistan on two occasions
         with no reported problems.
         3.   It was submitted that there are no adequate reasons given for
         the findings.  The cumulative grounds of matters referred to at
         paragraphs 35 and 52 raise an arguable error of law as they are
         crucial to the findings that the Applicant would face risk on
         return.  In the interests of justice and grounds of fairness
         permission is also granted to deal with the ground on whether a new
         matter should have been raised with regards to the Applicant being
         at risk of persecution in Afghanistan due to her association with
         her brother [D] since it affects the final outcome of the appeal.
         Permission to appeal is granted."


8. The Appellant filed a Rule 24 response dated 3 December 2020.  It is
   said that Judge Adio refused permission on ground one.  That is not the
   case.  First, the operative part of a decision in response to an
   application for permission to appeal is the decision and not the reasons
   for it.  The decision does not indicate any limited grant.  Further, it
   is clear from the penultimate sentence of the reasons that the Judge did
   not intend to limit the grant of permission.  It is also said in response
   to this ground that the Respondent was on notice as to the New Claim in
   July 2020 and had ample time to respond to it.


9. In relation to ground two, the Appellant points out that the Respondent
   did not challenge the authenticity of the documents.  What was important
   was the credibility of the Appellant and her husband.  It is said that
   there was no material challenge to their credibility.  In essence, the
   Appellant says that the Judge was entitled to reach the findings she did
   based on the testimony of the witnesses and the documents.

10. In relation to ground three, the Appellant points out that her husband
   had returned to Afghanistan only in 2012 and 2014 prior to the events
   giving rise to the claim based on association with [D].  The Appellant
   points out that the Judge considered safety of relocation to Kabul but
   noted that the guidance in AS (Afghanistan) was concerned with single
   adult males and not women.


11. By a Note and Directions dated 30 November 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge
   Pitt indicated that it might be appropriate to determine the error of law
   issue without a hearing.  The parties were invited to provide
   observations on that course.  The Appellant objected.  So it was that the
   hearing came before me as a remote hearing via Skype for Business.  There
   were some initial difficulties with Ms Fisher's connection.  However,
   once that was resolved, the hearing proceeded without technical
   difficulties.  I had before me a bundle of the core documents relating to
   the appeal, and, thanks to Mr Clarke's efforts, the Appellant's original
   and supplementary bundles.

12. The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision contains
   an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make the decision or
   remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

13. I deal with each of the grounds in turn.

Ground One


14. I did not understand Ms Fisher to suggest that the New Claim did not
   amount to a "new matter".  I therefore begin with the importance of that
   issue for the lawfulness of the Decision.


15. Section 85 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002
   Act") ("Section 85") sets out the matters which the Tribunal can consider
   when hearing an appeal.  Since the changes to the appeal regime made by
   the Immigration Act 2014, Section 85 has included the following
   provisions:

         "(1) An appeal under section 82(1) against the decision shall be
         treated by the Tribunal as including an appeal against any decision
         in respect of which the appellant has a right of appeal under
         section 82(1).
         (2)  If an appellant under section 82(1) makes a statement under
         section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any matter raised in a
         statement which constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in
         section 84 against the decision appealed against.
         (3)  Subsection (2) applies to a statement made under section 120
         whether the statement was made before or after the appeal was
         commenced.
         (4)  On an appeal under section 82(1) against a decision the
         Tribunal may consider any matter which it thinks relevant to the
         substance of the decision, including a matter arising after the
         date of the decision.
         (5)  But the Tribunal must not consider a new matter unless the
         Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent to do so.
         (6)  A matter is a "new matter" if-
         (a)  it constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in section
    84, and
         (b)  the Secretary of State has not previously considered the
    matter in the context of-
         (i)  the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or
         (ii) a statement made by the appellant under section 120."

16. Section 86 of the 2002 Act provides that on an appeal, the Tribunal
   "must determine ... any matter raised as a ground of appeal ... and ...
   any matter which section 85 requires it to consider".  That then sets out
   the limits of the Tribunal's jurisdiction.


17. What constitutes a "new matter" was considered by this Tribunal (Vice-
   President and UTJ Jackson) in Mahmud (S.85 NIAA 2002 - 'new matters')
   [2017] UKUT 00488 (IAC) ("Mahmud").  The headnote reads as follows:


       "1.   Whether something is or is not a  'new  matter'  goes  to  the
       jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal in the appeal and the First-
       tier Tribunal must therefore determine for itself the issue.
       2.             A 'new matter' is a matter which constitutes a ground
       of appeal of a kind listed in section 84,  as  required  by  section
       85(6)(a) of the 2002 Act.  Constituting a  ground  of  appeal  means
       that it must contain a matter  which  could  raise  or  establish  a
       listed ground of appeal.  A matter is the  factual  substance  of  a
       claim.  A ground of appeal is the legal basis on which the facts  in
       any given matter could form the basis of a challenge to the decision
       under appeal.
       3.             In practice, a new matter is a factual matrix  which
       has not previously been considered by the Secretary of State in  the
       context of the decision in section 82(1) or a statement made by  the
       appellant under  section  120.   This  requires  the  matter  to  be
       factually distinct from that previously raised by an  appellant,  as
       opposed to further or better evidence of an  existing  matter.   The
       assessment will always be fact sensitive."
       [my emphasis]


18. It cannot sensibly be suggested based on the guidance given in Mahmud
   that the New Claim was not to be categorised as a "new matter".  The
   Appellant's original claim was a general one based on her membership of a
   particular social group, namely lone women in Afghanistan.  Although the
   presence of the Appellant's brother [D] was relevant to that claim, the
   Respondent having raised this as reason why the Appellant would have
   support on return, the Appellant at that time said that she had little
   contact with him.  His presence in Afghanistan and her association with
   him formed no part of any claimed individual risk to her.  I did not
   understand Ms Fisher to argue to the contrary.


19. What is said in the Rule 24 response and Ms Fisher's submissions
   concerned the factual background to the raising and Respondent's reaction
   to the New Claim.  It is said in the Rule 24 response that the New Claim
   was raised by the Appellant with the Respondent in July 2020.  I accept
   that the detail of the claim and the documents relating to it are in the
   Appellant's original bundle. I was told that this was served on the
   Respondent in July 2020.  Mr Clarke did not dispute that.

20. Mr Clarke also accepted, as said in the Rule 24 response, that there
   was a CMR in the appeal in August 2020.  He informed me based on a note
   made by the Presenting Officer who attended that hearing that the "new
   matter" issue had been raised at that hearing but the Judge dealing with
   the CMR indicated that this was a matter for the Judge at the full
   hearing (consistently with the guidance given in Mahmud).  The order made
   following the CMR does not take matters any further in that regard.  Both
   representatives also accepted that there was a hearing of this appeal
   listed in September 2020, but Mr Clarke said this had to be adjourned due
   to a lack of an interpreter.


21. It was not suggested, however, in either the Rule 24 response or Ms
   Fisher's submissions that the New Claim had ever been formally raised
   with the Respondent by way of a section 120 statement.  Mr Clarke was
   unable to find one on file.  There is none in the Appellant's bundles.
   Even if the New Claim was formally raised in that way, the issue under
   Section 85 is not whether the Respondent has had the opportunity to deal
   with it but whether she has consented to it being raised.  I also observe
   as an aside that, whilst a period of a few months might well be
   sufficient in usual circumstances for the Respondent to consider new
   facts and produce a supplementary letter in response, that is not
   necessarily the case in the current climate, given the impact of the
   pandemic. Again, in any event, the issue is not whether the Respondent
   has responded to the "new matter" but whether she has consented to it
   being dealt with by the Tribunal in the appeal.


22. Returning to the issue of consent, as Judge Adio pointed out when
   granting permission, the Respondent was represented at the hearing before
   Judge Daldry.  There is no indication in the Decision that the Presenting
   Officer raised the issue whether the New Claim amounted to a "new
   matter".  Mr Clarke conceded that the note made by the Presenting Officer
   did not indicate that any submission had been made in that regard.  Ms
   Fisher submitted that, on that analysis, there was tacit consent.


23. I begin my consideration of what constitutes consent in this context
   with what is said in Mahmud as follows:


       "The Secretary of State's consent to the Tribunal to consider a  new
       matter, section 85(5)
      33. The second part of construction with which we have to deal is the
          meaning of consent in section 85(5) of the 2002 Act.  A  Tribunal
          may consider new matters if the Secretary of State has given  the
          Tribunal consent to do so.
      34. Mr Chelvan submitted that  the  procedure  to  give  or  withhold
          consent is contained within rule 24 of the Procedure Rules, which
          itself acts as  a  gatekeeper  to  ensure  equality  between  the
          parties. Emphasis was placed on rules 24(2)  and  (3)  which  are
          said to contain a mandatory requirement  for  the  Respondent  to
          provide a statement in opposition to  all  matters,  specifically
          including those raised in box E of the notice of appeal form (the
          new matters section). This requires a reading of  rule  24(2)  to
          include a requirement that if the Respondent takes the view  that
          something raised in the notice of appeal is a new matter governed
          by section 85(5) and (6) of the  2002  Act,  she  is  obliged  to
          indicate that and to indicate if she intends to withhold consent.
      35. It was  further  submitted  that  the  failure  to  file  such  a
          statement means that by omission, the Respondent does not  oppose
          the new matter being raised in the appeal notice and is deemed by
          that conduct to have given consent  for  the  new  matter  to  be
          considered by the First-tier Tribunal. Reliance was placed on the
          Upper Tribunal's decision in MH (Respondent's bundle:  Documents
          not provided) Pakistan [2010] UKUT 168 to support the submission
          by analogy with a situation where the  Respondent  was  found  to
          have been required to  submit  a  document  to  the  Tribunal  in
          accordance with a different requirement in former rules (rule  13
          of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005)
          which was designed to ensure that an appellant knew the case that
          he had to meet on appeal. It was  held  in  that  case  that  the
          tribunal was entitled to conclude that a document  not  furnished
          under that rule was  not  a  document  on  which  the  Respondent
          relied.
      36. First, we express caution in using procedure rules as an  aid  to
          statutory construction generally and specifically for the purpose
          construing the meaning of 'consent' in section 85(5) of the  2002
          Act. The procedure rules govern the procedure to  be  applied  to
          matters that are before the Tribunal to determine in  an  appeal,
          whereas in the present situation, the effect of section 85(5)  is
          that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider a  new  matter.
          Procedure  rules  governing  determination  of  an   appeal   can
          therefore offer little if any assistance on the interpretation of
          statute which determines the jurisdiction of the Tribunal itself.
          Secondly, we do not consider  that  rule  24  contains  any  such
          mandatory requirement on the Respondent in  relation  to  consent
          for new matters. Thirdly, in any event, it would be  contrary  to
          the clear language in section 85(5) requiring  the  Secretary  of
          State to have given consent, to find that by means of  procedural
          rules, deemed consent can be inferred by inaction. Section  85(5)
          of the 2002 Act requires actual consent by the  Respondent  which
          cannot be deemed or implied.
      37. Rule 24(2) expressly states that  the  Respondent  must, if  the
          Respondent intends to change or add to  the  grounds  or  reasons
          relied upon in the notice or the other documents referred  to  in
          paragraph (1)(a), provide the Tribunal and the other parties with
          a statement of whether the  Respondent  opposes  the  appellant's
          case and the grounds for such opposition  (emphasis  added).  The
          requirement to make  a  statement  is  clearly  conditional.  The
          condition that the Respondent wishes to  change  or  add  to  the
          grounds reasons relied upon, does not include any requirement  to
          make a new decision on a new matter identified in the  notice  of
          appeal or in a section 120 notice, nor to indicate if consent  is
          withheld for such a new matter to be considered by the  Tribunal.
          The decision in MH (Pakistan) is not applicable to the  present
          case which significantly differs on its facts as to the  type  of
          document or statement in issue. MH (Pakistan) was concerned with
          a failure to submit a specified document in the old rule 13, such
          that the document could not be relied  upon  by  the  Respondent.
          Rule 24 does not require the Respondent to make any statement  or
          new decision as to new matters raised by an  appellant  which  is
          qualitatively different to the  failure  to  submit  an  existing
          document used at the time of the decision.
      38. Further it appears that if the Respondent had  made  a  statement
          pursuant to rule 24, the effect  would  inevitably  be  that  the
          matter would not be a 'new matter' because it had  in  fact  been
          considered by the Respondent in the context of the decision under
          appeal and would therefore not meet  the  definition  in  section
          85(6)(b)(i)  of  the  2002  Act.  The  construction  of  rule  24
          contended for by the Appellant would have the result of rendering
          section 85(5) of the  2002  Act  devoid  of  any  application  in
          practice.
      39. Mr Chelvan made further submissions as to whether  there  was  in
          place an appropriate procedure for  the  Respondent  to  give  or
          withhold consent to the First-tier Tribunal to deal  with  a  new
          matter  if  rule  24  was  not  applicable.  Relevant  to   these
          submissions are the contents of the Respondent's  policy  'Rights
          of Appeal' version 3, which sets out guidance for those acting on
          behalf of the Respondent as to how to handle 'new matters'.  This
          includes when any 'new matter' should be considered,  before  the
          appeal hearing if possible and if not at  a  CMR  or  substantive
          appeal hearing; together with guidance on the process  of  giving
          or refusing consent. There  was  no  specific  challenge  to  the
          contents of this part of the guidance, only to the effect that it
          had not been complied with  by  the  Respondent  in  the  present
          appeal.
      40. There is no dispute between the parties that the  Respondent  has
          not followed the process for refusing  consent  set  out  in  the
          guidance in this case  as  no  written  reasons  have  ever  been
          provided for the refusal. However, that is  not  a  matter  which
          assists this Appellant in the context of  this  statutory  appeal
          and it cannot constitute a ground of appeal which can be  pursued
          in this Tribunal. A failure by the Respondent to follow  her  own
          guidance is  a  public  law  issue  which  could  potentially  be
          challenged by an application for  Judicial  Review  but  that  is
          outside the scope of this appeal. We do not  consider  that  this
          raises any issues of procedural fairness  in  the  conduct  of  a
          statutory appeal and unless and until  the  Respondent  expressly
          gives consent for the  consideration  of  a  new  matter  by  the
          Tribunal, an appellant must  be  aware  the  issues  may  not  be
          considered. There is no power for the First-tier Tribunal, or the
          Upper  Tribunal  to  determine   whether   the   Respondent   has
          appropriately for fairly withheld consent: again that is a matter
          only challengeable in Judicial Review proceedings on  public  law
          grounds."
          [my emphasis in bold]


   As that passage makes clear, particularly at [36], consent cannot be
   implied.  Consent must be express. What is said by the Tribunal, although
   not part of the headnote for which the case is reported, does not assist
   the Appellant.


24. Ms Fisher alluded in her submissions to the Tribunal's decision in
   Qaidoo (new matter: procedure/process) [2018] UKUT 87 (IAC) ("Qaidoo").
   I have therefore considered the decision in that case also.  The headnote
   reads as follows:


       "1. If, at a hearing, the Tribunal is satisfied that a matter  which
       an appellant wishes to raise is a new matter,  which  by  reason  of
       section 85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,
       the Tribunal may not consider unless  the  Secretary  of  State  has
       given consent,  and,  in  pursuance  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
       Guidance, her representative applies for an adjournment for  further
       time to  consider  whether  to  give  such  consent,  then  it  will
       generally be appropriate to grant such an adjournment,  rather  than
       proceed without consideration of the new matter
       2. If an appellant considers that the decision of the respondent not
       to consent to the consideration of a new matter is unlawful,  either
       by  reference  to  the  respondent's  guidance  or  otherwise,   the
       appropriate remedy is a challenge by way of judicial review."

25. The headnote in Qaidoo makes the point, consistently with what is said
   in Mahmud, that it is for the Tribunal to determine whether something is
   a new matter and, thereafter, to consider how to deal with the appeal
   procedurally in order to obtain the Respondent's consent.  Whilst one may
   have sympathy with a Judge who proceeds without being put on notice by
   either party that the claim which she is being asked to consider is a
   "new matter", Section 85(5) is a restriction on the Tribunal's
   jurisdiction.  Whether the Judge is aware of that restriction or not is
   not the issue.  The issue is whether that restriction applies and
   therefore whether the Judge was entitled to determine the New Claim at
   all, at least absent consent.  The decision in Qaidoo does not assist at
   all in relation to what constitutes consent for these purposes.  I have
   not been able to find any authority for the proposition that a failure by
   the Respondent to object to an appellant raising a new claim which
   amounts to a new matter is to be assumed to be consent.  As was said in
   Mahmud, the Respondent is required to consent to the consideration of the
   "new matter" expressly.


26. As Mr Clarke also submitted and I accept, there is good reason for
   Section 85(5).  If the Respondent has not dealt with a "new matter"
   previously and has not considered whether, for example, to interview an
   appellant again or provide a supplementary letter dealing with it, a
   Judge is placed in the position of being the primary decision-maker, as
   happened here.  The Judge then has to decide the claim with no prior
   input from the Respondent who bears the initial task of deciding whether
   to recognise an asylum applicant as a refugee.

27. For those reasons, ground one is made out.  The New Claim is on any
   view, in light of the guidance in Mahmud, a "new matter".  The Respondent
   had not consented to the Judge determining the New Claim.  Whilst I
   accept that the Respondent did not object to the Tribunal dealing with
   the New Claim, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is limited by statute.
   Its jurisdiction cannot be extended by agreement between the parties.  If
   the Respondent had been asked by the Judge whether she objected to the
   Judge determining the New Claim and the Respondent had answered in the
   negative, the position may well have been different.  That response could
   be seen as an express consent to the determination of the New Claim.
   That is not however what occurred here.  I am therefore satisfied that
   the Judge erred by determining the New Claim.

28. Ms Fisher did suggest that this error made no difference because the
   Judge had also allowed the appeal on the basis of the original claim,
   namely that the Appellant was at risk on account of returning to
   Afghanistan as a lone woman.

29. I reject this submission.  I accept that the Judge considered the
   position for lone women as such at [55] to [58] of the Decision.  I
   accept also that, in so doing, she took into account what is said in AS
   (Afghanistan) at [57] and [58] of the Decision.  I would not, for that
   reason, have found the Respondent's ground three to be made out.

30. However, following the consideration of the position for lone women,
   the Judge's conclusion at [59] of the Decision reads as follows:


         "59. It is my finding, for the reasons stated above, that if the
         appellant is returned to Afghanistan, then she would be returned as
         a lone woman as it would not be safe for her husband to return with
         her because he too would be affected by the risk associated with
         [D] and his activities.  If the appellant is returned to
         Afghanistan as a lone woman then she is at even greater risk
         because she will be exposed to a real risk of persecution due to
         her brother [D] who is known to the Taliban through his
         associations with high profile individuals.  She would also be at
         risk for being a lone woman set out in the case of AK."
         [my emphasis]


31. Whilst that final sentence might suggest that the Judge was finding a
   general risk to the Appellant based on being a lone woman without more,
   that ignores the first part of the paragraph dealing with why the
   Appellant's husband could not also return with her.  I accept as Ms
   Fisher submitted that he cannot be removed to Afghanistan.  He is a
   British citizen.  He may not wish to go.  However, the Judge would at the
   very least have to consider whether he would do so even if not also
   whether it would be reasonable to expect him to do so.  The Judge did not
   carry out that analysis because she had concluded that the Appellant's
   husband would be at risk due to the association with [D].  For that
   reason, he could not be expected to return.  As an aside, the point made
   by the Respondent in her ground three has no merit.  The Appellant's
   husband had returned to Afghanistan only in 2012 and 2014, well before
   the events arising from association with [D] were said to have arisen.


32. The finding that the Appellant would be at risk as a lone woman is also
   impacted by the Judge's finding in relation to [D] himself.  The
   Respondent had taken the point that the Appellant could look to her
   family members in Afghanistan for support on return.  That included [D]
   as well as her sister who she said had fled Afghanistan following the
   threats arising from association with [D] and the disappearance of her
   own husband.  The availability of support for the Appellant from other
   family members is however directly impacted by the credibility of the New
   Claim.  The Judge obviously did not consider the option of support from
   other family members due to her finding on the credibility of the New
   Claim.


33. For those reasons, the error disclosed by ground one is one which
   affects the outcome of the entire appeal.  For that reason, I set aside
   the Decision in its entirety with no findings preserved.

34. In light of the nature of the error found, I do not need to deal with
   grounds two and three.  I have made some observations in relation to
   ground three above.  Were it not for the error disclosed by ground one, I
   would not have found an error disclosed by ground three.  Ground two is
   perhaps more nuanced.  However, since the credibility of the New Claim
   will need to be reconsidered entirely afresh there is no need for me to
   deal with this ground.

35. In light of the nature of the error I have found (that the Judge had no
   jurisdiction to determine it), and since the credibility of the New Claim
   must be considered entirely afresh, I consider it appropriate to remit
   this appeal for redetermination.  Both representatives agreed that this
   is the appropriate course.  The reason which lies behind the error found
   is that the Respondent has not given consent for the New Claim.  The
   First-tier Tribunal will therefore need to consider the appropriate
   procedural course to ensure that consent is considered and if appropriate
   given prior to redetermination of this appeal.

CONCLUSION

36. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that there is an error of law
   disclosed by ground one.  The Judge was not entitled to deal with the New
   Claim absent the Respondent's consent.  That consent was not given.  For
   that reason, the Decision is set aside, and the appeal is remitted to the
   First-tier Tribunal for redetermination.  The issue of the consent
   required for the New Claim needs to be considered prior to the re-hearing
   of this appeal.


DECISION
The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Daldry promulgated on 19 October
2020 involves the making of an error on a point of law.  I therefore set
aside the Decision and remit the appeal for re-hearing before a Judge other
than Judge Daldry.


Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  30 March 2021

