
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10856/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 April 2018                                |                              |
|                                               |On 2 May 2018                 |
|                                               |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                                    [A K]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Professor W Rees (for Farani Javid Taylor
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Senior Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of [AK], a citizen of  Pakistan  born  [  ]  1990,
       against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal of 19 December  2017,
       dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State
       to refuse his asylum claim.

    2. The Appellant entered the UK as a student on 6  September  2010  with
       leave until 31 October 2012, ultimately extended until 31 March 2015,
       though curtailed to end in May 2014 when his  Sponsor's  licence  was
       revoked. He was subsequently served with notice of being  an  illegal
       entrant on 18 March 2015 as information came to light  indicating  he
       had relied on false educational certificates to secure entry  in  the
       student route. He brought a judicial review application against  that
       decision which was refused on 8 December 2015. He claim asylum on  24
       August 2017 having been detained two days earlier when  reporting  to
       the Home Office.

    3. The Appellant's asylum claim as summarised by the Home Office refusal
       letter was based on his homosexuality. He was an engineering  student
       from Karachi who had discovered his sexuality between the age  of  17
       and 18 after he developed an attraction to a  male  friend,  [U].  He
       came to the UK as a student and began to live openly as  a  gay  man,
       visiting gay clubs from March 2011 and telling his friends about  his
       relationship; in 2011 he had an eight-month relationship with  a  man
       named [AA], and in 2013 a year long relationship with  a  man  called
       [A]. The Appellant told his father of his gender preference  in  June
       or July  2013,  provoking  his  anger:  he  threatened  to  kill  the
       Appellant if he returned to Pakistan; he had  since  had  no  contact
       with his family. He now feared death at the hands of  his  family  or
       society generally.

    4. His application was refused on 25 October 2017 because the  Secretary
       of State did not accept that his account of past events and his claim
       to be gay were true, as

      a) He had given different dates at different  points  in  his  asylum
         interview as to when he first became aware of  his  sexuality:  he
         had said both that he was at  the  time  aged  around  14/15,  and
         17/18;

      b) He could not recall his own age when he first became attracted  to
         [U];

      c) He was vague in his recollection of events that might  be  thought
         significant in his journey to coming out in the UK, such  as  same
         sex parades;

      d) He could not recall [A]'s surname and the circumstances  of  their
         claimed meeting in a shop: furthermore his claim that he had  told
         [A] that he was gay upon meeting him  was  inconsistent  with  the
         general tenor of his evidence elsewhere, which was to  the  effect
         that he was reluctant to tell strangers of his sexual orientation;



      e) A letter he provided from the sexual  health  charity  NAZ  of  13
         October 2017 stated he had accessed their services  since  January
         2015 represented the sole corroborative evidence of his activities
         in the gay community;

      f) Letters from his friends were essentially self-serving;

      g) He claimed asylum only after being detained, and very late in  his
         period of UK residence.

    5. In these circumstances the Secretary of State did not accept that  he
       was gay or that anybody would so perceive him. Accordingly  he  faced
       no risk of persecution in Pakistan.

    6. The Appellant appealed against that decision and gave  oral  evidence
       before the First-tier Tribunal. His  appeal  was  dismissed,  on  the
       basis that his account was not credible, because

      a) His account of being pressured by his parents to get  married  was
         vague and did not adequately explain his decision  to  reveal  his
         sexuality to them, given the likely serious consequences for their
         relationship that would ensue;

      b) His asylum claim was brought very late given he had been attending
         gay clubs and parades from 2013, attended NAZ sessions since 2015,
         and he had had legal representation from at  least  2015  when  he
         brought a judicial review application, all of which indicated that
         he would have met other gay Asian men  in  the  same  situation  a
         significant time ago;

      c) His inability to recollect [A]'s surname was surprising  if  their
         relationship had been genuine;

      d) Given these findings, the photographs of him and other men said to
         support his claim were considered fabricated.

    7. The Judge refers to oral evidence from [SH] who adopted a  letter  he
       had already written supporting the asylum claim,  confirming  he  met
       the Appellant in Disco Rani Club in June 2016  and  knew  him  to  be
       openly gay and comfortable with his sexuality.  A  letter  from  [HA]
       also confirmed the Appellant lived openly as a gay man  and  that  he
       had had sex with him following a meeting at a club. This evidence was
       rejected, on the basis that the Appellant's own evidence had  already
       been found wanting.

    8. In the light of its rejection of the critical characteristic  claimed
       by the Appellant as  underlying  his  asylum  claim,  the  First-tier
       Tribunal dismissed his appeal.

    9. Grounds of appeal argued that the failure to  make  findings  on  the
       evidence of the witnesses [SH] and [HA] amounted to a material  error
       of law by way of a failure to assess the Appellant's evidence in  the
       round.

   10. The First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal  on  16  January
       2018 on the basis that the evidence from a male witness  who  claimed
       to have had sex with the Appellant had not been considered, and  that
       typographical errors and missing words in the  decision  suggested  a
       lack of  the  proofreading  and  professionalism  expected  from  the
       judiciary.

   11. Before me Mr Rees submitted  that  a  failure  to  make  findings  on
       ostensibly  independent  witnesses  of  fact  who  corroborated   the
       critical issue in  the  appeal  was  a  material  error  of  law.  Ms
       Isherwood replied that whilst it was undesirable to make  credibility
       findings on witnesses other than the Appellant  without  giving  some
       independent  reasoning,  nevertheless  overall   the   decision   was
       sustainable.

Findings and reasons

   12. As I indicated at the hearing,  I  considered  that  the  grounds  of
       appeal were made out. The evidence from the  witnesses  went  to  the
       central issue in the appeal. Both witnesses gave  oral  evidence,  as
       can be seen from the record of proceedings and as  was  confirmed  by
       the Appellant himself.

   13. As the Earl of Halsbury, Lord Chancellor, stated in Montgomerie &  Co
       Ltd v Wallace-James [1904] AC 73:

           "It is simply  a  question  of  fact,  and  doubtless,  where  a
           question of fact has been decided by a tribunal which  has  seen
           and heard  the  witnesses,  the  greatest  weight  ought  to  be
           attached to the findings of such a  tribunal.  It  has  had  the
           opportunity of observing the  demeanour  of  the  witnesses  and
           judging of  their  veracity  and  accuracy  in  a  way  that  no
           appellate tribunal can have."

   14. Of course, as most recently noted in KB & AH Pakistan [2017] UKUT 491
       (IAC),  "in  asylum  appeals  it  will  rarely  be  safe  to   attach
       significant weight to  demeanour  as  a  factor."  Nevertheless,  the
       reason that appellate tribunals afford significant deference to first-
       instance trial judges is because of  the  advantage  they  have  when
       assessing oral evidence. The other side of the  coin  is  that  where
       there is some patent failing in the assessment of  oral  evidence,  a
       decision is very unlikely to be unsafe.  That  is  clearly  the  case
       here.

   15. [SH]'s evidence was consistent with the  Appellant's  claim  to  have
       lived openly in recent times. [HA]'s evidence went  directly  to  the
       Appellant's gender preference, and additionally constitutes  evidence
       of an intimate nature which it would require some degree of  personal
       fortitude to reveal in court. That  does  not  necessarily  make  the
       evidence true, but given its materiality to the key issue upon  which
       the parties were divided, it plainly demanded reasoned adjudication.

   16. I accordingly find that the First-tier Tribunal's decision is  flawed
       by material errors of law and the appeal is  allowed  to  the  extent
       that the matter is remitted back to that Tribunal for hearing afresh.



      Decision:

    The appeal is allowed to the extent it is remitted back to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


Signed:                                            Date: 5 April 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
