
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10190/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On 19 July 2019                      |On 09 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               SHAHJAHAN AHMED
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M West instructed by City Heights Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant appeals a decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Daldrey
       promulgated on 16  April  2019  in  which  the  Judge  dismissed  the
       appellant's appeal on all grounds.




Discussion


    2. The appellant, who was born on 5 September  1974,  is  a  citizen  of
       Bangladesh who entered the United Kingdom lawfully on 28 May 2014  as
       a Tier 4 Student. The appellant's leave was  curtailed  on  13  March
       2015 as the sponsor's  licence  for  his  college  was  revoked.  The
       appellant applied for leave to remain outside the  Immigration  Rules
       on 1 June 2016 which was refused on 24 August 2016 with no  right  of
       appeal. The appellant was encountered  working  in  a  restaurant  by
       immigration officials on 14 September 2017 and deemed  an  overstayer
       and served with removal directions following which he claimed  asylum
       on 10 October 2017.

    3. The Judge noted the basis of the appellant's claim  and  reasons  for
       refusal. The Judge had the benefit of documentary and oral  evidence.
       Findings of fact are set out from [31].

    4. The first challenge by Mr West to the decision of  the  Judge  is  an
       assertion the Judge erred in law by failing to set  out  at  all  the
       standard of proof in the appellant's protection claim. At [7] of  the
       application for permission to appeal the appellant notes that  whilst
       it is clear that the  FTTJ  has,  whilst  not  explicitly  doing  so,
       implicitly acknowledged that  the  burden  of  proof  lies  with  the
       appellant to prove his case, evident on a straightforward reading  of
       the determination, the FTJ has failed to refer at all to the standard
       of proof.

    5. As an observation in response to a question "has the Judge set out in
       the determination the self-direction regarding the  correct  standard
       of proof to be applied" such reply would have to be in  the  negative
       as there is no specific reference or self-direction of the type  seen
       in some decisions of the First-Tier Tribunal.

    6. To find legal error on the basis of the failure to set out such self-
       direction in writing, without more, will be to  find  the  Judge  had
       erred in law as a matter of form rather than  substance.  It  is  not
       disputed in asylum appeals that the existence of a well-founded  fear
       of persecution required an appellant to establish what was  described
       by Lord Keith of Kinkel in R  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department (ex p. Sivakumaran (1998) AC 958 as "a  reasonable  degree
       of likelihood", by Lord  Templeman  as  a  "a  real  and  substantial
       danger" and by Lord Goff as a "real and substantial risk". In PS (Sri
       Lanka) [2008] EWCA Civ 1213 the Court of Appeal reminded us that  the
       single test of whether a fear of  persecution  or  ill-treatment  was
       well-founded was whether on the evidence there was a real risk of its
       occurrence or re-occurrence.

    7. The appropriate standard is often referred to as the "lower standard"
       recognising that an  individual  may  have  difficulty  in  providing
       support for a claim in relation to events that may have happened some
       time ago in their home country which could be many thousands of miles
       away.

    8. Mr West was asked during the course of his submissions to identify in
       the determination any specific examples demonstrating the  Judge  had
       applied too high a standard of proof. Mr West was unable  to  do  so,
       also claiming this was an unrealistic approach. I  disagree.  If  the
       Judge had, for example, stated that it was found on  the  balance  of
       probabilities that risk had not been established this will be a clear
       indication of the wrong standard of proof  being  applied.  Similarly
       had  the  Judge  referred  to  risk  not  being  established   beyond
       reasonable doubt that may indicate the highest standard was  applied.
       It is necessary to read the determination as  a  whole.  It  is  also
       important to note the Judge is an experienced judge of the First-Tier
       Tribunal who will have received extensive training in relation to the
       correct burden and standard of proof applicable.

    9. I do not find it made out the Judge applied an incorrect  burden  and
       standard of proof. Considering the  substance  of  the  determination
       rather than purely form no arguable legal error is made out.

   10. Mr West also asserted the Judge failed to consider  the  question  of
       subsidiary protection in the appellant's case at all, but  the  Judge
       notes at [57]:

             "57.      Mr  Sperling  agreed  that  the  appellant  if   not
                  successful in his asylum claim then he would not  have  an
                  Article 2 or 3 route  to  a  grant  of  leave.  Nor  would
                  Article  8  be  possible  to  argue  other  than  via  the
                  "insurmountable obstacles" route but that could only be on
                  the basis the appellant would be exposed to a real risk of
                  persecution. That having been found to not  be  the  case,
                  the appellant's claim fails on all limbs."


   11. The appellant's asylum claim was rejected, and it was not  found  the
       appellant will be exposed to a real risk of persecution or any  other
       form of harm. The statement by the Judge that the  appellant's  claim
       fails on all limbs is clearly a finding that not only  that  relating
       to asylum, but also subsidiary protection and  human  rights  grounds
       also fails. No arguable legal error is made out on this ground.  This
       finding also undermines Ground 6 relied upon by Mr West in  which  he
       pleads an arguable failure to correctly apply the  Immigration  Rules
       and Article 8 in the appellant's case. It is not  made  out  on  what
       basis the appellant was able to succeed on either basis.

   12. Mr West also asserts the Judge arguably  failed  to  correctly  apply
       section 8 Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants  etc)  Act
       2004 on the basis the Judge decided  the  application  of  section  8
       impacts on the credibility  of  the  appellant  overall.  Under  this
       heading it is asserted the Judge failed to assess the evidence  as  a
       whole in finding the section 8 aspects undermined the veracity of the
       claim and that within the section 8 assessment  the  Judge  fails  to
       afford proper weight to the appellant's explanation as  to  his  late
       claim for asylum.

   13.  The  Judge  clearly  considered  this  aspect,   devoting   specific
       consideration to the timing  of  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum
       between [44 - 47]. The Judge gives ample reasons for finding why  the
       late timing of the application for  asylum  damaged  the  appellant's
       credibility pursuant  to  section  8  of  the  2004  Act.  The  Judge
       concludes [47] with  the  sentence  "if  he  chose  not  to  make  an
       application for asylum, it is  in  my  finding,  more  likely  to  be
       because he was aware that he did not have a valid claim for leave  to
       remain via this route". The Judge does not consider section 8 as  the
       determinative factor and took into account the  explanation  provided
       by the appellant with the required degree of anxious scrutiny,  which
       was rejected. The weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for
       the Judge and disagreement with the section  8  assessment  does  not
       arguably establish legal error, per se.

   14. Mr West further asserted  the  Judge  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
       properly  consider  the  documentary  evidence  when  dismissing  the
       appellant's case and in failing to give adequate  reasons  concerning
       key documents in the protection claim. It was argued  in  submissions
       that the Judge failed to consider in the determination  the  evidence
       from the appellant's lawyer  in  Bangladesh  and  that  while  citing
       Tanveer Ahmed failed to properly apply the principles of  that  case.
       Concern was also expressed in oral submissions  in  relation  to  the
       specific finding of the Judge at [51] in which it is written:

             "51.     I do not place a great what deal of weight  on  these
                  documents as they are self-serving. They were all obtained
                  after  the  appellant   made   his   claim   for   asylum.
                  Furthermore, if the appellant had  already  attracted  the
                  level of interest as suggested by these arrest warrants, I
                  would have expected him to have made an earlier claim  for
                  asylum. The fact that he did not do  so,  in  my  finding,
                  undermines the veracity of his claim."


   15.  The  issue  of  a  finding  that  statements  are  self-serving  was
       considered by the Upper Tribunal in R (on the application  of  SS)  v
       SSHD ("self-serving" statements) [2017] UKUT 00164 in  which  it  was
       held (1) the expression "self-serving)  is,  to  a  large  extent,  a
       protean one. The expression itself tells us little or  nothing.  What
       is needed is a reason,  however  brief,  for  that  designation.  For
       example, a letter written by  a  third  party  to  an  applicant  for
       international protection may be "self-serving" because it  bears  the
       hallmarks of being written  to  order,  in  circumstances  where  the
       appellant's case is that the letter was a  spontaneous  warning;  (2)
       whilst a statement from a family member is capable of lending  weight
       to a claim, the issue will be whether, looked at  in  the  round,  it
       does so in the particular case in question. Such a statement may, for
       instance, be  incapable  of  saving  a  claim  which,  in  all  other
       respects, lacks credibility.

   16. It is not disputed that the term, 'self-serving', is one  tending  or
       able to change frequently or easily, as found in SS. No error is made
       out on the face of the decision in the Judge  using  this  phrase  as
       that in itself  does  not  establish  arguable  legal  error.  As  Ms
       Isherwood submitted the Judge does give adequate reasons  in  support
       of the findings made regarding the lack of credibility in  the  claim
       and why little weight was attached by the Judge  to  the  documentary
       evidence adduced in support. I do not find the Judge failed  to  take
       the  appellant's  evidence  into  account  as  is  quite  clear   the
       appellant's bundle of documents of 178 pages was properly considered.
       The Judge was not required to set out or make findings  on  each  and
       every aspect of the evidence. It is also the case that the Judge made
       a number  of  findings  in  the  appellant's  favour  which  are  not
       challenged by assertion in incorrect burden and standard of proof was
       applied or the evidence not properly considered. These  are  referred
       to between [53 - 57] in the following terms:

             "53.     With regards to the appellant's membership of the JCD
                  and BNP in Bangladesh, I accept Mr  Spurling's  submission
                  that the appellant could not be expected to  have  an  in-
                  depth knowledge of the policies of the BNP and it is clear
                  from the answers he gave in response to questions  put  to
                  him  at  his  asylum  interview  that  he  did  have  some
                  knowledge of the party. However, it is my finding, that at
                  the very most his involvement was at a low level. I do not
                  accept that he was arrested and detained as he claimed. It
                  is my finding that if he really had  been  then  he  would
                  have likely made an earlier claim for asylum and he  would
                  not have denied that he had a political  profile  when  he
                  had the opportunity to provide this at the  time  he  made
                  his human rights claim in 2016. After  this  was  refused,
                  the appellant simply disappeared  and  did  not  make  any
                  further applications until he was arrested  working  in  a
                  restaurant. This, in my finding, does not suggest that  he
                  was genuinely in fear for his life.


             54.  I accept that the appellant sustained  a  broken  leg  at
                  some point whilst he was in Bangladesh and the  x-ray  and
                  medical reports clearly show this. However,  having  found
                  the appellant's account lacked credibility I do not accept
                  that this was a result of an attack on  the  appellant  by
                  members of the Awami League.


             55.  Both representatives agreed that low level party  members
                  returned to Bangladesh as failed asylum seekers  will  not
                  be  exposed  to  a  real  risk  of   state   or   nonstate
                  persecution. This is stated  in  the  Country  Policy  and
                  Information Note - Bangladesh: Opposition  to  Government,
                  version 2.0, January 2018.


             56.  I  find  that  the  appellant  is  at  most  a  low-level
                  supporter of  the  JCD/BNP  in  Bangladesh  and  that  his
                  activities are not such as to  have  brought  him  to  the
                  attention of the authorities. I attach  little  weight  to
                  the documentary evidence adduced in support including  the
                  First Information Reports an arrest warrant and  also  the
                  medical report of Dr Nallet."


   17. It is not made out there is any artificial separation in  the  manner
       in which the Judge assessed the evidence as a whole  and  credibility
       of the same. It is not made  out  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
       evidence is inappropriate in light of the material considered.

   18. Whilst the appellant disagrees with the Judge's findings and  clearly
       seeks a more favourable outcome to enable him to remain in the United
       Kingdom disagreement with the  Judge's  finding  is  not  sufficient.
       Although there are some aspects of the way in which the determination
       is structured that  might  be  improved  upon  the  grounds  fail  to
       establish arguable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss
       the appeal sufficient to warrant a grant of permission to  appeal  to
       the Upper Tribunal.



Decision

   19. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.




  Anonymity.

   20. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 29 July 2019

