
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10929/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Centre                                |                                 |
|On 20 March 2019                      |On 25 March 2019                 |
|                                      |                                 |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                    O A E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms L Mair instructed by Lei Dat Baig
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Atkinson,  promulgated  on  29
   November 2018 which allowed the Appellant's appeal on  asylum  and  human
   rights grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on  12  February  1994  and  is  a  national  of
    Somalia.

 4. On 2 March 2018 the Appellant applied for asylum on the basis  that  he
    was at risk from Al Shabaab who he had refused to join; he was at  risk
    because he was a member of a minority clan; and he was at risk  because
    he had secretly married his wife who was a member of  a  majority  clan
    and her family would kill him.

 5. On 29 August 2018  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Atkinson  ("the  Judge")  allowed   the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the  Judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons why he was at risk following a family feud; failed  to
    properly assess whether  internal  relocation  to  Mogadishu  would  be
    unreasonable.

 8.  On  31  December  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson   gave
    permission to appeal on both grounds.

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Bates  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that:

      a) He relied on the grounds.

      b) The Judge focuses on the father's death certificate but  given  the
         issues he identifies he fails  to  explain  why  he  gives  it  any
         weight.

      c) In relation to internal relocation having previously accepted  that
         the Appellant had sufficient funds to flee to Kenya and study there
         he failed to explain why such funding would  not  be  available  to
         assist him in re settling in Mogadishu.

      d) He fails to take into account that in MOJ it  is  noted  that  clan
         support was not of such importance as it had been  previously.  His
         clan status was irrelevant to whether he could be sent  money  from
         family members.

      e) In relation to his prospects of securing employment he  had  worked
         previously as a farm labourer, can speak  Arabic  and  English  and
         would  be  more  skilled  than  those  who  remained.  These   were
         transferable skills and would assist him in finding work.

10. On behalf of the Appellant Ms Mair submitted that:

      a) She relied on her skeleton argument.

      b) In relation to credibility the Judge adopted entirely  the  correct
         approach as set out in HK v SSHD 2006 EWCA Civ 1037.

      c)  The Judge then set out having found some matters to be implausible
         where she placed them in the context of her overall assessment.

      d) The Judge refers to the fact that the Appellant was the subject  of
         probing questions and expanded upon his account and  gave  detailed
         responses which were pivotal to the overall assessment.

      e) The Judge recognised the frailties of the documentary evidence  and
         thus gave it 'some weight.'

      f) The Judge bore in mind the lower standard of proof that applies  in
         these cases and therefore the conclusions reached were open to her.

      g) In relation to Ground 2 she emphasised that while the  factors  set
         out in  MOJ& Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442
         (IAC)  were clearly relevant the CG case  was  concerned  with  the
         risk in relation to  Article  15(c)  which  was  clearly  a  higher
         threshold than  applied  when  the  question  was  whether  it  was
         reasonable to relocate there . The Judge had up to date  background
         material stating that the situation was still  dire  and  therefore
         the Judge in assessing the question of reasonableness erred on  the
         side of caution.

      h) Given that the Judge had found his underlying account was  credible
         and that included his  father  and  brother  being  dead  the  only
         potential source of income was his mother whose circumstances  were
         very modest. Having access to a one time fund to enable him to flee
         was different to 'on going' financial support. It was therefore not
         outside the bounds of reasonable findings that the Appellant had no
         ongoing support to enable him to have  a  reasonable  existence  in
         Mogadishu.

      i) The Appellant had never  lived  in  Mogadishu  and  his  only  work
         experience was as a farm labourer

11. In reply Mr Bates on behalf of the Respondent submitted

      a) MOJ differentiated between either being self sufficient  or  having
         access to on going support.

      b)  Not unreasonable to expect the Appellant to establish himself with
         some support and then become self sufficient.

      c) The Appellant  used  farm  machinery  and  these  skills  might  be
         transferrable

      d) Clan structure is not as important as it was.

The Law

12.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have  taken  no  account  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration judge concludes that the story told is untrue. If  a  point
    of evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is
    a failure to take into account a material consideration. In  Mibanga  v
    SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367 Buxton LJ said this in relation to challenging
    such findings:

         "Where, as in this case, complaint is made of the reasoning  of  an
         adjudicator in respect of a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
         credibility), particular care  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the
         criticism is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and
         does not merely reflect a feeling on  the  part  of  the  appellate
         tribunal that it might itself have taken a different  view  of  the
         matter from that that appealed to the adjudicator."

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

15. In relation to the assertion that the Judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons as to why she accepted that the Appellant faced a real risk  of
    harm in his home area from his wife's family I am  satisfied  that  the
    Judge adopted an entirely proper approach  in  her  assessment  of  the
    evidence. The approach she adopted was inline with the  guidance  given
    by the Court of Appeal in HK that, in many asylum cases some, even most
    of the Appellant's story, might seem inherently unlikely.  But that did
    not mean it was untrue.  The ingredients of the story and the story  as
    a whole, had to be considered against the  available  country  evidence
    and reliable expert  evidence,  and  other  similar  factors,  such  as
    consistency with what the appellant had  said  before  and  with  other
    factual evidence. This is exactly what the Judge did: at paragraphs 41-
    44 she identifies some aspects of  the  Appellants  account  that  were
    implausible but clearly recognised, as she was entitled to,  that  such
    events could not have occurred. She  did  not,  again  quite  properly,
    treat these matters as determinative but  moved  on  to  consider  what
    support there was for the Appellants  case  at  paragraphs  46-52.  The
    challenges to the documents he relied on the Judge found  were  met  by
    the Appellant with reasonable explanations (paragraph 49) She therefore
    attached 'some' weight to the documents which supported his  case.  She
    looked at the background material which was also  consistent  with  his
    claim and concluded looking at the  evidence  in  the  round  that  the
    Appellant had met the evidential burden of establishing his case.

16. In relation to the Judges assessment of whether it was  reasonable  for
    the Appellant to relocate  to  Mogadishu  the  Judge  was  making  that
    assessment on the factual matrix he had accepted: that  the  Appellants
    father and  brother  were  dead  and  they  were  a  family  of  modest
    circumstances and he had to borrow money from his wife  when  they  got
    married. While the Judge applied the guidance in MOJ without explicitly
    acknowledging that the test in that case related to Article 15 (c)  and
    Article 3, recognising that there was a lower threshold in relation  to
    reasonableness would only have assisted the Appellant. At paragraph  59
    -60  she  assesses  all  those  matters  which  were  relevant  to  the
    reasonableness of relocation: that the Appellant had no family  or  any
    other links to the city; he had only ever lived briefly in an IDP  camp
    and returning there would not be reasonable. There was nothing  in  the
    background  material  to  suggest  that  conditions  in  Mogadishu  had
    improved.  It was open to the Judge having accepted that his account of
    why he fled his home area was true to accept that  further  funds  from
    his family were not  available.  While  the  Appellant  had  previously
    worked as a farm labourer  I  accept  Ms  Mairs  argument  that  it  is
    difficult to see how this would be a transferable skill  in  the  urban
    setting of Mogadishu

17. As to the duty to give reasons I take into account what was said by the
    Court of Appeal in MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 at paragraph 26:

         "The duty to give reasons requires that  reasons  must  be  proper,
         intelligible and adequate:  see the classic authority of this court
         in Re Poyser and Mills' Arbitration [1964]  2  QB  467.   The  only
         dispute in the present case relates to the last of those  elements,
         that is the adequacy of the  reasons  given  by  the  FtT  for  its
         decision allowing the  appellant's  appeal.   It  is  important  to
         appreciate that adequacy in this context is precisely that, no more
         and no less.  It is not a counsel of perfection.  Still less should
         it provide an opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment  of
         the reasons to see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on
         their merits.  The purpose of the duty to give reasons is, in part,
         to enable the losing party to know why she has lost.  It is also to
         enable an appellate court or tribunal to see what the  reasons  for
         the decision are so that they can be examined in case some error of
         approach has been committed."

18. I therefore find that while  a  different  Judge  may  have  reached  a
    different conclusion the reasons given by the  Judge  are  adequate  to
    explain to the Respondent why he allowed the appeal.

CONCLUSION

19. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

20. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 21.3.2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
