
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/10579/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 November 2020                |On 2 December 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     PG

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Mr K Wood, instructed by IAS (Manchester)

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. The appellant, who is a national of Iran with date of  birth  given  as
    12.5.71, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  23.12.19   (Judge
    Davies), dismissing on all grounds her appeal against the  decision  of
    the Secretary  of  State,  dated  4.10.19,  to  refuse  her  claim  for
    international protection made in further submissions on 18.8.19.

 2. The appellant claims that she is  a  Christian  convert  and  for  that
    reason has a well-founded fear of persecution on return  to  Iran.  She
    first made that claim after  arriving  in  the  UK  from  Amsterdam  in
    October 2016. The claim was refused and her subsequent appeal dismissed
    by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Jones) in  August  2017.  Her  onward
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was also  dismissed  so  that  she  became
    Appeal Rights Exhausted  (ARE)  on  11.4.19.  Her  further  submissions
    maintain the  Christian  conversion  claim  with  further  evidence  in
    support, and further assert that  she  is  in  a  relationship  with  a
    British citizen caring for his British citizen child  from  a  previous
    relationship following the death of the child's mother.  The  appellant
    claims to share the parental responsibility for  her  partner's  child,
    including providing support for his mental health issues.

 3. Pursuant to the Devaseelan principle, Judge Davies took the decision of
    Judge Jones as the starting point. In assessing the credibility of  the
    conversion claim, the judge noted that the appellant had engaged in  an
    elaborate deception in making and advancing her asylum claim, admitting
    before Judge Jones that she had invented the claim to have converted to
    Christianity in Iran and to have attended  a  house  church  which  had
    subsequently been raided. She also invented  the  claim  to  have  been
    sought by the Iranian authorities. Witnesses made statements  and  oral
    evidence was given in her support on the false  premise  that  she  had
    been in hiding from the Iranian intelligence services  because  of  her
    Christian conversion and so in fear of her life that she  had  to  flee
    Iran. She in fact  left  Iran  lawfully  using  her  own  passport  and
    identity and was not  of  adverse  interest  to  the  authorities.  For
    obvious reasons, the appellant's deception undermined  the  credibility
    of her claim. Her failure to  claim  asylum  in  the  Netherlands  also
    undermined her credibility.

 4. After making a careful assessment of the new evidence in support of the
    claimed Christian conversion, the judge  accepted  that  the  appellant
    started attending church in the UK soon after arrival.  Curiously,  she
    was first baptised in the Pentecostal faith at a church  in  Manchester
    before attending a nearby Church  of  English  parish  church  after  a
    relocation from Manchester to Chester. She admitted that  this  was  in
    fact the church nearest to her home.

 5. The judge raised a number  of  other  concerns  about  the  appellant's
    claimed Christian conversion and found the oral  evidence  of  Reverend
    Hildreth unreliable. As the judge noted, this witness departed from his
    role as a Dorodian witness and entered into the legal area by asserting
    that the previous decision of the Tribunal was wrong  in  law,  without
    being aware of the Upper Tribunal's decision on that issue.  The  judge
    made a careful assessment of each witness relied on. Of concern to  the
    judge was that the evidence relied on did not explain what process  was
    adopted to assess whether the appellant was a genuine Christian.  After
    consideration of all of the evidence, at [57] of the decision the judge
    concluded that there were no grounds  to  justify  departing  from  the
    decision of Judge Jones that the appellant was not a genuine  Christian
    convert.

 6. With regard to the appellant's relationship to her partner and his son,
    the judge noted that  she  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The judge went on to assess  the  relationship  with
    her partner's son, who had lived with his mother prior to her death  in
    hospital. The judge made an error of date in suggesting the  death  was
    on 9.12.19, when it was on 9.12.18. However, the factual error  is  not
    material as it is obvious that the judge  accepted  that  the  son  had
    lived with his father and the appellant since early 2019.   Ultimately,
    the judge concluded at [69] of  the  decision  that  there  was  not  a
    parental relationship between the appellant and her partner's  son,  by
    then 18 years of age. The judge went on  to  consider  article  8  ECHR
    outside  the  Rules,  applying  section  117B   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and concluding  that  the  appellant's
    removal would not be disproportionate.

The Grounds & Submissions

 7. The grounds of application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal argue that the judge materially misdirected himself in law  in
    failing to assess the  evidence  of  Reverend  Hildreth  as  an  expert
    witness. It is argued that the judge failed to apply relevant case  law
    to the risk on return issue,  and  that  having  attended  a  Christian
    church the appellant would for that reason be of  adverse  interest  to
    the Iranian authorities, irrespective as to whether she  is  a  genuine
    convert.

 8. The grounds also argue that there were exceptional circumstances in the
    appellant's relationship with her partner's son, who was  still  17  at
    the date of application. However, there was no  'application'  in  this
    case but further submissions.

 9. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 5.2.20, the judge considering it  arguable  that  "the
    judge erred in making a material misdirection in law in respect of  his
    approach to assessing the evidence of the church  witness  and  of  the
    attendance of the appellant at  church.  Arguable  errors  of  law  are
    revealed in this regard. Furthermore, with regard to Article 8,  it  is
    arguable that the judge has failed to properly  consider  the  evidence
    and correctly apply the law."

10. The respondent's Rule 24 response, date 18.2.20, submits that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge directed himself appropriately. It is  pointed  out
    that a previous tribunal found the appellant not to  be  a  witness  of
    truth and that she had lied to at least one witness making a  statement
    in support of her claim to Christian conversion in Iran.  The  argument
    that  Reverend  Hildreth  was  an  expert  witness  is  rejected.   The
    respondent also pointed out that it does not appear that any  claim  in
    the alternative  was  made  regarding  risk  on  return  from  being  a
    disingenuous Christian convert. It  is  submitted  that  the  remaining
    grounds are no more than a disagreement with the decision.

11. The appellant has made further submissions, dated 19.5.20, in which  it
    is accepted that in light of the Upper Tribunal's reported decision  in
    MH (review; slip rule; church witnesses) Iran [2020] UKUT 00125  (IAC),
    a church witness is not to be regarded as an  expert  witness,  nor  is
    their evidence necessarily deserving  of  particular  weight,  and  the
    weight to be given is for the judicial fact-finder. Nevertheless, it is
    argued that it is not clear what weight was given to the  evidence  and
    the 'opinion' in MH is described as 'obiter'.

12. In  response,  Mr  Jarvis  for  the  Home  Office  has  lodged  written
    submissions dated 27.5.20, arguing that in  respect  of  the  complaint
    about  the  Christianity  findings,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was extremely detailed, giving  proper  consideration  to  all
    relevant evidence and providing cogent reasoning, so that  there  there
    is nothing at all in this ground.

13. At the hearing before me, Mr Wood accepted that the grounds had shifted
    somewhat, so that he was pursuing a reasons challenge as to the  weight
    given to the Dorodian witness. He submitted that whilst at [46] to [47]
    the judge had given some reasons, he had not explained what weight  was
    given to Reverend Hildreth's evidence or why it was not  accepted,  and
    there was a greater need for 'particularity,' as Mr Wood put it.

14. Mr Wood also submitted that it was open to Judge Davies to go back  and
    look at the evidence considered by Judge Jones, in  particular  between
    [45] to [56] of that decision. In relation to article 8  he  relied  on
    the written grounds and submission. He cited R (on the  application  of
    MW) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Fast  track  appeal:
    Devaseelan guidelines) [2019] UKUT 00411  (IAC),  in  which  the  Upper
    Tribunal held that the starting point principle is not a legal straight-
    jacket but permits subsequent judicial fact-finders to depart from  the
    earlier decision on a principles and properly-reasoned basis.

15. Mr Wood did not address, until I raised it with him the argument raised
    in the grounds that the appellant  would  be  at  risk  on  return.  He
    maintained that argument and in response to the fact that  it  was  not
    raised at the hearing suggested it was Robinson Obvious.

16. Mr McVeety relied on Mr Jarvis' response and further submitted that the
    findings were  entirely  open  to  Judge  Davies  and  were  adequately
    reasoned. He submitted that Reverend Hildreth undermined  his  evidence
    by straying from his role as a Dorodian witness. In  reality,  the  new
    evidence did not advance the appellant's case.

17. In relation to article 8, Mr McVeety submitted  that  this  was  doomed
    from the outset and there never was a basis for the appellant to remain
    on the basis of a parental relationship with her  partner's  child.  In
    relation to the recently-raised risk on return as a  failed  Christian-
    conversion asylum-seeker who had attended church services, he relied on
    PS (Christianity - risk) Iran CG [2020] UKUT  00046  (IAC),  where  the
    Upper Tribunal held that:

         "In cases where the claimant is found to be insincere in his or her
         claimed conversion, there is not a real risk  of  persecution  'in-
         country'. There being no reason for such an individual to associate
         himself with Christians, there is not a real  risk  that  he  would
         come to the adverse attention of the Iranian authorities. Decision-
         makers must nevertheless consider the possible risks arising at the
         'pinch point' of arrival:

         i) All returning failed asylum seekers are subject  to  questioning
         on arrival, and this will include questions about why they  claimed
         asylum;

         ii)      A returnee who divulges that he claimed to be a  Christian
         is reasonably likely to be transferred for further questioning;

         iii)     The returnee  can  be  expected  to  sign  an  undertaking
         renouncing his claimed Christianity. The questioning will therefore
         in general be short and  will  not  entail  a  real  risk  of  ill-
         treatment;

         iv)      If  there  are  any  reasons  why  the  detention  becomes
         prolonged, the risk of  ill-treatment  will  correspondingly  rise.
         Factors that could result in prolonged detention must be determined
         on a case by case basis. They could include but are not limited to:

             a)   Previous  adverse  contact  with  the  Iranian   security
             services;

             b)   Connection  to  persons  of  interest  to   the   Iranian
             authorities;

             c)  Attendance  at  a  church  with  perceived  connection  to
             Iranian house churches;

             d)  Overt social media content indicating that the  individual
             concerned has actively promoted Christianity."

Error of Law Consideration

18. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of the oral  and  written  submissions  and  the  grounds  of
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

19. After hearing from both parties,  I  entirely  agree  with  Mr  Jarvis'
    written submissions, relied on by Mr McVeety. Weight to be accorded  to
    the church evidence was for the judge and it is clear from the  careful
    approach taken that all evidence relevant to the conversion  issue  was
    considered and assessed. Reverend Hildreth was not  an  expert  witness
    and his evidence was deserving of no particular weight. It is  not  for
    such a witness to embark on a critique of the Tribunal's  decision.  In
    fact, given his behaviour in the First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  hearing,
    deliberately trespassing onto ground that  was  outside  his  role,  he
    demonstrated  an  inability  to  remain  objective,   undermining   the
    reliability of the claim that the appellant is a  genuine  convert,  so
    that his evidence did the appellant no favours at all.  This  inability
    to 'stay in lane' is further amply  demonstrated  by  his  most  recent
    witness statement of 19.5.20, which also strays widely beyond the remit
    for which he is relied on as a witness. For example,  he  submits  that
    the judge may have formed a concluded  view  of  the  veracity  of  the
    appellant before evaluating the  witness'  evidence.  With  respect  to
    Reverend Hildreth, he appears entirely oblivious to the true purpose of
    being called upon as a witness as to the appellant's conversion and has
    become a strident advocate for  the  appellant.  In  the  premises,  no
    rational Tribunal judge would accord any weight to the evidence of such
    a partisan Dorodian witness.  In  any  event,  his  further  and  post-
    decision evidence purporting to confirm the appellant's true conversion
    is immaterial to the issue as to whether the First-tier Tribunal  erred
    in law.

20. Whilst the judge was entitled to look at the evidence  heard  by  Judge
    Jones and reach a different conclusion, if that was justified,  he  was
    not obliged to  revisit  and  effectively  remake  that  unsuccessfully
    appealed decision. It is clear from  the  impugned  decision  that  the
    judge did not regard the previous decision  as  a  straight-jacket  but
    carefully considered the evidence in the round and in some considerable
    detail before reaching a conclusion in the context of the evidence as a
    whole. In reality the grounds are a challenge as to the  weight  to  be
    given to the evidence. In Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 412, the Court
    of Appeal said that it is necessary to guard against the temptation  to
    characterise  as  errors  of  law  what  are  in  truth  no  more  than
    disagreements about the  weight  to  be  given  to  different  factors,
    particularly if the judge who decided the appeal had the  advantage  of
    hearing oral evidence. It is well-established law that the weight to be
    given to any particular factor in an appeal is a matter for  the  judge
    and will rarely give rise to an error of law, see Green (Article 8 -new
    rules) [2013] UKUT 254.

21. Taken together with the appellant's admitted deception  in  claimed  to
    have been converted in Iran and be wanted by the authorities  for  that
    reason, as well  as  the  findings  of  the  previous  tribunal,  I  am
    satisfied that the conclusion that  the  appellant  is  not  a  genuine
    Christian convert is one which was entirely open to the judge  and  for
    which cogent reasoning has been provided. No error of law is  disclosed
    in this regard.

22. In respect of the claim that the appellant will be at risk on return to
    Iran as a failed asylum claimant who in an attempt to bolster her claim
    has attended Christian church services in the  UK,  it  is  clear  that
    whilst this 'bad faith' point is raised in the grounds  of  application
    for permission to appeal, it was not taken on  the  appellant's  behalf
    either in her further submissions of  18.8.19,  or  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal hearing. Nor is it addressed in the appellant's further
    submissions of 19.5.20.

23. The CPIN on Christian Converts of May 2019 referred to in  the  refusal
    decision confirms that Christians who have converted from Islam will be
    regarded as apostates, a criminal offence in Iran. Sharia law does  not
    allow for conversion from Islam to another  faith  and  the  respondent
    accepts that such  a  person  would  be  at  real  risk  on  return  of
    mistreatment amounting to persecution or breach of article 3 ECHR.

24. However, I am not satisfied that this was a 'Robinson Obvious' point or
    that the appellant is entitled to raise it at this late stage.  In  any
    event, on the basis of PS, the appellant did not demonstrate  that  she
    would be at risk on return for having attended a  Christian  church  in
    bad faith. She may be questioned and asked to renounce  the  faith.  As
    she has been found not to be genuine in  her  conversion  there  is  no
    reason for her to object to this course of action. It follows  that  no
    error of law arises on this point.

25. In relation to the article 8 claim, the fact that the  appellant  could
    not meet the requirements of the Rules for leave to remain  was  highly
    relevant to the article 8 proportionality balancing exercise.  Contrary
    to the assertions in the grounds, it was open to the judge to  conclude
    that on the facts of this case there were no exceptional or  compelling
    circumstances justifying granting leave to remain  on  the  basis  that
    otherwise the decision would be unjustifiably harsh.

26. As pointed out above, at the date of the hearing the partner's son  was
    no longer a child but 18 years of age. He was not  a  qualifying  child
    and the appellant could not take advantage of s117B(6) of the 2002 Act.
    As Mr Jarvis has pointed out the grounds on this issue are misguided as
    the  date  of  application  is  only  relevant  to   the   Rules,   not
    consideration of family life outside the Rule.  The judge assessed  the
    evidence put before the tribunal but noted the limited period  of  time
    in which the son had been part of the household. The  medical  evidence
    including of mental  health  issues  was  also  considered.  The  judge
    accepted at [67] of the decision that he needed some  support  but  was
    competent and able to attend  college.  The  Judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant was supportive of the son  and  helps  with  some  housework.
    However, she had only lived with her partner  and  his  son  since  May
    2019, and the conclusion that she did not have a parental role was  one
    open to the judge on the evidence, for the cogent  reasoning  provided.
    This is confirmed again at [69] of the decision, where the judge points
    out that the son is now 18 years of  age  and  cognitively  capable  of
    making his own decisions. He has previously lived  alone  with  a  care
    package and would likely do  so  again.  On  this  evidence  and  these
    findings, the judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  the  support  the
    appellant has provided does not equate to a parental relationship,  nor
    is his ability to remain in the UK dependent on her presence. The judge
    then went on to make a perfectly acceptable R (Razgar) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department  [2004]  UKHKL  27  stepped  approach  to
    article 8, concluding that the refusal decision was proportionate. That
    was entirely open to the  judge  on  the  evidence  and  is  adequately
    reasoned,  demonstrating  a  careful  consideration  of  all   relevant
    information.

27. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, so it
    should stand as made.

Decision

    The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the  appeal  remains
    dismissed on all grounds.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       25 November 2020






Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       25 November 2020

