
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  PA/10721/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 November 2017                           |On 18 December 2017           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                                  MR G P M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Fripp, Counsel, for Irvine Thanvi Nata
Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bolivia born on [ ]  1993.   He  appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 31  August  2016  refusing
    his application for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights
    grounds.

 2. The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Talbot  on  12
    June 2017.  The appeal was dismissed  on  all  grounds  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 23 June 2017.


 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    refused by the First-Tier Tribunal.  An application for  permission  to
    appeal was made to the Upper Tribunal and  permission  was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on  12  September  2017.   The  permission
    states that it is arguable that the First-Tier Tribunal Judge erred  in
    his assessment of paragraph  276ADE  and  the  relevant  fact  finding.
    Grounds 3 and 4 were found to have less weight but the  permission  was
    not restricted.


 4. There is a Rule 24 response on file which states that the Judge of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately  and  made  adequate
    findings of fact and gave adequate reasons for the findings in  respect
    of the appellant's credibility.  Reference is made to paragraphs 22  to
    25 of the decision and the report states that the Judge's findings  are
    neither  perverse  nor  irrational  and  the  grounds  are   merely   a
    disagreement with the findings made by  the  Judge.   The  report  also
    states that the Judge made adequate findings  of  fact  in  respect  of
    paragraph 276ADE at paragraphs 32 and 33 of the decision.


 5. I put to the parties that the main issue in this claim  appears  to  be
    that paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration  Rules  was  not  dealt
    with properly by the First-Tier Judge.  Counsel submitted that risk has
    to be considered and humanitarian protection and human rights  have  to
    be dealt with.


 6. He submitted that country conditions have to be considered.  Bolivia is
    a very poor  country  with  anarchic  policing,  a  lot  of  crime  and
    kidnapping risks.  He submitted that if the appellant has to return, it
    will be known that his family is abroad and this in  itself  could  put
    him in danger of the risk of kidnapping.


 7. Counsel then went on to discuss paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  He  submitted
    that the Judge did not attach  adequate  weight  to  the  problems  the
    appellant would have integrating in Bolivia after the  long  period  he
    has spent in the United Kingdom, and did not attach adequate weight  to
    the young age the appellant was when he arrived in the United  Kingdom.
    He submitted that the Judge failed to conduct a realistic assessment of
    the fact that on return the appellant will have no  family  links.   He
    submitted that in the appellant's mother's appeal  it  was  found  that
    there were insurmountable obstacles to her and her new partner going to
    live in Bolivia.  I was referred to the high level of crime in  Bolivia
    which the Judge appears to have accepted and the expert  report  of  Dr
    Erika Moreno and in  this  appellant's  case,  the  endemic  risk  from
    criminals.  He submitted that paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  must  apply  in
    this case.  He submitted that the concession made  by  Counsel  at  the
    First-Tier  hearing,  that  Appendix  FM  was  not  satisfied  will  be
    withdrawn if a second stage hearing or re-hearing  has  to  be  carried
    out.


 8. He submitted that the decision in the appellant's mother's case  should
    be given considerable weight.  The Judge refers to this at paragraph 31
    of his decision and it was pointed out that although her  human  rights
    claim initially failed, because her partner was found to be  unable  to
    go to Bolivia with her EX1(b) applied  and  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to  her  and  her  partner  having  family  life  in  Bolivia
    together.  He submitted that this is relevant as it is clear  that  the
    appellant, his mother and step-father, (who all live  together  in  the
    United Kingdom), cannot live together in Bolivia.   He  submitted  that
    although the appellant is over 18 years old he has no  separate  family
    life.


 9. Counsel submitted that the Judge did not properly consider the facts of
    the case.  When the appellant's mother came to the United Kingdom there
    was a failed kidnapping attempt against the  appellant.   He  submitted
    that because the appellant's mother was abroad it was thought that  she
    would have money and this was the reason  that  the  attempt  was  made
    against the appellant.  He submitted that this could well happen again.
     The objective evidence refers to people with connections abroad having
    problems with criminal elements in Bolivia.  He submitted that if it is
    accepted  that  this  happened  to  the  appellant  this  reflects  the
    credibility of the witnesses.


10. Counsel made reference to past persecution  indicating  a  well-founded
    fear of future persecution and I was referred to paragraph 339K of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   He  submitted  that  based  on  this  event  this
    appellant should have  been  granted  humanitarian  protection  in  the
    United Kingdom.  I was asked to consider paragraph 7 of  the  decision,
    then paragraph 19 and paragraph 20 relating to Section 8 of the  Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants Etc) Act  2004.   He  submitted
    that at paragraph 21 the Judge refers  to  the  appellant's  protection
    claim and goes on to state that the evidence of this event is vague and
    inconsistent.  Counsel submitted that all this  happened  a  long  time
    ago.  The appellant was very young and his mother's version  of  events
    was based on hearsay.  She was in the United Kingdom when this incident
    happened.  He submitted that there is no contradiction in the  evidence
    and the appellant's mother could have been  referring  to  a  different
    incident when she gave her evidence.


11. I was asked to consider the expert report which supports the view  that
    on return the appellant, who has previously faced threats and attempted
    kidnapping, would face a high probability of continued threats as he is
    likely to be viewed as wealthy.


12. He submitted that the Judge did not properly  consider  that  14  years
    have passed since the kidnapping attempt and the  expert  report  finds
    the appellant's account to be perfectly plausible.  At paragraph 25  of
    the decision the Judge refers to the high  rate  of  violent  crime  in
    Bolivia, but finds that any incidents which might have happened to  the
    appellant and any threats  against  the  appellant  have  been  greatly
    embellished.  He submitted that the Judge did not  properly  deal  with
    credibility relating to the attempted kidnapping and this is  extremely
    relevant to the remainder  of  the  claim.   At  paragraph  33  of  the
    decision the Judge states that the appellant can only succeed if he can
    establish that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration in Bolivia.  The  Judge  accepts  that  the  appellant  has
    established a private life in the United Kingdom.  The Judge  does  not
    accept the appellant's evidence that his Spanish is no longer  good  or
    that his mother will have no contacts left in Bolivia.  The Judge  also
    notes that there is family property  in  Bolivia  and  finds  that  the
    appellant's mother and step-father will help the appellant  financially
    if he has to return.  Because of this the Judge  finds  that  the  very
    significant obstacles test has not been met.   Counsel  submitted  that
    although the case of Kamara [2016] EWCA  Civ  813  is  referred  to  at
    paragraph 33, the Judge has not properly considered its terms  as  this
    case is consistent with the said case  of  Kamara.   Counsel  submitted
    that the Judge failed to consider whether the appellant was  enough  of
    "an insider" to fit in on return to Bolivia.   Counsel  submitted  that
    there must be very significant obstacles to  this  appellant  returning
    there and integrating after the length of  time  he  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom.  This is an appellant who is integrated into the United
    Kingdom.  Counsel submitted that the  Judge  does  not  deal  with  the
    expert report which states that  the  appellant  will  be  seen  to  be
    affluent on return.

13. Counsel then referred to Article 8 of ECHR which  is  now  incorporated
    into  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  Judge  rejected  family  life  at
    paragraph 32 of the decision but Counsel submitted that this  appellant
    is a young adult who stays with his mother and stepfather in the United
    Kingdom and he submitted that the claim  should  have  been  considered
    outside the Rules. He submitted that there must  be  more  than  normal
    emotional ties between him and his  mother.   They  live  in  the  same
    house, he has grown up there and until he was 18 he  had  family  life.
    Counsel submitted that he still has family life  with  his  mother  and
    stepfather.  He submitted that the Judge  misdirected  himself  in  his
    family life finding.


14. I was referred to the proportionality assessment at paragraph 35 of the
    decision relating to Article 8 outside the  Rules.   Counsel  submitted
    that when the rights of the appellant and his mother are considered and
    weighed against public interest, public interest  cannot  succeed.   He
    submitted that there are errors in the Judge's reasoning and he has not
    dealt with the expert report adequately.  He  should  have  given  this
    report more weight.  I was asked to consider his findings  relating  to
    Article 3 and humanitarian protection paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Rules and Article 8 outside the Rules.


15. The Presenting Officer made his submissions  relying  on  the  Rule  24
    response.


16. He submitted that paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) is the main issue.  The Judge
    clearly has in mind that the appellant was only 11 when he came to  the
    United Kingdom.  With regard to ground 1 and the facts of the case, the
    attempted kidnapping was properly dealt with by the Judge at paragraphs
    21  and  22  of  the  decision.   The  Judge  notes  that   there   are
    inconsistencies in the evidence and notes that the appellant's mother's
    evidence was different from the appellant's evidence.  He refers to the
    appellant's mother's evidence being purely hearsay.   At  paragraph  23
    the Judge makes significant points, noting that  when  the  appellant's
    mother heard about the attempted  kidnapping  she  did  not  return  to
    Bolivia, even when her status in the United Kingdom ended.  Neither did
    she make an asylum claim,  but  remained  unlawfully  in  the  UK.   At
    paragraph 23 the Judge also found it significant that the appellant had
    never made an asylum claim until March 2016 following  his  arrest  and
    detention as an overstayer.  The Judge finds that  his  credibility  is
    damaged because of this and the Presenting Officer  submitted  that  he
    was entitled to this finding.

17. At paragraph 28 the Judge refers to the expert report  and  deals  with
    the kidnapping and the background evidence at paragraphs 25 and 26.  He
    has accepted that the expert is an academic expert in Latin America and
    he has accepted that there are high levels of crime and lawlessness  in
    Bolivia and that wealthy individuals  are  likely  to  face  particular
    risks, but he goes on to find that her report carries little weight  in
    terms of the risks that this appellant could face on return.  He refers
    to the report, stating that it makes a sweeping assertion  that  it  is
    likely that the appellant suffered  an  attempted  kidnapping,  but  he
    finds that this assertion is not based on a detailed examination of the
    specific evidence put forward by the appellant.  The appellant will not
    be returning as a wealthy individual and  at  paragraph  28  the  Judge
    states that aside from the expert report  the  appellant  has  provided
    little in the way of country specific evidence  to  support  his  claim
    that he faces a real risk of persecution and serious harm if he returns
    to Bolivia from abroad after a lengthy period of absence.  He submitted
    that the Judge has properly considered the expert report and has  given
    it the weight he believes should attach to it.

18. He submitted that Counsel at the First-Tier Hearing made  a  concession
    on family life and at paragraph 33 the Judge focusses on private  life.
    He makes reference to the said case of Kamara and the Razgar  test  and
    he submitted that there is no misdirection.  The Judge was entitled  to
    the findings he made on Article 8.


19. With regard to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and integration into Bolivia, he
    submitted that based on the Judge's  other  findings  this  is  not  an
    exceptional case or so compelling that the appellant, an  educated  man
    who will get help financially from his mother and  step-father  in  the
    United Kingdom on return, will be unable to integrate in Bolivia.


20. Counsel then submitted that the Rule 24  response  did  not  take  into
    account the points raised in the grounds of application.


21. He submitted that the expert evidence has not been properly  considered
    and the issue of risk on return has not been properly considered  based
    on the expert report.  He submitted that this  is  a  valid  ground  of
    appeal and there would be a real risk to this appellant on return.   He
    submitted that although the appellant will be returning and will not be
    wealthy, he will be perceived as  wealthy  on  return  and  the  expert
    refers to the private security measures in Bolivia being insufficient.


22. Counsel submitted that the Presenting Officer has stated that  relating
    to ground 3 and particular dependence,  the  Presenting  Officer  finds
    that the Judge did not misdirect himself. He submitted that  the  Judge
    has misapplied the case of Kugathas and not only has  he  not  properly
    considered the interests of the appellant, he has  not  considered  the
    interests of his mother and step-father.  I was asked to remit the case
    to the First-Tier Tribunal for rehearing.  Counsel  submitted  that  if
    that is done the concession made at  the  First-Tier  Hearing  will  be
    withdrawn.


Decision and Reasons


23. The permission is not restricted but it is clear  from  the  permission
    that the main issue is the Judge's assessment  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)
    (vi)  and the relevant fact finding.

24. I shall go through the grounds.  The Judge accepts that there are  high
    levels of crime and lawlessness in  Bolivia.   He  has  considered  the
    background evidence and the expert report and  it  is  clear  from  the
    decision that he is aware of the length of time that has passed and the
    age of the appellant when the supposed attempted kidnapping took place.
     This is an appellant who states that he fears return  to  Bolivia  and
    yet he did not claim asylum until 2016, ten years after he  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom.  The Judge has taken this into account and has also
    taken into account the fact that his mother remained illegally  in  the
    United Kingdom for a considerable period and made no attempt to contact
    the Home Office.  Counsel for  the  appellant's  argument  is  that  on
    return the appellant will be perceived as being wealthy because he  has
    a parent who lives abroad and so will be in danger of kidnapping.   The
    Judge finds credibility to be an issue because  of  inconsistencies  in
    the appellant's and his mother's evidence, although  he  realises  that
    the incident took place a long time ago and his mother  is  relying  on
    hearsay  evidence.   He  notes  that  Section  8  of  the  Asylum   and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants Etc) Act 2004 applies and this goes
    against the appellant's credibility.  There are inconsistencies in  the
    appellant's evidence and in the appellant's and his mother's  evidence.
    The Judge finds it significant  that  if  this  incident  happened  the
    appellant's mother did not immediately return to Bolivia.  (She  states
    that her father said it would be too dangerous for her to return).   In
    spite of this, as is pointed out by the Judge,  neither  the  appellant
    nor  his  mother  claimed  asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom  for   some
    considerable time after that, and this goes against their  credibility.
    The Judge is not satisfied with the police report produced.  He  refers
    to discrepancies and vagueness in the evidence and finds that if  there
    were any incidents they  have  been  greatly  embellished.   After  the
    supposed attempted kidnapping the appellant did not leave  for  the  UK
    for a year.  The judge does not believe  that  the  appellant's  mother
    remained in the United Kingdom because she  was  afraid  to  return  to
    Bolivia. He believes she wanted to stay in the United  Kingdom  and  he
    does not believe that it was because of the attempted  kidnapping  that
    the appellant left Bolivia.  It was because he wanted  to  be  reunited
    with his mother. The appellant is now in his 20s and  he  was  only  11
    when the supposed kidnapping attempt took place. This has to  be  taken
    into account when all the evidence is assessed in the round.

25. The Judge has explained his findings, having  taken  into  account  the
    expert  report  and  the  objective  evidence  and  has   referred   to
    discrepancies and vagueness in the accounts given to him.  His findings
    were open to him.


26. The second ground deals with paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  This is the main
    issue in the grounds and the  ground  states  that  the  Judge's  self-
    direction is deficient.  The Judge deals with the said case of  Kamara.
    The grounds state that he failed to conduct a realistic  assessment  of
    whether the appellant faces very significant obstacles by reason of his
    long absence from Bolivia coupled  with  other  factors,  such  as  the
    absence of any family link  or  identifiable  continuing  contacts  and
    isolation from his  mother  and  step-father.   The  Judge  takes  into
    account the appellant's mother's asylum decision and notes  that  there
    were found to be insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's mother and
    step-father continuing their family life together in Bolivia.   Counsel
    stated that when a proportionality assessment  is  carried  out  it  is
    clear that public interest must lose but the appellant's mother  has  a
    house in Bolivia that she is going to sell.  If she  lived  in  Bolivia
    for the whole of her life it is not credible that  she  would  have  no
    contacts there and this is the Judge's finding.  The  Judge  refers  to
    the expert report by stating that she makes a sweeping assertion  which
    is not based on a detailed examination of  the  specific  evidence  put
    forward by the appellant but on the  fact  that  these  sorts  of  acts
    (kidnapping) are not uncommon across Bolivia's larger cities  including
    La Paz.  The expert believes that the appellant  will  be  at  risk  on
    return but the Judge finds that the appellant's main concern is that he
    will be returning to an impoverished country  with  poor  prospects  of
    making a living there.  This is not a reason for asylum being  granted.
    The Judge notes that his mother and step-father are  prepared  to  help
    him financially on return.   The  Judge  notes  that  there  is  little
    evidence apart from the expert report to support  the  claim  that  the
    appellant faces a real risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  if  he
    returns to Bolivia from abroad.  He points out that the Foreign  Office
    advises caution  to  British  travellers  but  not  against  travel  to
    Bolivia.  The Judge has dealt with  this  issue  properly  and  clearly
    finds that paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) cannot be satisfied.

27. The Judge has made adequate findings about this and  has  given  proper
    explanations for his findings.


28. With regard to the third ground the Judge has dealt with  family  life,
    finding that there is none and this was  accepted  by  Counsel  at  the
    First-Tier hearing.  The Judge has dealt properly with  this  based  on
    the evidence before him and the fact that the appellant is an adult  in
    his 20s, although he is still staying with his mother and  step-father.




29. With regard to the fourth ground and Article 8, the appellant's private
    life, I have considered the case of R (Agyarko) and it  is  clear  from
    the Judge's decision he does not find that  for  the  appellant  to  be
    returned to Bolivia would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences.
    The Judge finds that there are no exceptional circumstances and I  find
    that the Judge has dealt appropriately with this matter.   Counsel  has
    referred to the appellant being a young man  who  has  never  left  his
    mother's house but he is in his 20s, is educated and has the support of
    his mother and step-father if he returns to Bolivia.  All of  this  has
    been noted by the Judge.  I find that he  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    decision he did.


Notice of Decision


30. There is no material error of law in the Judge's  decision  promulgated
    on 22 June 2016.  All his findings have been properly explained and  he
    has considered all the evidence before him  at  the  hearing.   He  was
    entitled to reach the conclusions he did based on this evidence.

31. Anonymity has been directed.




Signed                                  Date 18 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
