

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10504/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 September 2017                  |On 19 September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                    [S P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

Appellant:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Ms S Iqbal, of counsel, instructed by Polpitiya & Co
Solicitors


                                  DECISION

    Framework of this Appeal


 1. The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  (the  "Secretary  of
    State") appeals, with permission, against the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the "FtT") which allowed the  appeal  of  [SP],  whom  I
    shall describe as "the Appellant".  The scope of the appeal before  the
    FtT is evident from [1] and [2] of the grounds of appeal:

         "It is submitted that the Appellant's  deportation  and  subsequent
         removal would be in  breach  of  the  UK's  obligations  under  the
         Refugee Convention and/or the Appellant is entitled to humanitarian
         protection and/or deportation will give rise to a breach of Article
         3 ....


         It is  submitted  further  that  the  Appellant's  deportation  and
         subsequent removal would constitute an unlawful interference in his
         right to respect for his family and private life established in the
         UK contrary to Article 8 ECHR."




    Thus the subject of the Appellant's challenge was twofold:


      i) The Secretary of State's deportation order dated 19 September 2016.




     ii) The Secretary of State's decision dated 20 September 2016  refusing
         the Appellant's protection and human right's claim.


    (Hereinafter "the impugned measures")


 2. It is not in dispute that in 1990 the  Appellant,  accompanied  by  his
    family members, fled Sri Lanka to India where they  lived  until  1994.
    There were then granted entry clearance  to  join  his  father  in  the
    United Kingdom.  In April 2001 the Appellant applied for naturalisation
    as a British citizen.  This application, in the wake and by  reason  of
    his convictions, was refused. The Appellant  first  claimed  asylum  in
    March 2016 in response to the "One Stop Notice" (Stage 1).


 3. The impetus for each of the impugned measures appears from [17] of  the
    decision letter:


         "On 16 October 2002 at Central Crown Court you  were  convicted  of
         four counts of wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm  and
         1 count of murder.  You were sentenced to  ten  years  imprisonment
         concurrent and life, to serve a minimum of 17 years."




    In sentencing the Appellant, the Judge recorded  that  he  and  others,
    having armed themselves with axes and swords,  perpetrated  a  "vicious
    and remorseless attack" on five innocent young men who were  mistakenly
    believed to have damaged the Appellant's brother's car.


    Legal Framework


 4. A brief outline of  the  legal  framework  within  which  the  impugned
    measures were taken is appropriate at this stage.  As  is  well  known,
    the Refugee Convention (1951), an instrument of international law which
    forms part of the domestic law of  the  United  Kingdom  and  has  been
    ratified by 145 states, defines the term "refugee" and establishes both
    the rights of those who satisfy this definition and  the  corresponding
    protection duties of states.  Protection of the individual  is  secured
    by the core principle of non-refoulement.  Article 33 is germane in the
    present context:


         "1.  No Contracting State shall  expel  or  return  ('refouler')  a
             refugee  in  any  manner  whatsoever  to  the   frontiers   of
             territories where his life or freedom would be  threatened  on
             account of his race, religion, nationality,  membership  of  a
             particular social group or political opinion.


         2.   The benefit of the present  provision  may  not,  however,  be
             claimed by a refugee whom there  are  reasonable  grounds  for
             regarding as a danger to the security of the country in  which
             he is, or who, having been convicted by a final judgment of  a
             particularly  serious  crime,  constitutes  a  danger  to  the
             community of that country."




 5. Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (the
    "2002 Act") provides:


         "(1) This section applies for the purpose of the  construction  and
             application  of  Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee   Convention
             (Exclusion from Protection).


         (2)  A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by  a  final
             judgment of a particularly serious crime and to  constitute  a
             danger to the community of the United Kingdom if he is -


                a) Convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence; and


                b) Sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at  least  2
                   years."




    Paragraph  334  of  the  Immigration  Rules  provides  that  an  asylum
    applicant will be granted asylum in the United Kingdom if the Secretary
    of State is satisfied (inter alia) that -


         "(iv)    he does not, having been convicted by a final judgment  of
             a  particularly  serious  crime,  constitute  danger  to   the
             community of the United Kingdom."




 6. Accordingly, lying at the heart  of  the  refusal  of  the  Appellant's
    asylum claim is the twofold assessment of the Secretary of State, based
    on  the  (rebuttable)  statutory  presumption,  that  the   Appellant's
    offending was of a "particularly serious" nature and in consequence  he
    constitutes a danger to United Kingdom society.


 7. Next it is necessary to consider the "automatic" deportation provisions
    of the UK Borders Act 2007.  Section 32, under  the  rubric  "Automatic
    Deportation" provides:


        "(1) In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-


             (a) who is not a British citizen,
             (b) who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
             (c) to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.


        (2) Condition 1 is that the person is  sentenced  to  a  period  of
        imprisonment of at least 12 months.


        (3) Condition 2 is that-


             (a) the offence is specified by order of the Secretary of State
             under section 72(4)(a)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002 (c. 41) (serious criminal), and
             (b) the person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment.


        (4) For the purpose of section 3(5)(a)  of the Immigration Act 1971
        (c. 77), the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to  the
        public good.


        (5) The Secretary of State must make a deportation order in respect
        of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33)."



    Section 33 establishes certain exceptions to  the  Section  32  regime.
    One of these is, per subsection (2):


         "Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign criminal in  pursuance
         of the Deportation Order would breach -


          a) A person's Convention rights, or


          b)  The  United   Kingdom's   obligations   under   the   Refugee
             Convention."




    The "order" of the Secretary of State to which section 32(3)(a)  refers
    is a Statutory Instrument, the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 (Specification of Particularly Serious Crimes) Order  2004,  which
    by Article 2 provides:


         "An offence of a description set out in any of Schedules 1 -  6  to
         this Order is hereby specified for the purposes of section 72(4)(a)
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."




    The specified offences include, by Schedule 2, the generic category of
    "Offences under the Common Law of England and Wales" which, of course,
    encompass murder.




 8. At this juncture it is  convenient  to  consider  those  provisions  of
    section 72 which are engaged  when  an  appeal  is  brought  against  a
    decision of the aforementioned nature.  Section 72(9), (10)  and  (10A)
    provide:


        "(9) Subsection (10) applies where-


             (a) a person appeals under section 82  of  this  Act  or  under
             section 2 of the Special  Immigration  Appeals  Commission  Act
             1997 (c. 68) wholly  or  partly  on  the  ground  mentioned  in
             section 84(1)(a) or (3)(a) of this Act (breach  of  the  United
             Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention), and


             (b)  the  Secretary  of  State  issues   a   certificate   that
             presumptions under subsection (2), (3)  or  (4)  apply  to  the
             person (subject to rebuttal).


        (10) The Tribunal or Commission hearing the appeal-


             (a) must  begin  substantive  deliberation  on  the  appeal  by
             considering the certificate, and


             (b) if in agreement that presumptions under subsection (2), (3)
             or (4) apply (having given the  appellant  an  opportunity  for
             rebuttal) must dismiss the appeal in so far as it relies on the
             ground specified in subsection (9)(a).


         (10A) Subsection (10)  also  applies  in  relation  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal when it acts under section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the  Tribunals,
        Courts and Enforcement Act 2007."




    SSHD Decision

 9. The thrust of the Appellant's claim for asylum entailed assertions that
    his family home had been raided by the Sri  Lankan  Army  when  aged  9
    years; the family fled to India the following day; his father is wanted
    by  the  Sri  Lankan  Army  as  the  family  supported  the   terrorist
    organisation LTTE; his grandfather was tortured upon returning  to  Sri
    Lanka in 1993/94; and the Appellant played football for a  Tamil  group
    in the United Kingdom.  In essence, all of these claims  were  rejected
    by the Secretary of State's decision maker.


10. In  a separate compartment of the decision  letter  it  was  determined
    that the Appellant had not rebutted the presumption that  he  had  been
    convicted of a particularly serious offence, in these terms:


         "Having considered the objective evidence it is not considered that
         you have rebutted the presumption that you have been convicted of a
         particularly serious offence ...


         With regard to the danger that you pose to the community of the UK,
         for the purpose and application of section 72, there is no specific
         level of risk that needs to be satisfied ....


         It is therefore believed that section 72(2) should be applied ....


         In light of your failure to rebut the presumptions  that  you  have
         been convicted of a  particularly  serious  offence  or  that  your
         continued presence in the UK  would  constitute  a  danger  to  the
         community of the UK, it is concluded that section 72 of  the  [2002
         Act] is applicable to you ....


         In accordance with section 72(9)(b) of [2002 Act] the Secretary  of
         State hereby satisfies that the presumptions  under  section  72(2)
         apply to you."




    The second of the two measures under challenge, the deportation  order,
    is contained in a separate instrument.


    FtT Decision


11.  In  allowing  the  appeal  the  FtT  made  the   following   principal
    conclusions:


      i) The Appellant had rebutted the statutory presumption (supra).


     ii) The public interest favouring the Appellant's  deportation  to  Sri
         Lanka was outweighed by a combination of  "very  strong  mitigating
         factors", which  the  Judge  duly  listed,  giving  rise  to  "very
         compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those   described   in
         paragraphs 399 and 399A [of  the  Immigration  Rules]".   Thus  the
         appeal would succeed under Article 8 ECHR.


    iii) The asylum appeal also succeeded in light of a real  risk  that  by
         virtue of his serious criminal conviction and his association  with
         LTTE the Appellant "... would be arrested and detained and  in  all
         likelihood  ill-treated  and  tortured  under  the  Prevention   of
         Terrorism Act upon his return as his name would  be  [on]  a  watch
         list".


     iv) The appeal also succeeded under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.




12. The specific finding that the  Appellant  had  rebutted  the  statutory
    presumption that he constitutes a danger to the community was based  on
    three factors: the assessment in the OASYS Report that the risk of  him
    re-offending was "low"; the positive  assessments  of  the  Appellant's
    progress in prison by both the Parole Board and in the NOMS report; and
    the Appellant's own evidence to the Tribunal.


    This Appeal


13. There are, in substance, two grounds of  appeal  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's formulation:


      i) Having regard to the  assessment  in  the  OASYS  Report  that  the
         Appellant poses a high risk of serious harm to the public  (in  the
         event of the low  risk  of  reoffending  materialising)  the  FtT's
         finding that he has rebutted the presumption that he constitutes  a
         danger to  the  community  is  irrational;  or  is  not  adequately
         measured; or is unsustainable by virtue of the  Tribunal's  failure
         to properly weigh all facts and factors bearing on this issue.


     ii) The FtT "... failed to consider the requirements of the Immigration
         Rules" (without particularisation) and failed  to  give  effect  to
         section 117C of the 2002 Act.


    Permission to appeal was granted  in  the  following  somewhat  cryptic
    terms:


         "It is arguable that the Judge may have  materially  erred  in  the
         assessment of risk under the section 72 certificate  and  regarding
         the application of section 117 within Article 8."


    Consideration and Conclusions


14. Properly analysed, there are three grounds of appeal.

15. The first ground of  appeal  relates  to  the  FtT's  approach  to  the
    assessment in the OASYS report  which  was  twofold:  first,  that  the
    Appellant posed a high risk of serious harm to the public and,  second,
    that he presented a low risk of reoffending.  The Tribunal concentrated
    solely  on  the  latter  to  the  exclusion  of  the  former   in   its
    consideration of whether the statutory presumption had  been  rebutted.
    It did so to the extent that a key sentence in the determination namely
    the first in paragraph 83 suffers from a manifest lack of coherence and
    intelligibility.  Figuratively, it pole vaulted over the first  of  the
    two assessments.   In my judgement a clear error  of  law  was  thereby
    committed.

16. The essence of the second ground of appeal may be expressed in a number
    of ways.  Fundamentally it resolves to a failure on the part of the FtT
    to give proper consideration and effect to paragraphs 399 and  399A  of
    the Immigration Rules before proceeding to apply the test which I shall
    in shorthand describe as the "over and  above"  test.   Logically  this
    test cannot be applied unless and until proper consideration and effect
    has been given to paragraphs 399 and 399A: see Greenwood (No. 2)  (para
    398 considered) [2015] UKUT 00629 (IAC).   This  exercise  entails  the
    making of appropriate findings and evaluative assessments on  the  part
    of the Tribunal.  There was an outright failure on the part of the  FtT
    to carry out this exercise.  It follows ineluctably that paragraph  106
    and following of the determination are unsustainable in law.

17. The gist of the third ground of appeal is that the FtT failed  to  give
    effect to Section 117C of the 2002 Act.  The Tribunal  was  obliged  by
    statute to do so.  There is no exception to that  absolute  duty.   The
    FtT has failed to do so expressly.  That  is  not  automatically  fatal
    since it was in principle open to the Tribunal to do so  in  substance.
    However it failed to do so. The nature of  the  task  required  of  the
    Tribunal under Part 5A of the 2002 Act has been considered  extensively
    by this Tribunal in, amongst other cases, Deelah and Forman.  There  is
    nothing in the decision of the FtT which would warrant  the  conclusion
    that the absolute duty to give effect to Section 117C  of  the  statute
    has been carried out by the judge.  It follows that the third ground of
    appeal succeeds also.

18. As a result, I order that the decision of the FtT  be  set  aside.   In
    light of the legal infirmities in the decision which I  have  diagnosed
    remittal to the FtT is appropriate.  Having heard both  representatives
    on the issue, the Tribunal's findings in respect of Articles  2  and  3
    ECHR are  preserved.   The  appeal  will  be  reheard  by  a  different
    constitution of the FtT.



                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                    Date:  13 September 2017

