
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10734/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15 February 2018                   |On 22 February 2018                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                              Pillainayagam [K]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Easty, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.   He  was  born  on  either  4
    November 1961 or 21 November 1961.  See refusal dated 7 October 2017.

 2.  He  appealed  against  the  respondent's  refusal  to  grant   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and on human rights  grounds  dated  7  October
    2017.

 3. The appeal was dismissed on asylum grounds but allowed on human  rights
    grounds by Judge A A Wilson (the judge) in a decision promulgated on  8
    December 2017.

 4. The grounds claim the judge erred by making a material misdirection  in
    law and giving inadequate reasoning as follows:

         "2.  It is asserted that the FTTJ's findings are confused and based
             on speculation, rather than the facts and a proper  assessment
             of  the  facts  within  the  framework  of   the   Article   8
             legislation.

         3.   The Presenting Officer raised a number of  concerns  regarding
             the genuineness of  the  relationship,  especially  given  the
             inconsistencies in the appellant's and his  claimed  partner's
             evidence but the FTTJ fails to address the issues raised  when
             finding that this is a genuine relationship.  Please  see  the
             attached Presenting Officer's minute regarding the hearing.

         4.   The FTTJ accepts without question that the appellant's claimed
             partner was raped and the child was born as a result of  that.
             This finding is notwithstanding the fact that her asylum claim
             was unsuccessful and the FTTJ speculates as to the reasons for
             the grant of discretionary leave.  It is  therefore  contended
             that the FTTJ has not properly considered whether or not there
             would be insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in
             Sri Lanka.  This is a high threshold to be met as set  out  by
             the Supreme Court in Agyarko and a mere assertion at paragraph
             10 that there would be strong and humanitarian reasons why she
             should be given leave to remain is not sufficient.   The  FTTJ
             has failed to assess the evidence himself prior to  coming  to
             the conclusion regarding whether or not the claimed  partner's
             account is credible  in  this  regard.   Mere  speculation  is
             insufficient.

         5.   At paragraph 11, the FTTJ finds  that  the  claimed  partner's
             status in the UK is not precarious.  It is  asserted  that  in
             accordance with Rhuppiah  the  FTTJ  is  mistaken  and  little
             weight should have been given to the private and  family  life
             which has developed in the UK.

         6.   Further, there is no finding regarding whether  the  appellant
             has a "parental  relationship"  with  the  child  and  if  so,
             whether it would be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the UK with the appellant and  his  mother.   Given  that  the
             appellant is not the biological father of the  child,  it  was
             incumbent  on  the  FTTJ  to  make  findings   regarding   the
             relationship with the child.  It is not enough to  assess  the
             best interests of the child as a standalone  consideration  in
             the balancing exercise."

 5. Judge Chohan granted permission to appeal on 8 January 2018.   He  said
    inter alia:

         "3.   There  is  substance  in  the  grounds  seeking   permission.
             Overall, in respect of the Article 8 assessment, it does  seem
             that the judge has given inadequate reasons.  There appears to
             be little or no consideration as to why the child in  question
             could  not  live  in  Sri  Lanka   with   parents.    Parental
             relationship also lacks consideration."

 6. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Ms Easty described the case as being weak with regard to asylum grounds
    but  strong  with  regard  to  human  rights.   There   was   no   s.55
    consideration  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   The  judge  wanted  the
    Secretary of State to reconsider her decision.  This  was  a  situation
    where Greenwood (No. 2) (para. 398 considered) [2015]  UKUT  629  (IAC)
    applied such that if there was any error on the part of  the  judge  it
    was not material.  His decision was pragmatic.

 8. Mr Nath relied upon the grounds.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 9. I find the grounds are made out.  Ms Easty said that if  there  was  an
    error it was not material in terms of Greenwood (No. 2).  I  find  that
    the judge attempted to treat the human rights aspect of this appeal  as
    a freestanding challenge to the decision not anticipated  by  Greenwood
    (No. 2).  If I am wrong in that regard I find that the judge materially
    erred in failing to carry out an analysis or any adequate  analysis  of
    the parties' relationship, issues regarding the same having been raised
    by the respondent.  The judge failed to engage with relevant case  law,
    Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803 and Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.

10. As regards the failure on the part of the respondent to  carry  out  an
    s.55 analysis, the judge was in a position to be the  primary  decision
    maker in that regard.  It was a matter for the appellant to put  before
    the judge evidence  with  regard  to  the  family  circumstances,  such
    evidence apparently being significant in its absence.  See the  judge's
    decision at [22].

11. The judge's findings and conclusion with regard to the dismissed asylum
    claim are preserved.

12. As regards the Article 8 claim, the respondent has established that the
    judge materially erred.  I  set  aside  that  aspect  of  the  decision
    allowed on human rights grounds and remit the same  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for those issues alone to be heard afresh.

Notice of Decision

13. The judge's findings and conclusions with regard only  to  the  allowed
    human rights aspect of the appeal contain material errors of  law,  are
    set aside and shall be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
    hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 15 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

