
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10475/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 April 2018                              |On 26 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   Mr H M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Caseley, Counsel, instructed by Migrant Legal
                    Project (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   In a decision posted on 21 November 2017 Judge O'Rourke of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of the appellant.   A  citizen
    of Iran, the appellant had brought an appeal against  the  respondent's
    refusal of his protection claim dated 1 October 2017.  The basis of the
    appellant's claim was that he would  be  at  risk  on  return  to  Iran
    because he had converted to Christianity.  Neither the  respondent  nor
    the judge believed he had given a credible account.

2.   The appellant's grounds of appeal were  essentially  three  in  number.
    It was submitted that the judge erred in (1)  failing  to  make  proper
    allowance for the appellant's vulnerability and the effect of his  drug
    addiction to opiates on his ability  to  give  coherent  evidence;  (2)
    making inappropriate use of the doctrine of  judicial  notice  to  deal
    with the controversial  matter  not  in  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    apparent wish to eat only halal food; and (3) failing to give  adequate
    reasons for not following the findings of the UT in AB [2015] UKUT  257
    (IAC) as regards the state of the  evidence  about  internet  activity.
    There was a further issue that for convenience I shall call ground (4),
    namely that the judge failed to take into account post-hearing evidence
    submitted  by  the  appellant's   representatives   relating   to   the
    appellant's Facebook activities.

3.   I received helpful submissions from both representatives.

    I shall take ground (3) first.

4.   Ground (3) asserts that the judge gave no or no  adequate  reasons  for
    declining to follow the findings in AB and Others (internet activity  -
    state of evidence) [2015] UKUT 257 (IAC).  The simple  answer  to  that
    ground is that given by Mr Mills.   Not  only  was  AB  not  a  country
    guidance case, but, as presaged in the keywords and  clarified  in  the
    italicised summary, the UT concluded in that  case  that  the  material
    before it was  insufficient  to  warrant  giving  guidance  on  country
    conditions.  The UT itself makes very clear in AB that it  cannot  make
    findings of fact of  general  application  because  of  the  evidential
    deficiencies. Thus there was no guidance to follow.

5.   Shorn of being able to rely on AB, the appellant's ground 3 amounts  to
    a series of mere disagreements with the judge's findings of  fact  that
    the  appellant's  case  concerned  one  with  "a  minimal   amount   of
    effectively anonymous Facebook activity for which there is no  evidence
    of widespread viewing ..."  The fact that the judge also  thought  that
    the appellant would delete his Facebook activity  once  he  learnt  his
    appeal had failed was immaterial to the reasons why the judge found the
    appellant's internet activity not to pose a real risk of attracting the
    adverse interest of the authorities.

6.   Taking ground (2) next, it alleges that the judge  made  "inappropriate
    use of the doctrine of judicial notice".  As Miss Caseley acknowledged,
    this ground as drafted is overbroad.   What  the  judge  took  judicial
    notice of was the "common public  knowledge  ...  that  halal  (meaning
    'permissible') is that food which adheres to Islamic Sharia law and  is
    achieved by the method of animal slaughter, by cutting the  throat  and
    draining the blood" (paragraph 24(i)(a)).  There can be no criticism of
    that; that is public knowledge.  What the grounds effectively object to
    is the judge inferring from  this  knowledge  that  the  appellant  was
    "still an observant Muslim".  I consider that a  close  examination  of
    the circumstances in which the judge reached this finding shows that it
    was one that was in the range of reasonable responses.  First,  it  was
    based on the statement the  appellant  himself  had  made  to  his  GP.
    Second, in that statement he was explaining why he had not been  eating
    well in his asylum support accommodation ("most of food  not  halal  so
    not eating well").  Third, the appellant was afforded  the  opportunity
    to explain why he would have continued to be concerned about halal food
    even though he had converted to Christianity.  It seems to me that  the
    judge  was  fully   entitled   to   find   the   appellant's   response
    unsatisfactory in that he did not offer any other religious or cultural
    explanation for this choice of diet and had reacted to the question  by
    challenging its disclosure, even though it was his  own  solicitor  who
    had produced the GP record.   It  must  also  be  borne  in  mind  that
    although the judge deals specifically with this issue in 24(i)(a) under
    the heading 'The Halal Food  Evidence',  this  was  prefaced  with  the
    statement that he had "looked at the evidence in the  round"  and  Miss
    Caseley did not submit that the judge had failed to  apply  a  holistic
    approach to the evidence as a whole.  Part of the surrounding  evidence
    was the oral testimony of the Reverend Rees that if one of the  Iranian
    converts of his church has insisted on halal food that would have  been
    a 'red flag' for him, as he "strongly disapproved  of  halal  slaughter
    practices" (paragraph 21).

7.   As regards ground (1) (which alleges a failure  to  take  into  account
    the  appellant's  vulnerability   when   making   adverse   credibility
    findings), it is submitted that the judge "had  previously  acceded  to
    the appellant's Counsel's application (for the appellant) to be treated
    as a vulnerable witness".  Mr Mills' response was to argue  that  there
    was not sufficient medical evidence before the judge to  conclude  that
    the appellant was a vulnerable witness.   However,  it  is  clear  from
    paragraph 8 that Counsel representing the appellant at the FtT  hearing
    (Mr Neale) made an application that  the  appellant  be  treated  as  a
    vulnerable witness and Mr Mills does not dispute that the judge did  in
    fact accede to that application.  Even if the fact was that  the  judge
    did not accede to the application, it was one regarding which he should
    have  recorded  his  decision.   As  regards  the  substance   of   the
    application, there was a lack of medical evidence but it was  seemingly
    not in dispute that the appellant had been an opiate addict (or, if  it
    was, the judge should have addressed that and made findings about  it).
    Other than paragraph 8 there is no  passage  of  the  judge's  decision
    which indicates that he made allowances  for  the  appellant's  claimed
    vulnerability.  In my judgment  this  represents  a  clear  failure  to
    follow the guidance given in the Joint Presidential  Guidance  Note  of
    2010 and renders unsafe the judge's strong reliance  on  the  "confused
    and contradictory" evidence the appellant gave on the issue of his drug
    rehabilitation (whose narrative was central to his account  of  how  he
    converted).  It amounts to a material error of law.

8.   As  regards  ground  (4),  I  am  not  persuaded  that  there  was  any
    procedural error of process.  The further documents  were  sent  by  Mr
    Neale on 19 November  2017.   The  judge  signed  his  decision  on  18
    November.  Miss Caseley seeks to rely on the fact that the decision was
    re-promulgated on 4 December 2017 but she has not been able to point to
    any difference between its contents and that signed by the judge on  18
    November 2017.  There is no basis for  concluding  the  re-promulgation
    was anything other than an administrative matter  not  related  to  the
    contents of the judge's decision.  In any event, the  further  evidence
    was not directed by  the  judge  and  Mr  Neale  cannot  have  had  any
    legitimate expectations it would be dealt with by the judge  after  the
    hearing.

9.   In the event  the  issue  surrounding  ground  (4)  has  been  rendered
    academic by my decision that the judge  erred  in  law  in  respect  of
    ground (3).  As a result this further documentary evidence submitted by
    Mr Neale will be considered by the next FtT Judge.

10.  None of my findings are to be  taken  to  suggest  anything  about  the
    merits of the appellant's appeal.  Both questions of fact and law  will
    be entirely  a  matter  for  the  next  FtT  Judge.   Nevertheless  the
    appellant has done enough for me to decide to:

    -    set aside the decision of FtT Judge O'Rourke for material error of
    law;and


    -    remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 25 April 2018

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

