
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/10158/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 July 2019                      |On 31 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellants:    Ms Spencer-Bolton, Manuel Bravo Project
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION and REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic of Congo born in
    1964.  She appeals with permission against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal dated the 22nd November 2018 to dismiss her protection appeal.

 2. It had been the Appellant's case before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that
    she faced a real risk of harm in  Congo  for  reasons  of  her  imputed
    political opinion. The Appellant states that  she  is  originally  from
    Kinshasa where she had a good job in the telecoms industry. In December
    2008 she was told that a friend of hers F had  been  arrested  and  was
    being held by the ANR, the  national  intelligence  service.  She  made
    enquiries about his whereabouts which came to nothing but a week  later
    this friend had contacted her and said that he was in a  small  medical
    unit somewhere in Bandal. She went and collected him, and  subsequently
    assisted him in getting him out of the  country  to  Brazzaville.   The
    Appellant states that since that incident  the  following  things  have
    happened to her:

              i) Men came to her house looking for her (December 2018);

             ii) Men attended at her house during a power cut  and  demanded
                 to be given entry so that  they  could  search  for  hidden
                 weapons. Her guard refused them entry and  they  left.  The
                 same night police attended and  successfully  searched  the
                 home of F's brother (January 2009);

            iii) The Appellant believes  that  she  was  under  surveillance
                 (2010-2014);

             iv) Armed men attended her home  with  an  arrest  warrant  but
                 failed to gain entry (September 2015);

              v) The Appellant was poisoned (March 2016);

             vi) She was attacked by  armed  men  whilst  driving  (December
                 2016)

            vii) Armed men tried to prevent her entering her  home  (January
                 2017)

 3. The  Appellant's  oral  account  was  supported  by  various  items  of
    documentary  evidence  including  correspondence  between  her  and  F,
    country background material confirming the arrest and  detention  of  F
    and medical evidence relating to the alleged poisoning incident.

 4. Having considered all of this evidence the First-tier Tribunal accepted
    that the Appellant had been employed as she claimed and  that  had  she
    had met F through  her  work.  It  also  accepted  that  she  had  made
    enquiries about his detention in December 2018.

 5. Beyond that the Tribunal was not satisfied that the Appellant  had  any
    further involvement with F. Specifically it rejected her claim to  have
    helped F escape. The media reports stated that he had been released  in
    Kinshasa, not that he had escaped in Bandal. It was inherently unlikely
    that he would not have been heavily guarded, had he in fact  been  held
    by the ANR.   F had not written a letter in support, despite  the  fact
    that he now lives in this country.   There was  no  objective  evidence
    supporting the Appellant's description of the river border between  the
    DRC and Congo-Brazzaville.  The Appellant's evidence was that  she  had
    been able to travel in and out of the DRC  on  a  number  of  occasions
    since 2008 and this was inconsistent with her claim that the ANR had an
    adverse interest in her. It was not  reasonably  likely  that  the  ANR
    would have simply left her  premises  having  been  denied  entry.   In
    respect of the alleged poisoning the Tribunal found this to have been a
    bacterial illness.

 6. The Tribunal did accept that the Appellant had, on 5 occasions in an  8
    year period, been a potential victim  of  attacks  from  criminals  but
    found:

         "I am satisfied that this is merely due to her being  in  well-paid
         employment in an area where there is a high crime rate rather  than
         as a result of her falling foul of the government or ANR.  She  has
         failed to establish that there is no sufficiency of  protection  as
         nothing has actually happened to her, there is no evidence she  has
         gone to the police for help and they have refused, and her employer
         has  the  ability  to  assist  her  in  internally  relocating  and
         providing her with protection that her kept her safe".

    On that basis the appeal was dismissed.

 7. The Appellant has sought and  obtained  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    grounds that the decision is perverse.




    Discussion and Findings

 8. Before me Ms Spencer-Bolton  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to give reasons why it was not  satisfied  that  the  actors  of
    aggression in the various incidents described were not ANR  operatives.
    She submitted that given the other elements of the  account  that  were
    accepted, it was irrational to reject the Appellant's evidence on  this
    point. In  particular  there  was  no  evidential  foundation  for  the
    conclusion that the attacks were by criminals.

 9. On this last point Mr Diwnycz agreed that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    impermissibly speculated. In a number of the incidents described it had
    been the Appellant's evidence that she knew,  or  reasonably  believed,
    the men involved to be agents of the state. In the very first  incident
    her guard's description of the men who attended the house accorded with
    the reports about F's arrest - they appeared to be the  same  men  [see
    Q44 of the asylum interview record].   In the second incident  the  men
    who attended her property were wearing police uniform [Q46].  She  then
    described  being  routinely  followed,  "but   not   interfered   with"
    throughout 2009-2010 by men in cars [Q51]: this does not appear  to  be
    consistent with any criminal activity.  Then in September 2015 the  men
    who came to the Appellant's house actually had an arrest warrant and  a
    document from the prosecutor's office [Q57]. In each of these incidents
    the Appellant, or someone, had positively identified reasons  why  they
    believed the ANR to be the perpetrator.  In fact  it  is  only  in  the
    later incidents described, for  instance  the  attack  on  her  car  in
    December 2016, that the Appellant was unable to say who  her  attackers
    were - in her asylum  interview  she  said  she  referred  to  them  as
    "bandits" for that reason.  Mr Diwnycz agreed that all of this was  not
    easy to square with the Tribunal's conclusion  that  the  men  were  in
    every case simply common criminals. He submitted  that  it  would  have
    been  open  to  the  Tribunal  to  reject  the   Appellant's   evidence
    altogether, but it does appear that this is what it had done.

10. This is an adversarial process, and where the parties were in agreement
    I would be slow to take another approach. In this case  I  accept  that
    the First-tier Tribunal does not appear to have squarely  engaged  with
    the Appellant's evidence  that  the  characters  involved  were  either
    wearing uniform, carried official documentation or had  otherwise  been
    identified as ANR. I am however satisfied that the  overall  conclusion
    of the First-tier Tribunal - that the Appellant  has  not  demonstrated
    that she is at risk - was one open to it.

11. The Appellant claims to have had some involvement with  the  escape  of
    her friend F in 2008.  Thereafter  she  remained  in  the  DRC,  freely
    travelling within and outside of the country, for  some  8  years.  She
    states that on three occasions men whom she believes  to  be  from  the
    security service attended her property.  On  each  occasion  they  were
    armed, and on at least one  occasion  they  claimed  to  hold  official
    authorisation.   She suspects that for a period of  between  2-3  years
    they were tailing her. Assuming it was indeed the  ANR  behind  all  of
    this, that evidence strongly suggests that the Appellant is not in fact
    at any risk of harm. The objective evidence in the bundle unequivocally
    demonstrates that the ANR are able to  act  with  impunity,  conducting
    arbitrary arrests and holding suspects in incommunicado detention.  The
    security  services  regularly  commit  serious  human   rights   abuses
    including rape and torture. The point made by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    is that if they had actually wished to detain  or  otherwise  harm  the
    Appellant, it seems very unlikely that they would not have done so.  By
    the Appellant's account the men turned away from her home empty  handed
    because her guard refused to open the gate, and on one occasion because
    it was after six o'clock in the evening and "everybody knows" that they
    cannot make an arrest after that time. This would appear  to  underline
    the lack of any real interest on the part of the  visitors.   Had  they
    wished to detain or  otherwise  harm  the  Appellant,  they  had  ample
    opportunity to do so in the time that she spent in the DRC between 2008
    and 2017 when she finally left.

12. That is the reasoning underpinning the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,
    and I am unable to say that it was irrational. The  Tribunal  may  have
    gone too far in characterising the visitors as 'criminals' - that was a
    finding unsupported by the evidence - but on the  evidence  adduced  it
    was quite entitled to find that the Appellant did not have a  currently
    well-founded fear of persecution in the DRC.




    Anonymity

13. This appeal concerns a claim made under the Refugee Convention.  Having
    had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity  Orders
    we therefore consider it appropriate to make an order in the  following
    terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.    Failure  to  comply  with  this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Decisions

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  any  material
    error of law. It is upheld.

15. There is a direction for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              20th July 2019

