
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10639/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 12 February 2021                 |On: 2 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Amin, instructed by Sohaib Fatimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has been no objection by
      the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A face-
      to-face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and  all
      issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

   2.  The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on 12 February  1982,
      from Logar province. He arrived in the UK on 14 April 2018 and applied
      for asylum the same day. His claim was refused on 23 August  2018  and
      his appeal against that decision was initially dismissed by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Williams on 18 December 2018.  However,  that  decision
      was set aside by the Upper Tribunal and the case was remitted  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal  and  heard  on  22  October  2019  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Malik, who dismissed the appeal  again.  Judge  Malik's
      decision was then set aside by the Upper Tribunal and  the  case  came
      before me for a resumed hearing.

   3. By way of background,  the  appellant  claimed  to  have  completed  a
      professional accounting course called Certified Accounting  Technician
      at the Association of Chartered Accountants, Glasgow; a BSC in Applied
      Accounting at Oxford Brookes University; the Association of  Chartered
      Certified  Accountants  (ACCA)  exams,  Glasgow;   and   an   MSC   in
      Professional Accountancy at the University of London, all as  distance
      learning online courses. From September 2004 to May 2010 he worked for
      an  International  Telecom  company,  Roshan,  starting  as   accounts
      assistant and  working  up  to  finance  and  accounting  manager  and
      financial controller. At that time, he and his family lived in Kart-e-
      naw area of Kabul. In May 2010 they moved to Makroyan, also in  Kabul,
      and in June 2010 he started working for the Etisalat  Telecom  company
      as an accounts manager and then in May 2013 became  a  senior  finance
      manager.  In September 2014  he  became  a  senior  manager  reporting
      planning and budgeting, and at the same time was the Head  of  Finance
      at Mhawala, a subsidiary of  Etisalat,  which  specialised  in  mobile
      banking. He also worked for some time, part-time, from August 2014  to
      December  2014,  with  the  American  University  as  FIA   and   ACCA
      instructor, and part-time from April 2015 to September 2015 with Pearl
      Horizon Consulting as financial management trainer. In  July  2017  he
      became a member of the professional  conduct  committee  of  Certified
      Professional  Accountants  (CPA)  for  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and
      continued as such until he left Afghanistan.

   4. The appellant's  claim  is  based  on  his  fear  of  the  Taliban  in
      Afghanistan because of his refusal of their demands and his refusal to
      cooperate  with  them  in  relation  to  his  work  in   finance   and
      accountancy. He claimed that  in  2016  a  Taliban  Judge  from  Logan
      province came to his house in Kabul asking  for  money  to  help  with
      expenses of the Islamic School and he gave him some money, not knowing
      at the time that he was a member of the Taliban. His uncle  then  told
      him that the money was used for  training  the  Taliban  and  that  he
      should not give more in the future and, as a  result,  when  the  same
      judge came to his house again asking for more money, his  father  told
      the judge that they could not help. The appellant later heard that the
      judge had been arrested in Kabul and was in prison in Bagram. He hoped
      that people would not know that the judge had come to  his  house  and
      thought that that was the end of the  matter.  However,  in  September
      2017 three Taliban members came to his house  telling  him  that  they
      were aware of his senior position with Etisalat and demanded  that  he
      monitored telephone numbers of Afghan and foreign officials  and  also
      that he transferred their money through the company via mobile banking
      to the various provinces to their members. He told them that he  could
      not do that. In late September 2017 he was approached by  one  of  the
      three at a funeral ceremony and asked whether he had considered  their
      demands. He again refused, but the Talib said he would be  in  contact
      again.

   5. The appellant said that he kept a low profile after that and  went  to
      Dubai for a while and then, in November 2017, he came  to  the  UK  to
      attend his graduation at the University of London. He took pictures of
      his graduation and put them on social media. On 11  December  2017  he
      participated in an ACCA event in Kabul and was awarded  a  certificate
      and recognised to be the first Afghan national who  was  a  member  of
      ACCA and who had obtained a Masters degree in Chartered Accountancy in
      the UK. The event was broadcast on Afghan national TV  and  he  became
      well-known as a result in Kabul. After the event he was  contacted  by
      the Presidential Office and offered a position as the chief  financial
      officer for the Afghan Telecom and Salam  Telecom.  He  met  President
      Ghani at his office in December 2017. Subsequent to  that  he  started
      receiving direct threats from the Taliban.

   6. The appellant claimed that the Taliban sent a letter to his  house  on
      14 December 2017 telling him that it was his duty  to  give  them  the
      information they required and to follow their  instructions.  He  took
      the letter to the police the following day, but they could not  assist
      him. He then went to meet his local MP and told him what had  happened
      and his MP wrote a  letter  for  him  to  take  to  the  Kabul  police
      commandant which he did, but was told that the Head of Police was  not
      there and they could not help. The appellant stated that  he  went  to
      stay with a family friend  in  another  part  of  the  city  and  then
      travelled to Dubai from January to February 2018 with his family as he
      was not feeling safe in Kabul. He returned in March  hoping  that  the
      situation would have settled down, but he was contacted by the Taliban
      soon after he returned, on 17 March 2018,  who  again  asked  for  his
      response to their demands. On 21 March 2018 he was approached by  four
      armed Taliban members when he was leaving the Large Tax  Payer  office
      of the Ministry of Finance and was waiting for a taxi to go  home,  at
      around 7.30pm, and they attacked him and tried to push him into  their
      car. When people heard him screaming and starting running over to him,
      the Taliban left him and escaped. On 26 March 2018 the Taliban sent  a
      second letter to his house threatening to kill him and his family  and
      accusing him of being involved in  the  imprisonment  of  the  Taliban
      Judge, of being a spy and of helping the  government  and  foreigners.
      They said they were giving him ten days to meet their demands or  else
      they  would  kill  him  and  bomb  his  house.  He  was  to  pay  them
      compensation, release the Taliban Judge and share the information they
      had previously requested. The appellant claimed that he contacted  the
      MP again who advised him to leave the country. On  30  March  2018  he
      called the police who said they could not do  anything.  He  moved  to
      another place for safety purposes, but  received  a  threatening  text
      from the Taliban.

   7. The appellant claimed that on 4 April 2018 he was  again  attacked  by
      four Taliban members who hit him on  the  back  of  his  head  with  a
      weapon. His wife was injured when she tried to stop them hitting  him.
      The Taliban left when the local people came out of their  homes  after
      hearing screaming and his wife had to have surgery in the hospital  as
      a result of her injuries. On 7 April 2018 he went to the police  again
      and then again the following day and they told him to  put  everything
      in writing and make an official report which he did on 9  April  2018.
      He went back to the police on 10 April 2018, but they  did  not  treat
      him well and he left the police station. He realised that he  was  not
      safe in Afghanistan and on 14 April 2018 he left the country, using  a
      visa he already had in his passport. He claimed asylum on  arrival  in
      the UK. He feared being killed  by  the  Taliban  if  he  returned  to
      Afghanistan.

   8. The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, considered that  he
      had provided an inconsistent and implausible account  of  threats  and
      problems from the Taliban and rejected his claim. Little or no  weight
      was given to  the  documentary  evidence  produced,  in  the  form  of
      threatening letters from the Taliban and reports to the police and the
      appellant's MP. The  respondent  considered  that  in  any  event  the
      appellant would not be of any ongoing interest to the Taliban now that
      he had left his  job  and  could  no  longer  provide  them  with  the
      information they wanted. He would be able to return to Kabul and would
      be at no risk on return. His removal to Afghanistan would  not  breach
      his human rights.

   9. The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Williams
      on  23  November  2018.  The  appellant's   employment   history   and
      qualifications were all  accepted  by  the  judge,  in  light  of  the
      evidence produced in that regard, but his account of threats from  the
      Taliban was rejected and it was concluded that he was at  no  risk  on
      return to Afghanistan. That decision was, however, set aside  by  DUTJ
      Juss on 4 June 2019, who found that the judge had erred by failing  to
      give proper consideration to the guidance  in  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)
      Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118 when rejecting the plausibility of  the
      appellant's account.

  10. The case was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  afresh
      and came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Malik on  22  October  2019.
      The appellant gave evidence before the judge. He said that  his  wife,
      four children, mother and  sister  remained  in  Afghanistan  and  had
      recently moved to another area, Khair-Khan, in the north of Kabul, due
      to threats in the form of a letter and an attack on  his  property  in
      Logar three months previously. The judge accepted, on the basis of the
      evidence that the appellant had worked in Afghanistan for  a  telecoms
      company and had acquired qualifications as a certified accountant. She
      also  accepted,  in  light  of  the   background   information,   that
      individuals who worked for such organisations and  the  government  in
      Afghanistan could be targeted. However, she did not consider that  the
      appellant had given a credible account of being threatened.

  11. The judge  considered  that  if  the  appellant  genuinely  considered
      himself and his family to be at  risk,  and  given  that  he  had  the
      ability to live and work in the UAE, it was not credible that he would
      not have done so. The judge did not find it credible that the  Taliban
      would have sought to kidnap the appellant from outside the Ministry of
      Finance and considered that the  account  was  inconsistent  with  the
      information provided in the expert report. Neither  did  she  find  it
      credible that, if the appellant had met the President  of  Afghanistan
      and that the government had wanted him to work for them, he would  not
      have raised the threats from the Taliban with the relevant  government
      department and he would not have  been  provided  with  some  form  of
      protection. The  judge  considered  that  the  appellant's  return  to
      Afghanistan from the UK, the publicising of  the  ACCA  ceremony,  the
      fact that he did  not  seek  to  change  his  telephone  number  after
      receiving a threatening text from the Taliban and  the  fact  that  he
      chose not to go with his family to Dubai where he had a job  and  they
      all had residence permits, all undermined his claim to be at risk. The
      judge accordingly found that the appellant was at no risk of return to
      Afghanistan and that he could safely return to Kabul and she dismissed
      the appeal on all grounds.

  12. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      against Judge Malik's decision on the  following  grounds:  inadequate
      consideration of the expert report; disproportionate weight  given  to
      the Dubai permit issue; material misunderstanding of fact in regard to
      the appellant not having raised the Taliban threat with  the  relevant
      government  department  after  meeting  the  Afghan   President;   and
      inadequate consideration of documentary evidence.

  13. Following the grant of permission  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
      matter came before Upper Tribunal Finch on 20 March  2020.  UTJ  Finch
      found material errors of law in the judge's decision on the  basis  of
      all the grounds and set aside the  decision.  She  directed  that  the
      decision be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.

Hearing and submissions

  14. The matter then came before me. Mr Jarvis clarified that  he  was  not
      pursuing the question of internal relocation, and that the only  issue
      was credibility which the respondent did not accept.

  15. The appellant then gave evidence before me, adopting his four  witness
      statements, of 24 July 2018, 21 September 2018, 12 November 2018 and 7
      October 2019. He confirmed that his family remained in Kabul and  were
      facing danger because of him. He was  suffering  from  depression  and
      lack of sleep because of the situation and was taking  medication.  He
      explained the problems he had faced from the Taliban and  the  demands
      they were making on him, namely  to  share  with  them  the  telephone
      numbers and records of communications of foreign delegations and  high
      officials and to channel their money to  their  supporters  throughout
      Afghanistan through the money transfer company Mhawala.

  16. In cross-examination, the appellant gave details of his mental  health
      concerns and said that he had had counselling for six months  but  had
      not been to a psychiatrist and did not have a psychiatric  report.  He
      explained that after the  threats  in  December  2017  he  lived  with
      friends for a while, moving to three  different  locations,  but  then
      after the attack on 21 March 2018 he moved with his  family  to  Arzan
      Kimat in Kabul city. It was whilst they were living there  that  there
      was the second attack when his wife was injured and  after  that  they
      moved to Makroryan for a few days and he left the country. His  family
      then moved to Takia Mashan, then Khair Khana and then to Qasabah,  all
      in Kabul City. They were currently in Qasabah  and  he  would  contact
      them through Viber. The appellant said that his brother-in-law was the
      person helping his family move and keep safe. The Taliban came to know
      that he had left and they burned their fruit orchards and removed  all
      the farmers from their land in Logar. His wife and children were still
      living on the money he had left them as well as  money  borrowed  from
      his brother-in-law and from his wife selling her gold.  The  appellant
      said that his wife and children could not  move  to  another  part  of
      Afghanistan or leave the country as they needed a male with them.  His
      brother-in-law was taking responsibility for them but could  not  move
      with them as he had his own family to look after. The  appellant  said
      that he still had a temporary residence visa for the UAE when he  left
      Afghanistan, but it would have been revoked when he resigned from  his
      job, and in any event it would have been automatically  revoked  after
      six months' absence. The  appellant  then  gave  details  of  the  two
      attacks by the Taliban. In response to my enquiry as to why he did not
      take his family to the UAE rather than leaving  them  in  Afghanistan,
      the appellant said that there was no option of claiming asylum in  the
      UAE and further his MP had advised him  that  many  people,  including
      Taliban members, travelled to Dubai and  so  he  should  go  somewhere
      where he could seek protection.

  17. Both parties then made submissions.

  18. Mr Jarvis submitted that the appellant's claim was  not  supported  by
      the country guidance in AS (Safety of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  [2018]
      UKUT 118 and AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan (CG) [2020] UKUT 130 or
      the EASO report, which found  that  a  person  of  a  lower  level  of
      interest to the Taliban was not at risk in Kabul and that only a small
      proportion of people, of very  high  profile,  were  targeted  by  the
      Taliban.  He  submitted  that  the  appellant's  core  claim  was  not
      credible, that he had overplayed his evidence in regard to his  mental
      health  and  that  it  should  not  be  accepted  that  there  was   a
      deterioration in his mental  health  because  of  concerns  about  his
      family. Mr Jarvis submitted that if the  appellant  was  so  concerned
      about his family he would not have returned to Afghanistan from  Dubai
      and would not have left them behind and neither would he have remained
      in Kabul for so long. It was not credible that he would have been able
      to escape from the Taliban on those two  occasions  and  not  credible
      that the Taliban, who were hardened terrorists,  would  have  run  off
      simply because of the reaction of passers-by.  It  was  not  plausible
      that the appellant would have left his family in Kabul for three years
      if they were in such danger.

  19. Mr Jarvis submitted further that the documentary evidence provided  by
      the appellant should be considered to be unreliable and little  weight
      should be given to Dr Giustozzi's report, as he had been criticised by
      the Upper Tribunal in the country guidance in AS [2018]  and  had  not
      been used as an expert at all in AS [2020].  His opinion  about  there
      being a Taliban blacklist should not be accepted, as it was based upon
      information obtained through an unreliable source.  Mr  Jarvis  relied
      upon the cases of AAW (expert evidence - weight) Somalia  [2015]  UKUT
      673 and LP (LTTE area, Tamils, Colombo, risk?)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2007]
      UKAIT 00076 in that regard. In any event, the appellant's  account  of
      the two failed assassination attempts by the Taliban was  inconsistent
      with Dr Giustozzi's opinion of the sophistication and  professionalism
      of the Taliban. Mr Jarvis submitted that the  appellant's  account  of
      being at risk on return should be rejected and it should also  not  be
      accepted that there were any significant obstacles to his  integration
      in Afghanistan.

  20. Ms Amin relied on the Asylum Policy  Guidance  version  9  as  to  the
      approach to asylum claims and she submitted that there was a  lack  of
      anxious  scrutiny  by  the  respondent  of  the  documentary  evidence
      produced by the appellant and a failure to consider his claim  in  the
      round. The appellant's account was entirely consistent.  It  had  been
      considered in a piecemeal fashion by the respondent. The appellant had
      provided a credible account of threats from the Taliban and of  moving
      his family around to protect them. Dr  Giustozzi's  report  should  be
      relied upon and it should be safely inferred that the appellant was on
      a Taliban blacklist and was at risk on return. The  appeal  should  be
      allowed.

Consideration and findings

  21. As detailed at [3] and [4] of the grounds of appeal,  the  appellant's
      background in terms of his qualifications  and  employment,  including
      senior posts at a high salary, were all accepted by  Judge  Malik,  as
      was his account of his graduation ceremonies for  his  Masters  degree
      and his ACCA qualification being broadcast on TV and social media.  It
      was also  accepted  that  individuals  like  the  appellant  could  be
      targeted in Afghanistan  on  account  of  their  work  and  background
      information was provided to show that the Taliban  was  targeting  and
      killing employees working for the Telecom companies. None of  that  is
      in dispute. What is in dispute is the credibility of  the  appellant's
      claim to have been personally targeted by the Taliban and to  thus  be
      at risk on return to Afghanistan.

  22. Contrary to the case for the respondent, it seems to me, however, that
      there is no proper reason to disbelieve the  appellant's  account,  to
      the lower standard of proof,  given  that  it  has  remained  entirely
      consistent throughout the various times  it  has  been  recounted,  at
      interview, in statements and in  oral  evidence  before  three  judges
      (including myself) and is supported by the evidence of a known expert,
      Dr Giustozzi, as well as documentary evidence and  country  background
      information.

  23. Mr Jarvis made much of the lack of evidence of the appellant's claimed
      mental health concerns and the absence  of  a  psychiatric  report  in
      challenging the truthfulness of his account and his reliability  as  a
      witness, but this is not a case  where  reliance  is  placed  on  such
      matters to explain an inconsistent or contradictory account. Indeed it
      seems to me that the appellant's mental health is a peripheral matter.
      I accept, from the evidence that  is  available,  that  the  appellant
      suffers from insomnia and depression, but that could be for any number
      of reasons including the simple fact of separation from his family and
      the uncertainty of his immigration status, and  therefore  his  mental
      health is a matter which, in this case, neither particularly  enhances
      his case nor detracts from it.

  24. With regard to the submissions made by Mr Jarvis on the reliability of
      Dr Giustozzi as an expert, it seems to me that the concerns  expressed
      about his opinion can go no further than showing that his  conclusions
      should not, without more, be determinative of the appellant's case.  I
      have regard to, and take full account of, the Tribunal's rejection, at
      [173] to [188] in AS [2018] of Dr Giustozzi's account of  a  blacklist
      held by the Taliban  of  those  it  was  targeting,  but  it  was  not
      considered that his evidence in general was of no value.  Accordingly,
      in so far as the submissions suggest that no weight should be accorded
      to his opinion in the appellant's case, I disagree, and consider  that
      the report adds  some  weight  to  an  already  consistent  and  well-
      evidenced account.

  25. The respondent's case, aside from seeking to undermine the  weight  to
      be given to the appellant's account of his mental health  and  to  the
      expert report,  is  otherwise  based  upon  plausibility,  namely  the
      plausibility of the appellant remaining in Afghanistan if  he  was  at
      such threat from the Taliban, the  plausibility  of  him  leaving  his
      family in Afghanistan if they were in danger and the  plausibility  of
      the Taliban not completing  their  assassination/  kidnapping  on  two
      occasions. However, that is not a proper basis for rejecting  a  claim
      as incredible,  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof,  where  there  is
      otherwise an entirely detailed and consistent account supported  by  a
      significant amount of documentary evidence which is not, on its  face,
      unreliable. As already mentioned, the documentary evidence produced to
      support the appellant's claim about his qualifications and  employment
      history has not been challenged and those matters are not in  dispute.
      It is the documentary evidence submitted in regard to the threats from
      the Taliban, namely two letters and a text, and the reports  given  by
      the appellant to the police and his MP, which are  challenged  by  the
      respondent. However, the submissions made about the limited weight  to
      be given to that evidence rest not on any particular features  of  the
      documents which give rise to concerns, but on the overall  picture  of
      what is said to  be  a  claim  lacking  in  plausibility  and  on  the
      background  reports  of  fake  documents  being  easily  obtained   in
      Afghanistan.

  26. The appellant's account of  receiving  threatening  letters  from  the
      Taliban and being attacked by them and the chronology of that  account
      was considered by DUTJ Juss at [30]  of  his  decision  setting  aside
      Judge Williams'  decision  as  being  one  which  was  not  inherently
      implausible. Indeed the account is consistent with the UNHCR  refworld
      report at C178 of the appellant's bundle 1 and  the  EASO  report  for
      December 2020 (pages  12,  51,  57,  59).  There  is  nothing  in  the
      petitions, reports and letters to the police and higher officials,  at
      pages B59 to B77 of Bundle 1 which is inherently unreliable  or  which
      is  inconsistent  with  the  appellant's  account  or  the  background
      information or country guidance. On the contrary  they  all  interlink
      consistently with the appellant's account in  his  oral  evidence  and
      witness statements. Likewise, the findings of UTJ  Finch,  at  [8]  to
      [10], when setting aside Judge Malik's decision, were that  there  was
      nothing implausible about the appellant's account of  the  attacks  by
      the Taliban and that the accounts were supported by the expert  report
      of Dr Giustozzi. It is of note that the description the appellant gave
      in his evidence before me of the attacks was entirely  consistent,  in
      every small detail, with the  accounts  previously  given.  Mr  Jarvis
      asked me to find the account lacking in credibility because it was not
      plausible that a team of hardened terrorists would have  been  stopped
      from  a  few  passers  by  from   carrying   out   their   kidnapping/
      assassination. However, I do not find that to be a  sufficient  basis,
      when considering the evidence  as  a  whole  and  applying  the  lower
      standard of proof, to conclude that the appellant had  fabricated  his
      evidence.

  27. The same applies to the other reasons given by Mr Jarvis for rejecting
      the appellant's claim, namely that it was implausible  that  he  would
      have returned to Afghanistan from Dubai and  then  from  the  UK,  and
      would have left his family behind in Afghanistan, if he was  genuinely
      in fear of the Taliban and genuinely  considered  that  they  were  in
      danger. The appellant has provided a response to  those  concerns.  At
      [7] of his second witness statement of 21 September 2018, he explained
      how he moved around after receiving the first threatening  letter  and
      how he relocated his family to protect them and at  [9],  as  well  as
      [19] of his first statement, he explained why he believed it  safe  to
      return to Afghanistan from Dubai. It is also relevant to note that  it
      was only after his return from the UK that the  more  serious  threats
      and incidents occurred. My own concern, as I raised  at  the  hearing,
      was that the appellant had chosen to leave his family  in  Afghanistan
      and come to the UK, when he knew they were not safe there, rather than
      all of them going to the UAE when he still  had  a  residence  permit.
      That concern was partially addressed by  UTJ  Finch  at  [11]  of  her
      decision, but was also addressed by the  appellant's  response  before
      me, namely that there was no option of claiming asylum in the Emirates
      and further that he was advised by  his  MP  that  many  people  could
      travel to Dubai, including Taliban, and  that  it  was  better  to  go
      somewhere where he could  seek  international  protection.  I  do  not
      consider there to be anything implausible or unreasonable about such a
      response.

  28. In all the circumstances, having regard  to  the  consistency  of  the
      appellant's evidence throughout his various accounts,  the  supporting
      documentary evidence provided,  the  background  information  and  the
      expert report, it seems to me that the lower  standard  of  proof  has
      been more than adequately met and that the appellant's account of  his
      experiences in Afghanistan and his fears on his return are genuine.  I
      do not agree with Mr Jarvis that the appellant's claim is at odds with
      the country guidance in AS. Much of that case deals  with  returns  to
      Kabul as a place of relocation,  whereas  Kabul  was  the  appellant's
      place of residence at the time he experienced his  problems  with  the
      Taliban. In so far as AS considered Kabul as the home area, Mr  Jarvis
      relied upon the finding that "A person who is of lower-level  interest
      for the Taliban (i.e. not a senior  government  or  security  services
      official, or a spy) is not  at  real  risk  of  persecution  from  the
      Taliban in Kabul." However, it seems to me that the guidance does  not
      specifically address circumstances such as those of the appellant, and
      that the Tribunal's observation at [188] is therefore relevant: "there
      was only limited evidence before us of other possible risk factors  to
      individuals in Afghanistan (which were not relevant to  the  Appellant
      in this appeal) which are outwith the ambit of this appeal and we make
      no specific  findings  on  them."  Whilst  the  Tribunal  rejected  Dr
      Giustozzi's  view  as  to  there  being  a   blacklist   of   targeted
      individuals, I do not agree that the findings of the  Tribunal  in  AS
      preclude circumstances such as those of the appellant being considered
      as giving rise to a risk on return.

  29. Neither do I accept the submission  that  any  previous  risk  to  the
      appellant has been alleviated by the fact that he no longer holds  the
      positions he previously held which led to the  Taliban's  interest  in
      him. It is pure speculation to conclude that there would be no further
      interest in him and there is adequate evidence  to  suggest  that  the
      Taliban maintain an ongoing interest in  those  with  whom  they  have
      previously had conflict such that, to the lower standard of  proof,  I
      accept that there remains a risk on return.  The  respondent  has  not
      pursued any suggestion of sufficiency of protection  from  the  Afghan
      authorities and indeed the appellant has produced evidence to  support
      his claim that he had sought protection on various occasions  but  had
      been unable to secure any such assistance and had been advised to seek
      protection in another country. Neither has the  respondent  pursued  a
      suggestion of internal relocation and I accept that that would not  be
      a viable option, in particular given  that  the  appellant's  problems
      arose in Kabul, the city to which Afghans  were  usually  expected  to
      relocate. Accordingly, I accept that the  appellant  has  demonstrated
      that he is, and remains, at risk on return to Afghanistan and that  he
      is entitled to international protection.


DECISION

  30. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  an
      error on a point of law and has been set aside. I re-make the decision
      by allowing the appeal on asylum and Article 3 human  rights  grounds.
      As such there is no need to undertake any  separate  consideration  of
      humanitarian protection and Article 8.


Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  16 February
2021
