
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10305/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30th January 2017                |On 11th May 2017                      |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     LN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. A Benfield, Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order.  Pursuant to  Rule  14
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/269)  I
    make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a  Court  directs
    otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication
    thereof shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This
    direction applies to, amongst others, all paties. Any failure to comply
    with this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


 2. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Walker promulgated on 8th November 2016.


 3. The appellant is a national of Uganda.  She claims to have  arrived  in
    the UK on 15th December 2002 on a passport that did not belong to  her,
    and which she claims, was provided to her by an agent.  On  21st  March
    2016, she claimed asylum.   The claim for asylum was  refused  for  the
    reasons set out in a decision dated 12th September 2016.  That was  the
    underlying decision that was the subject of the appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal ("FtT").


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker


 4. The Judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and witness called  by
    the appellant to give evidence.  The appellant's immigration history is
    set out at paragraph [10]  of  the  decision  of  the  FtT  Judge.   At
    paragraphs [24] to [36]  of  his  decision,  the  Judge  sets  out  the
    appellant's case.    I borrow a summary of the matters giving  rise  to
    her claim, from paragraph [36] of the decision;


         "The  Appellant  cannot  return  to  Uganda   because   she   fears
         persecution there because of her sexuality. She believes  she  will
         be easily recognised in Uganda on return due to her  attendance  at
         various LGBT activities and protests in London."


 5. The findings and conclusions of the Judge are to be found at paragraphs
    [38] to [54] of the decision.  The Judge notes at paragraph  [40]  that
    the primary issue is whether or not the appellant  is  a  lesbian.  The
    overall findings of the Judge are set out at paragraphs [53]  and  [54]
    of his decision.  He states:


         "53. For all the above reasons, I do  not  accept  the  Appellant's
         claims about her sexuality, her longstanding  lesbian  relationship
         in Uganda and that she was forced to flee as a result of actions by
         her husband and the community at large. Following from that I  find
         that there would be no real risk of persecution  if  the  Appellant
         were to return to Uganda. It might well be that she has had a  long
         and unhappy marriage so if she did not want to return to  her  home
         area she could relocate within Uganda. She would have  the  support
         of her seven children or at least some of them, available  to  her.
         Neither do I accept her evidence of coming out in 2015 and 2016 and
         having a lesbian relationship with Monica.


         54.  The Appellant has claimed to have  attended  LGBT  events  but
         there has been no claim that in doing so she would have come to the
         knowledge and attention of the Ugandan authorities and therefore be
         perceived as a lesbian. Attending these events has not  caused  the
         Appellant to be placed in any place of risk."


The appeal before me


 6.  The appellant advances two grounds of appeal.   First,  the  appellant
    submits, the Judge failed in his assessment of credibility, to consider
    relevant evidence. Second, the Judge failed  to  resolve  a  matter  at
    issue between the  parties.   The  appellant  refers  to  the  evidence
    concerning her involvement in the UK as a campaigner  within  the  LGBT
    community.  The appellant claimed in her skeleton argument  before  the
    FtT that there was an additional risk to the appellant on  the  grounds
    of her activities as an LGBT activist.


 7. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Andrew  on  8th  December
    2016. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response opposing the  appeal.
    The matter comes before me to consider whether the decision of the  FtT
    involved the making of a material error of law, and if  so,  to  remake
    the decision.


 8. The appellant submits that the Judge does not appear to have considered
    the evidence that was in the appellant's bundle.  It is said  that  the
    Judge fails to refer to the photographs of the  appellant  and  Monica,
    photographs of the appellant showing her  attendance  at  protests  and
    demonstrations in the UK, the evidence of Margaret Ferguson,  a  letter
    from Jill Power, a statement of Mable Nalule and a letter  from  Samuel
    Kiwanuka.   The  appellant  submits  that   the   Judge   limited   his
    consideration of the evidence to the witnesses who attended the hearing
    of the appeal,  and  the  letter  from  Ray  Harvey-Amer,  but  without
    referring to his supplementary statement that was  in  the  appellant's
    bundle.


 9. Ms Benfield submits that the appellant's bundle comprised of  a  number
    of pieces of evidence that is to be found at pages [7] to [65]  of  the
    appellant's bundle, to which the Judge makes no reference.   Similarly,
    within the respondent's bundle there were letters from  Jill  Power  of
    Micro Rainbow International, Mable Nalule, and Samuel Kiwanuka that  do
    not appear to have been considered by  the  Judge.   She  submits  that
    despite the wealth of evidence before the FtT, the Judge fails to refer
    to many key pieces of  evidence,  or,  to  give  any  reasons  why  the
    evidence from those independent sources, was could not be relied  upon.
    Ms Benfield submits that the Judge  relies  solely  upon  the  evidence
    given by the witnesses whose oral evidence he heard, or that  had  been
    referred to in the respondent's decision.  She submits that the failure
    to engage with the evidence demonstrates that the Judge failed to  give
    anxious scrutiny to the evidence.  She submits that it cannot  be  said
    here, that if the Judge had considered all of the evidence before  him,
    the outcome would have been the same.


10. In reply, Mr Tarlow submits that at paragraphs  [38]  to  [40]  of  his
    decision, the Judge notes that he has considered all of  the  evidence.
    He submits that there is no reason to believe that the  Judge  has  not
    done so.  Mr Tarlow submits that at paragraphs [42]  and  [43]  of  his
    decision, the Judge reached findings that were properly  open  to  him.
    He submits that the Judge notes at paragraphs [44] to [52], a number of
    matters that relate to the core of the appellant's account,  where  the
    evidence was unsatisfactory and could not be relied upon.   He  accepts
    that the Judge does not refer to all of the evidence that  was  in  the
    appellant's bundle, but, he submits, it is not necessary for the  Judge
    to refer to each piece of evidence provided that it is clear  from  the
    decision why the Judge reached the decision that he  did.   He  submits
    that detailed reference to all of the evidence was  not  necessary  and
    that the outcome of the appeal would have been the same, even  if  that
    evidence had been referred to in the decision.


  11. I remind myself of the observations made by Mr. Justice Hadon-Cave  in
      Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);


           It  is  generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for   First-tier
           Tribunal judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a
           case. This leads to judgments becoming overly long and  confused
           and is not a proportionate approach to deciding  cases.  It  is,
           however, necessary  for  judges  to  identify  and  resolve  key
           conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and  brief  terms
           their reasons, so that the parties can understand why they  have
           won or lost.


  12. I have also had regard to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Shizad
      (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 IAC where it was
      stated in the head note that:


             "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of
             the conclusions on the central issue on which  the  appeal  is
             determined,  those  reasons  need  not  be  extensive  if  the
             decision makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted
             by the judge."


  13. I also remind myself of the test set out by Lord Hope in his judgement
      in HJ (Iran) -v- SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.  Such appeals  involve  what  is
      essentially an individual and fact-specific inquiry.   The first stage
      is to consider whether the appellant is indeed a lesbian.  Unless  she
      can establish that she is of that orientation she will not be entitled
      to be treated as a member of the social group.


  14. The issue for me to decide  is  whether  the  Judge  was  entitled  to
      dismiss the appeal for the reasons set out, because  the  Judge  found
      that the appellant is not a lesbian, on the evidence  before  him.   I
      have carefully read through the decision of the  FtT  Judge,  and  his
      findings of fact and credibility that are set out at  paragraphs  [38]
      to [54] of his decision.  It is right to note  that,  as  Ms  Benfield
      submits, the Judge does not make specific reference in his decision to
      the photographs that are to be found in the  appellant's  bundle,  the
      two letters from Margaret Ferguson  dated  24th  July  2016  and  19th
      October 2016 and her statement, or the statement of  Samwel  Kiwanuka.
      There were also several letters in the respondent's bundle,  to  which
      the Judge does not make express reference.


  15. That however, is not to say that the Judge did not consider them  when
      he resolved the key conflicts  in  the  evidence,  and  explained  his
      reasons in a way that the parties can understand why they have won  or
      lost.  At paragraph [38], the Judge proceeds to make his  findings  of
      credibility  and  fact,  "Having  considered  the  evidence  in   it's
      totality..".  At [39], the Judge states:


             "..My findings  are  based  upon  the  evidence  as  a  whole,
             including that to which I have not made specific reference."


  16. I have no reason to doubt that the Judge did, as he says, consider the
      evidence as a whole, in completing  an  individual  and  fact-specific
      inquiry as to the  appellant's  sexual  orientation.   The  Judge  was
      plainly ware that there was evidence before him, to which he  was  not
      making specific reference.  He identifies at paragraph [40]  that  the
      primary issue here is "whether or not the appellant is  a  lesbian..".
      It is in that context that the Judge considered the evidence  and  the
      core of the appellant's account.


17. The Judge found the appellant's evidence about what she has been  doing
    for the last 14 years to be vague.  The Judge, at  [41],  rejected  the
    claim by the appellant that she knew  nothing  of  the  asylum  process
    until she joined the LGBT groups at the end  of  2015  and  earlier  in
    2016.   The Judge notes, at [42], that the appellant has been in the UK
    for such a length of time, yet has only recently taken up with the LGBT
    groups and events. He found that no  reasonable  explanation  has  been
    given by the appellant why she has not come out about her sexuality nor
    had any partners for 13 years.   The  Judge  rejected  the  appellant's
    account that she had had a previous lesbian relationship in 2005,  with
    a woman called Anna from Uganda.


18. At paragraphs [44] to [52] of his  decision,  the  Judge  identifies  a
    number of other  areas  of  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  her
    witnesses, that  he  found  to  be  inconsistent  and  incredible.   At
    paragraphs [44] and [45], the Judge considers  the  account  of  events
    advanced by the appellant, against the matters set out "in one  of  the
    letters" submitted by the appellant from Ray  Harvey-Amer.   The  Judge
    was therefore plainly aware that there was more than one letter  before
    him, from Ray Harvey-Amer.  He did not feel it necessary  to  refer  to
    the content of both letters for the purposes of his assessment, but  he
    was clearly aware that there was more than one.


19. At paragraph [46], the Judge found it implausible, but into impossible,
    that the appellant has kept her sexuality hidden from her husband for a
    period of 22 years, during which time they have had  7  children.    At
    paragraphs [47] to [49],  the  Judge  identifies  other  areas  of  the
    appellant's evidence and account of evidence that he did not find to be
    credible.  At paragraphs [50] of the decision the Judge refers  to  the
    evidence  of  the  appellant  and  her  claimed  partner,  Monica.   At
    paragraph [51], the Judge refers to the evidence of Mr Lutakome and  at
    paragraph [52], the Judge refers to,  and  addresses  the  evidence  of
    Debbie Davies, a Deacon of the Metropolitan Community Church  of  North
    London, who attended the hearing to give evidence.


  20. As to the evidence set out in the respondent's  bundle,  at  paragraph
      [8], the Judge records that he has taken into account the respondent's
      bundle.  At paragraph [37(4)] of his decision, the Judge  records  the
      submission made by the respondent that  the  appellant  had  submitted
      various letters from supporters, some of which  are  contradictory  to
      the appellant's own account, and  others  that  are  completely  self-
      serving, and simply  corroborate  the  appellant's  vague  claim.  The
      letters  were  referred  to  in  the  respondent's  decision  of  12th
      September 2016 and included the letters  from  Movement  for  Justice,
      African LGBTI, Micro Rainbow International,  the  statement  of  Mable
      Nalule, and various photographs of the appellant  at  various  events.
      The Judge was clearly aware of that evidence.


  21. I have carefully read the two letters provided  by  Margaret  Ferguson
      dated 24th July 2016 (which was before the respondent and referred  to
      in the decision letter) and 19th October 2016.  I have also  carefully
      read the statement of Margaret Ferguson dated  20th  October  2016  in
      which she expresses the "opinion and belief that the  appellant  is  a
      lesbian woman and her life would be at risk should she be returned  to
      Uganda.". Her qualifications and reasons for her  latter  opinion  are
      not set out.   She did not attend the hearing of the  appeal  to  give
      evidence before the FtT Judge.  However, her colleague, Debbie Davies,
      a Deacon of the same Church, and who had  provided  a  similar  letter
      dated 26th October 2016, that  post-dates  the  witness  statement  of
      Margaret Ferguson, but supports the appellant in much  the  same  way,
      did attend before the FtT Judge and gave  evidence.   Consistent  with
      the statement of  Margaret  Ferguson,  Debbie  Davies  states  "..[the
      appellant's] choice to attend this church and her ease in  associating
      and building relationships with other LGBT  people  leaves  me  in  no
      doubt that she is a lesbian woman...".  The FtT Judge notes, at  [52],
      her evidence that she believes the appellant to  be  a  lesbian.   The
      Judge finds:


             "..I have no doubt at all as to Ms  Davies's  good  intentions
             and the good works she has carried out. I do believe that  she
             is mistaken and has believed what she has been told. It may be
             that she is too trusting and too altruistic but I believe that
             she is wrong in her views."


  22. Having heard from Debbie Davies and reached a view as to her evidence,
      in my judgement there was no need for the Judge to consider separately
      and make express reference to the evidence of Margaret  Ferguson.  The
      opinions of others, that did not attend the hearing before the FtT  to
      give evidence, is no substitute for  the  careful  assessment  of  the
      appellant's account that was completed by the Judge.


  23. The photographs relied upon by the appellant fall into two categories.
       There are several photographs showing the appellant and  her  claimed
      partner, Monica, together.  Photographs of the two women together  can
      hardly establish the appellant's sexual orientation and undermine  the
      conclusions that the Judge reached at paragraph [50] of his  decision,
      having heard the evidence of the appellant's claimed partner.


  24. The remaining photographs show the appellant  at  various  events  and
      demonstrations.  Although the Judge does not make express reference to
      those photographs, the Judge states at [54]:


             "The Appellant has claimed to have attended  LGBT  events  but
             there has been no claim that in doing so she would  have  come
             to the knowledge and attention of the Ugandan authorities  and
             therefore be perceived as a lesbian.  Attending  these  events
             has not I caused the Appellant to be placed in  any  place  of
             risk."


  25. It is clear from the summary that is set out by the Judge at  [36]  of
      his decision, that the Judge had in mind that the  appellant  believes
      she will  be  easily  recognised  in  Uganda  on  return  due  to  her
      attendance at various LGBT activities and protests in London.  In  the
      skeleton argument  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  before  the  FtT,
      reference was made to the respondent's  policy  guidance  that  states
      that there is restriction on civil society groups in Uganda, including
      the arrest of activists and restriction on registration  of  NGOs  and
      other groups.  It was claimed by the appellant that "it  is  therefore
      likely that the Ugandan authorities monitor  individuals  who  support
      LGBT rights and are outspoken activities against Uganda's  restrictive
      laws". In my judgement,  it  was  open  to  the  Judge  to  find  that
      attending these events, has not caused the appellant to be  placed  in
      any risk.


  26. On appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not overturn a judgment at  first
      instance, unless it really  cannot  understand  the  original  judge's
      thought process when he was making material findings. In my judgement,
      the Judge identified and resolved key conflicts in  the  evidence  and
      gave a brief explanation of the conclusions on the  central  issue  on
      which the appeal was determined. The findings made by the  Judge  were
      findings that were properly open to the Judge on the  evidence  before
      the FtT.  The findings cannot be said to be  perverse,  irrational  or
      findings that were not supported by  the  evidence.   The  appeal  was
      dismissed after the Judge  had  carefully  considered  the  facts  and
      circumstances of the claim and all the evidence before him.


27. In my judgment, the appellant is unable to establish that there  was  a
    material error of law in the decision of the FtT and  it  follows  that
    the appeal is dismissed.


DECISION


28. The appeal is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge stands.


29. An anonymity direction was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that
    direction shall continue.


Signed                                  Date          9th May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




