







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10173/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 21st March 2019                |On 9th April 2019                   |
|                                  |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     AA
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Allison, instructed by Turpin and Miller LLP
(Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant in  this  determination  identified  as  AA.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. By a decision promulgated on  12  September  2018,  Upper  Tribunal
         judge Perkins found an error of law in the decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal  Judge  Boylan-Kemp  MBE  who  dismissed  the  appellant's
         appeal, by a decision promulgated on  8th  March  2018,  against  a
         decision by the respondent refusing  his  international  protection
         and human rights claim on 11 August 2017.

         The appellant's immigration history

      2. The appellant is an Iraqi National from Kirkuk. He is a Sunni Kurd.
         He entered the UK in December 2002 and was granted leave to  remain
         until 2006 following  the  closure  of  Sangatte.  He  was  granted
         indefinite leave to remain on 14 April 2009. On 27 October 2016  he
         was convicted of  possession  of  controlled  drugs  Class  A,  and
         possession with intent to supply and possession of controlled drugs
         Class B. This conviction put him in breach of an earlier  suspended
         sentence also for drug related  matters.  This  led  to  him  being
         sentenced to serve consecutive terms of imprisonment  amounting  to
         24 months imprisonment in total. The appellant was subject  to  the
         deportation order as a consequence of his conviction and  sentence.
         S72  of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  was
         considered which, as noted, below was incorrect.

      3. The appellant does not seek to argue  that  he  is  a  refugee;  he
         cannot show that he faces  persecution  for  a  Convention  reason,
         rather than claiming ill-treatment from some other cause.

      4. The resumed hearing was listed before  me  on  7th  November  2018.
         Given the additional evidence that the respondent wished to rely on
         in connection with the ability of an individual to  obtain  a  CSID
         and the potential relevance of the Court  of  Appeal  judgement  in
         Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442, I adjourned that hearing with directions.
         It was also agreed that the grounds of appeal could be extended  to
         include a claim under Article 8 based on  the  appellant's  private
         life established in the UK.

      5. Hence the appeal came before  me  on  21  March  2019.  I  had  the
         following relevant documents before me:

           . Original Home Office bundle

           . Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  on
             30th of January 2018

           . letter from the British Red Cross dated 8th March 2019

           . OASys report following  a  completed  assessment  on  29th  of
             October 2018

           . An undated and unsigned witness statement the  appellant  sent
             under cover of  a  letter  dated  5  December  2018  (December
             witness statement)

           . CPIN Iraq: security and humanitarian situation,  Version  5.0,
             November 2018

           . Skeleton arguments prepared by Mr Allison dated 3 August 2018,
             7 November 2018, 4 February 2019 and 20 March 2019.

           . Skeleton argument prepared by Mr Jarvis dated 12 March 2019

           . Bundle of authorities to which I added MA(Somalia) [2018] EWCA
             Civ 994

           . I was also referred to the  CPIN  Iraq:  Internal  relocation,
             civil documentation and returns (version 9, February 2019).

      6. I heard oral evidence from the appellant and submissions from  both
         representatives. I am grateful to the representatives for the clear
         and  coherent  quality  of  both  their  written  and  their   oral
         submissions.

         Oral Evidence

      7. The appellant gave oral evidence in English. He confirmed that  his
         witness  statement  that  had  been  submitted  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (dated 24th January 2018) was true  and  correct  and  had
         been  adopted  by  him  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.  He
         confirmed the December witness statement was true and  correct  and
         he adopted this as his evidence. He could not recall  when  he  had
         made that latter statement with his solicitors.

      8. In so far as the letter  from  the  Red  Cross  was  concerned,  he
         confirmed he had contacted the Red Cross and  they  had  said  they
         would contact him in a couple of weeks; they did  not.  Eventually,
         he was able to make an appointment to see them which led to the Red
         Cross letter. That letter said that the Red Cross  were  unable  to
         conduct any active tracing on his behalf but that he could use  the
         'Trace the Face' online service. He confirms he has done  that  but
         has had no contact with his family in Iraq.

      9. There is a conflict between the December witness statement and  the
         OASys report in terms of the relationship he claims to have with  a
         person resident in the UK called Amber. In the OASys report he says
         that relationship broke down in May 2018, whereas in  his  December
         witness statement he describes still being in a  relationship  with
         her. That relationship has broken down at the date of this hearing.
         He confirms that he  sees  her  children,  of  whom  he's  not  the
         biological father, every week; he does not see either  of  his  own
         biological children; he gave no  further  significant  or  relevant
         detail of the relationship he has with the children. There  was  no
         witness statement or letter from Amber; the appellant said that she
         was prepared to write a letter or speak on the telephone but he had
         not asked her to come to court because he knew  she  would  refuse;
         she had, he said, written to his solicitors but that letter was not
         before me.

     10. In the December witness statement (repeating the evidence  set  out
         in his witness statement to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated  24th
         January 2018) the appellant refers to having made contact with  his
         family through a friend in 2003. He says he spoke to his mother and
         his sister and  during  those  conversations  he  learnt  that  his
         father, his uncles and one of his cousins had been killed, and that
         one brother had left Iraq. He says that in 2005 he  telephoned  the
         number and he was told that his mother had died and his sister  had
         left Kirkuk after her marriage and it was not known where  she  had
         gone. He did not know the name of the family she had married  into.
         He said that after that call, the phone number stopped working;  he
         is no longer in contact with that friend.

     11. When asked if he ever met people from Kirkuk, he confirmed  he  did
         but they were more recent arrivals; although he asked if they  knew
         his family, none did.

     12. The appellant said that he had had no  further  problems  with  the
         police and had not been arrested since his release  from  detention
         at the beginning of May 2017; he said he was drug-free.

         Issues

     13. The issues before me, which overlap, are as follows:

          i) The section 72 certificate

         ii) Article 3 ECHR/Article 15(b) Qualification Directive (QD)

        iii) Article 15(c) Qualification Directive (QD)[1]

         iv) Exclusion from protection

          v) Relocation

         vi) S117C Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (NIAA)

        vii) Article 8.

         Discussion

         Section 72 certificate

     14. Although the Secretary of  State  had  certified  that  section  72
         applied, Mr Jarvis readily accepted that  this  was  incorrect  and
         should not have been an issue before the First-tier Tribunal -  the
         appellant had been sentenced to consecutive sentences and  not  one
         sentence amounting to two years or more.

         Article 3/Article 15(b) QD

     15. Article 15(b) is in terms that are materially the same as Article 3
         ECHR Convention. Mr Allisson submitted, from which  Mr  Jarvis  did
         not dissent, that if excluded from protection, there would remain a
         separate Article 3 consideration to be carried out.

     16. The respondent took the view that this appeal  was  in  reality  an
         Article 15(b) appeal because Article 15(c)  did  not  bite,  as  to
         which see below. It was common ground that if the  appellant  could
         obtain a CSID, he would not be destitute on return to  Iraq.  There
         would remain issues of return to Kirkuk and/or  relocation  to  the
         IKR, but he would not be destitute; he would be able to access aid,
         accommodation and employment (albeit possibly with some difficulty)
         and he would be able to travel.

     17. The underlying factual issue to be determined therefore is  whether
         the appellant will be able to obtain a CSID either whilst in the UK
         or, within a reasonable time frame, on his return to Iraq.

     18. The guidance in AAH on CSID, in so far as relevant to this  appeal,
         is as follows:

             "Section C  of  Country  Guidance  annexed  to  the  Court  of
             Appeal's decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of  State  for  the
             Home Department [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944  is
             supplemented with the following guidance:

               1. Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national  returnee
                  (P) to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to do so, or do
                  so within a reasonable time  frame,  will  depend  on  the
                  individual  circumstances.  Factors   to   be   considered
                  include:

                   i) Whether P has any other  form  of  documentation,  or
                      information about the location of his  entry  in  the
                      civil  register.  An  INC,  passport,  birth/marriage
                      certificates or an  expired  CSID  would  all  be  of
                      substantial assistance. For someone in possession  of
                      one or more of these documents the process should  be
                      straightforward.  A  laissez-passer  should  not   be
                      counted for  these  purposes:  these  can  be  issued
                      without any other form of ID being available, are not
                      of any assistance in 'tracing  back'  to  the  family
                      record and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;

                  ii) The location of the relevant civil  registry  office.
                      If it is in an area held, or formerly held, by  ISIL,
                      is it operational?

                 iii) Are there male family members who would be  able  and
                      willing to attend the civil registry with P?  Because
                      the registration system is  patrilineal  it  will  be
                      relevant to consider whether the relative is from the
                      mother  or  father's  side.  A  maternal   uncle   in
                      possession of his CSID would be  able  to  assist  in
                      locating the original place of  registration  of  the
                      individual's mother, and from there the  trail  would
                      need to be followed to the  place  that  her  records
                      were transferred upon marriage. It must also be borne
                      in mind that a significant number of IDPs in Iraq are
                      themselves undocumented; if that is the  case  it  is
                      unlikely that they could be of assistance.   A  woman
                      without a male relative to assist with the process of
                      redocumentation would face very significant obstacles
                      in that officials may refuse to deal with her case at
                      all."

     19.  Mr  Jarvis  acknowledged  that  the   appellant's   evidence   had
         consistently been that he did not have a passport or CSID.  He  had
         entered the UK following the closure of Sangatte and his leave  had
         been granted on Home  Office  documents  not  Iraqi  documents.  He
         submitted that it was possible to obtain a CSID in the  UK  through
         the assistance of  relatives  in  Iraq  but  that  the  appellant's
         evidence in connection with contact with his  family  in  Iraq,  or
         rather lack of it, had also been consistent.  He  had  some  doubts
         about the tracing attempts made by the appellant  through  the  Red
         Cross. Mr Allison reminded me that the appellant had left Iraq at a
         time of great upheaval, had travelled across Europe and  had  lived
         in the UK for a lengthy period; his account of having lost  contact
         with his family was entirely credible.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         appellant's evidence of the lack of family contacts is credible and
         that he does not know the reference numbers required to enable  his
         identity documents to be retrieved. I am satisfied  that  he  would
         not, on the basis of  the  evidence  before  me  and  the  lack  of
         knowledge by the appellant of his required  reference  numbers,  be
         able to obtain a CSID in the UK. He would therefore  be  travelling
         to Baghdad on a laissez passer; the UK does not, at present, return
         individuals to Erbil.

     20. The Country Policy and Information Note Iraq: Internal  relocation,
         civil  documentation  and  returns  (Version  9.0  February   2019)
         attaches at Annex A[2] (5 September 2018) and B[3] (2 October 2018)
         copy letters from the Iraqi Ambassador to the  UK.  The  respondent
         submits that these letters are official  confirmation  relating  to
         airport procedures and amount to very strong grounds  supported  by
         cogent evidence to enable departure from AAH's  conclusions.  These
         letters appear to be in direct conflict with the evidence given  by
         Dr Fatah  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AAH  -  see  in  particular
         paragraphs 104 to 106  and  the  extract  from  AA  quoted  in  the
         decision.

     21. AAH heard evidence over 2 days in February  2018.  Dr  Fatah  is  a
         highly respected, impartial and knowledgeable expert. His  evidence
         was, and has been, carefully and thoroughly researched and includes
         personal visits. The letters  from  the  Iraqi  ambassador  do  not
         engage with the very  serious  issues  of  documentation  that  are
         recorded by the Upper Tribunal and  accepted,  only  a  few  months
         earlier, as the position on the ground.  In  the  absence  of  more
         direct  evidence  dealing  specifically  with  the   problems   and
         difficulties identified by Dr Fatah, and taking full account of the
         need for such evidence to be cogent as referred  to  in  SG  [2012]
         EWCA Civ 940, I do not accept that the appellant will  be  able  to
         access a CSID on his return to Baghdad or that he will be  able  to
         obtain a certificate enabling him to travel to Kirkuk to obtain his
         identity documents or to travel to the IKR without a CSID.

     22. I am satisfied on the evidence before me that this  appellant  will
         not be able to obtain a CSID either from here in the UK or  on  his
         return to Baghdad. It follows, given this finding of fact and it is
         common ground, that on  return  to  Iraq,  the  appellant  will  be
         destitute.

     23. The SSHD submits that Said confirms that a claim for  international
         protection  based  upon  destitution  and/or  adverse  humanitarian
         conditions  is  only  sustainable,  unless  it  attracts  the  very
         exceptional threshold test in N, in two scenarios:

           . Impoverished conditions which are the direct  and/or  indirect
             result of violent activities of the parties  to  the  relevant
             conflict; or

           . There is a real risk of direct violence against the person  in
             question in those conditions of destitution.

     24. He submits that the appellant's destitution in Iraq would not  fall
         within either of these two categories and he does not meet the very
         high threshold test of N.

     25. Mr Allison submits that firstly, Said  is  not  authority  for  the
         proposition that destitution has to meet the very high  exceptional
         threshold test in N and, secondly that the impoverished  conditions
         in which the appellant would find himself are the direct result  of
         the violent activities of the parties  to  the  conflict  that  has
         occurred in Iraq. He did not submit that there was a real  risk  of
         direct violence to the appellant.

     26. Mr Jarvis relied, in particular, upon paragraphs 15 to 18 of Said:

             "15.      The significance of point (iv)  in  the  summary  is
                  that the paradigm case, as Laws LJ described it at para 39
                  of the GS case,  in  which  article  3  prevents  removal
                  involves  the  necessary  risk  of  being  subject  to  an
                  intentional act which constitutes torture, or  inhuman  or
                  degrading treatment. Medical cases, and I would add  cases
                  where the complaint is  that  someone  returned  would  be
                  destitute on arrival, do not fall  within  that  paradigm.
                  Laws LJ reviewed the decisions of the Strasbourg Court  in
                  the case of MSS, Sufi and Elmi, SHH and Tarakhel which, in
                  addition to the  medical  exception  narrowly  defined  in
                  the D and N cases, illuminate the limited circumstances in
                  which it is appropriate to depart from  that  paradigm  in
                  article 3 cases.

             16. In the MSS case the Strasbourg Court decided that Belgium
                  would violate the article  3  rights  of  MSS,  an  Afghan
                  asylum seeker, were he to be returned to Greece under  the
                  Dublin Convention. That was because of the dire conditions
                  in which he would live in  Greece  whilst  his  claim  was
                  considered. Responsibility  for  those  conditions  rested
                  with the Greek state. In Sufi and Elmi the applicants were
                  Somali nationals who had committed  criminal  offences  in
                  this country. The Secretary of State  proposed  to  deport
                  them. At para 282 of its judgment the court said:

                      "If the dire humanitarian conditions in Somalia  were
                      solely or even predominantly attributable to  poverty
                      or the state's lack  of  resources  to  deal  with  a
                      naturally occurring phenomenon, such as drought,  the
                      test in N  v  United  Kingdom may  well  have  been
                      considered to be the appropriate one. However, it  is
                      clear that  while  drought  has  contributed  to  the
                      humanitarian crisis, that crisis is predominantly due
                      to the direct or indirect actions of the  parties  to
                      the conflict. The reports indicate that  all  parties
                      to the conflict have employed indiscriminate  methods
                      of warfare in densely populated urban areas  with  no
                      regard to the safety of the civilian population. This
                      fact alone has resulted  in  widespread  displacement
                      and the breakdown of social, political  and  economic
                      infrastructures. Moreover,  the  situation  has  been
                      greatly exacerbated by al-Shabaab's refusal to permit
                      international aid agencies to operate  in  the  areas
                      under its control, despite the fact that between one-
                      third and one-half of all Somalis  are  living  in  a
                      situation of serious deprivation."

                  Al-Shabaab is  an  Islamist  terrorist  organisation.  The
                  state of  affairs  described  in  this  extract  from  the
                  judgment is precisely what has since improved; and  it  is
                  the improvements which are reflected in  the  Somalia  CG.
                  But on the basis of the evidence as to the conflict at the
                  time of the Sufi and Elmi the Strasbourg  Court  decided
                  that the circumstances it had  described  meant  that  the
                  approach in MSS, rather than N, should be followed.

             17. In para 57 of the GS case, Laws LJ described this  as  a
                  "fork in the road, on the court's  own  approach"  between
                  the two different types of case. He then referred to SHH v
                  United Kingdom, concerning  a  severely  disabled  Afghan
                  applicant, who sought to rely upon the MSS approach,  but
                  failed.  His  problems  on  return   would   result   from
                  inadequate social provision and  want  of  resources.  The
                  approach in the N case was the correct one. Finally,  he
                  considered Tarakhel which was another case about returning
                  asylum seekers under the Dublin Convention, this  time  to
                  Italy, where there were said to be  systemic  deficiencies
                  in reception conditions which were the  responsibility  of
                  the Italian state. The MSS approach was applied.

             18. These cases  demonstrate  that  to  succeed  in  resisting
                  removal on article 3 grounds on  the  basis  of  suggested
                  poverty  or  deprivation  on  return  which  are  not  the
                  responsibility of the receiving country or others  in  the
                  sense described in para 282 of Sufi and Elmi, whether  or
                  not the feared deprivation is contributed to by a  medical
                  condition, the person  liable  to  deportation  must  show
                  circumstances which bring him within the approach  of  the
                  Strasbourg Court in the D and N cases.

     27. The CPIN Iraq: Internal relocation, civil documentation and returns
         (version 9, February 2019) states, where relevant in  this  appeal,
         as follows:

             '2.6.20 A person who is unable to: a. replace their CSID;  and
             b. obtain support from family members or others is  likely  to
             face  significant  difficulties  in  accessing  services   and
             humanitarian  conditions  which  are  likely  to   result   in
             destitution sufficient to amount to a breach of Article  3  of
             the ECHR / Article 15(b) of the QD. In these  circumstances  a
             grant of Humanitarian Protection (HP) will be appropriate.

             2.6.21 In AA, the UT found that the assessment  of  whether  a
             person would be at risk of destitution because of a lack of  a
             CSID should only be made if return was feasible. However, this
             position was reversed by the Court of  Appeal  (CoA)  in  June
             2017 (Annex: C 9). Decision makers must now  assess  the  risk
             arising from a lack of a CSID regardless  of  'feasibility  of
             return' (whether a person can be returned or not).

             2.6.22 If a person is

             .   unable to obtain a  passport  or  a  laissez-passer  (i.e.
                  their return is not feasible)

                . unable to obtain documents, including a CSID, and

                . claiming they are at real risk  of  destitution  based  on
                  their lack of documents

             then a person has not established a need  for  protection  and
             decision makers should consider the Discretionary  Leave  (DL)
             policy and, if appropriate, grant a person leave in accordance
             with this policy, pending future reviews of their  ability  to
             feasibly   return   to   Iraq.   These   are   very   specific
             circumstances. Decision makers must explore whether  a  person
             can reasonably obtain a travel document before they find  that
             a person's return is not feasible.

             2.6.23 A person in the above circumstances has not established
             a need for protection because there is a relationship  between
             feasibility  of  return  and  risk  arising  from  a  lack  of
             documents: once a person obtains a  passport  then  this  will
             have a positive impact on their ability to obtain a CSID.

             2.6.24 A person who can be feasibly returned, and is  at  real
             risk of destitution because of a lack of documents, should  be
             granted HP. It should be noted  that  this  is  the  case  for
             whatever reason the person's return becomes feasible. However,
             it is likely that a person whose return is  feasible  will  be
             able to obtain a CSID. This is because a passport is  a  route
             to an CSID. Alternatively,  if  a  person  is  returned  on  a
             laissez passer (LP) they may already possess  a  CSID  because
             the CSID is a route to an LP (see paragraph 2.7.11)'

     28. Mr Allison submitted that it does not follow from Said that medical
         and destitution cases have to reach the same  threshold;  Said  was
         saying that destitution did not fall within the  same  paradigm  as
         cases where removal involved the "necessary risk of  being  subject
         to an intentional act  which  constitutes  torture  or  inhuman  or
         degrading  treatment".  It  did  not,  he  submitted,  provide   an
         equivalence of test and that the threshold only referred to medical
         cases.

     29. I do not agree.  The  Court  of  Appeal  in  Said  considered  this
         submission and rejected it. [18] of Said makes clear that to  avoid
         removal on Article 3 grounds, the destitution must be in the  sense
         described in Sufi and Elmi; circumstances approaching D and N  must
         be shown.

         Are the impoverished conditions/destitution the appellant will find
         himself in the direct and/or indirect result of violent  activities
         of the parties to the conflict.

     30. This breaks down into a number of issues to be resolved:

          a) Whether the difficulties in processing IDPs and the issuing of
             CSIDs reveals a deliberate action on  the  part  of  the  Iraq
             State:   Mr   Allisson   submits   that   the   question    of
             'intentionality" is not settled. Although  accepting  that  in
             MSS v Belgium and Greece App no  30696/09,  21  January  2011,
             there was a breach  of  Article  3  based  on  the  deliberate
             inaction of the Greek authorities, he submits  that  in  cases
             involving  the  risk  of  suicide  no  intentional  action  is
             required on the  part  of  the  receiving  State.   Mr  Jarvis
             submits that the issue of intentionality does not have  to  be
             resolved;  it  is  a  matter  for  determination  whether  the
             destitution the appellant will face  can  be  located  in  the
             result not the intention behind the result.  I agree  with  Mr
             Jarvis' formulation.

          b) To what extent is the conflict the cause of  the  destitution:
             Mr Allison submits that it is the conflict  itself  which  has
             led to the breakdown of the CSID system, which had  previously
             been in operation - see AAH [30]. He submits that  it  is  not
             long-standing  socio-economic  adverse  conditions   but   the
             deliberate destruction of records, and that all parties to the
             conflict were involved. He submitted that  the  prioritisation
             by the Iraqi state of the post-conflict  needs  of  IDPs  over
             returnees  without  documents  and  thus  the   inability   of
             returnees without a CSID to avoid destitution was attributable
             to the direct actions and inactions  of  the  parties  to  the
             former conflict and this continued today. There was inadequate
             evidence before me to enable a finding that the actions of the
             current Iraqi authorities were such as  to  lead  directly  or
             indirectly to the current difficulties in the operation of the
             CSID system. What is apparent from the letters from the  Iraqi
             Ambassador is that the  Iraqi  State  is  making  attempts  to
             rectify the situation even though at this time  those  efforts
             are not, on the evidence before  me  sufficient  to  enable  a
             finding that the appellant would be able  to  obtain  a  CSID.
             What  is  apparent  from  AA  and  AAH  is  that  the  current
             government is  not  complicit  in  the  destitution  that  the
             appellant will face; that lies with the conflict over the many
             decades in the past and not with the current Government.  Sufi
             and Elmi, and MI (Palestine) [2018] EWCA Civ 1782 set out  the
             very specific  considerations  taken  into  account  in  those
             cases. As in Sufi and  Elmi,  the  Court  found  that  on  the
             evidence before it (my emphasis) the conditions in  Gaza  "are
             and were attributable to the direct and  indirect  actions  of
             the parties to the conflict within the  meaning  of  [282]  of
             Sufi and Elmi". The findings were predicated directly upon the
             action/inaction  of  the  relevant  authorities  or  lack   of
             authorities at that time. It cannot be said that  the  current
             Iraqi authorities are responsible for the current situation.

          c)  Whether  the  Home  Office  policy  on  the  risk   in   Iraq
             acknowledges a connection between Article 3  and  destitution:
             Mr Allison submits the policy  requires  assessment,  case-by-
             case, whether an individual's circumstances met the Article  3
             threshold.  Mr Jarvis does not accept  that  the  respondent's
             policy documents either currently or in the past  accept  that
             the conditions for destitute people in Iraq were the result of
             direct or indirect actions of the Iraq Authorities; he submits
             that the policy, in effect, enables some individuals  to  fall
             within  it  but  that  this  appellant  does   not,   in   his
             circumstances. The policy,  extracts  of  which  are  set  out
             above, does on its face appear to accept that in  many  cases,
             where an individual will be destitute, they are likely  to  be
             granted discretionary leave to remain.  The  policy  does  not
             mandate the grant of leave and cannot be said to unequivocally
             assert that destitution in Iraq  rises  to  the  threshold  of
             Article 3.

     31. It was not submitted that this appellant reached the N threshold.

     32. The conditions in which this appellant will find  himself  are  not
         due to the direct or indirect actions of the current authorities in
         Iraq. The current  regime  is  attempting  to  resolve  the  socio-
         economic damage as well as to protect civil  and  political  rights
         from the damage that has occurred in Iraq over the last  30  or  so
         years at least. That there remain  difficulties  and  problems  for
         individuals  and  families  in  some  areas  of  the  country,  are
         conditions that are covered by  the  application  of  the  relevant
         threshold. As MA stated in [63]

             "The analysis in Said, by which this court is bound,  is  that
             there is no violation of Article 3 by reason only of a  person
             being returned to a country which for economic reasons  cannot
             provide him with basic living standards..."

     33. The assessment of  whether  destitution  rises  to  the  Article  3
         threshold requires consideration of the causes of the  destitution,
         not the level of destitution - as per Said and as confirmed in  MA.
         I am satisfied that the cause of the appellant's  destitution  will
         not be because of the Iraqi authorities direct or indirect actions.
         I am satisfied that the destitution will not reach the N threshold.
         This is not a case where the appellant qualifies for the  grant  of
         leave as a direct result of the  application  of  the  respondent's
         policy. The appellant does not  reach  the  threshold  for  Article
         15(b).

     34.  In  his  main  skeleton  argument  dated  7th  November  2018,  Mr
         Allisson's submissions are under a  joint  heading  of  Article  3/
         Article 15(b) and do not seek to draw a distinction between Article
         3 and Article 15(b). Mr Jarvis' skeleton argument refers to Article
         3 and does  not  make  separate  reference  to  Article  15(b).  In
         response, Mr Allison in his skeleton argument of  20th  March  2019
         states that no further issues arise from Mr Jarvis'  skeleton  with
         regard to Article 15(b) but he addresses Article 3 in terms of what
         he states is the concession by the Secretary of State in AAH that

             "93.      ... returnees who were not in possession of  a  CSID
             and who were unable to obtain one, would face a real  risk  of
             destitution in all parts of Iraq  such  that  Article  3  ECHR
             would be engaged.

             94. The Tribunal agreed that to be the  case  [see  paragraphs
             151-152] save that it considered there may  be  situations  in
             which such an individual would not face destitution ..."

     35. The concession by the Secretary of State in  AAH  was  specific  to
         that case. There has been no  such  concession  in  this  case.  Mr
         Allisson in his skeleton refers to the stringent criteria to be met
         to reach the high threshold of Article 3  (see  Bensaid  [2001]  33
         EHRR, J [2005] EWCA] Civ 629, Y and Z (Sri Lanka) [2009]  EWCA  Civ
         362). Said considered the issue of  the  threshold  in  Article  3.
         Although a concession was made in AAH, it does not appear that Said
         was brought to their attention. The court in  MA  in  paragraph  63
         refers to the Said decision as binding upon it. Said is a Court  of
         Appeal and I am bound by that. In my view, the  stringent  criteria
         that are considered in Said are not met. The threshold in Article 3
         is not met.

         Article 15(c)QD

     36. The respondent relies upon the CPIN to support the contention  that
         there  has  been  sufficient  durable  change  to   conclude   that
         conditions in Kirkuk have changed and there is no  longer  a  15(c)
         risk.

     37. Headnote A[4] of AA(Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544  (30th
         October 2018) confirms that there was a  state  of  internal  armed
         conflict in the Kirkuk area such that as  a  general  matter  there
         were substantial grounds for believing that any civilian  returning
         there, solely on account of his or her presence there, faced a real
         risk of being subjected to  indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to
         serious harm within the scope of article 15  (c)  of  the  QD.  The
         degree of armed conflict in Baghdad city is not  such  as  to  give
         rise to indiscriminate violence amounting to such serious  harm  so
         as  to  engage  Article  15(c).   AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds   -   internal
         relocation) Iraq CG  [2018]  UKUT  00212  (IAC)  (26th  June  2018)
         declined to interfere with that conclusion.  The  tribunal  in  AAH
         stated that they were not concerned with whether the guidance given
         in AA in respect of article 15(c) holds good.  The  appeal  in  AAH
         proceeded on the assumption that it did.

     38. The CPIN is a collection  of  extracts  from  reports  produced  by
         various  bodies  including  the   International   Organisation   of
         Migration, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, the  World  Bank,
         Jane's, UN Assistance Mission  in  Iraq,  and  UN  Office  for  the
         Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Paragraphs 2.3.20  to  2.3.37
         of the CPIN are a  summary  of  the  security  situation  which  is
         described in more detail in  section  8  of  the  CPIN  report.  As
         referred to in AA, the non-exhaustive  list  of  factors  that  are
         relevant to whether an area  engages  Article  15(c)  includes  the
         conduct and relevant strengths of the parties to the conflict,  the
         number of civilian deaths and injuries, levels of displacement  and
         geographical scope of the conflict. The  summary  of  the  security
         situation set out in the CPIN leads the authors of that  report  to
         suggest that the security situation has changed significantly since
         May 2015 when AA considered the evidence. In  particular  the  CPIN
         refers to a significant decline in security  incidents,  fatalities
         and injuries which are "typically tens of  times  lower  than  they
         were in mid 2014"; that "displacement  has  significantly  declined
         and there has been a significant increase in  people  returning  to
         their homes"; that "the  threat  from  Daesh  has  not  disappeared
         entirely, but the group are  confined  to  small  pockets  and  the
         conflict has changed in  nature  from  open  conflict  to  periodic
         asymmetric attacks in ... Kirkuk...".  Section 8 of the  CPIN  sets
         out in more detail  the  information  upon  which  the  summary  is
         produced.

     39. SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940 makes clear that decision makers  and
         Tribunal   judges   are   required   to   take   Country   Guidance
         determinations into account and to follow  them  unless  there  are
         very strong grounds supported by  cogent  evidence  justifying  not
         doing so.

     40. Section 8 of the CPIN provides considerably more detail than is set
         out in the summary.  Although  overall  in  Iraq  there  may  be  a
         reduction in risk, I am not satisfied that the evidence as set  out
         in Section 8  is such as can justify a finding that there has  been
         significant stable or durable change in the Kirkuk area. Section  8
         refers to asymmetric attacks as recently as March 2018, an  ongoing
         need  for  Iraqi  security  operations,  ISIS  related   insecurity
         continuing in Kirkuk in July 2018 and increased  targeting  of  the
         abduction and killing of  soldiers,  to  name  but  a  few  matters
         referred to in section 8. Section 8 is itself a summary of  reports
         received by CPIN and some of the information  is  of  a  generalist
         nature or not specific to any particular area of Iraq.  I  was  not
         provided with the complete reports that were referred to; the  CPIN
         reproduces extracts or provides a summary. The graphs in Section  8
         of the CPIN do appear to show a reduction in security incidents but
         I cannot be satisfied on the limited evidence produced  and  relied
         upon by the respondent that  there  has  been  such  change  as  to
         justify departing from AA.

     41. I note in passing that the  appellant  relied  upon  an  unreported
         decision by a Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  in  November  2018.  No
         application to admit that decision had been made and there  was  no
         certificate that a search had been undertaken  in  accordance  with
         the Practice  Direction  2010/amended  2014.  I  indicated  at  the
         hearing that I would not be relying upon that decision and  I  have
         not read it. It is, nevertheless, not relevant to my decision given
         the paucity of evidence relied  upon  by  the  respondent  in  this
         appeal[5].

     42. There was no submission that  Article  15(c)  extended  to  Baghdad
         City, to where all Iraqis are returned.

     43. In conclusion on the basis of the evidence before me I am satisfied
         that there has not been sufficient durable change to conclude  that
         conditions in Kirkuk have changed; there remains an  Article  15(c)
         risk in Kirkuk;

     44. There remain the issues of exclusion  and  internal  relocation  to
         which I return below.

         Exclusion from protection

     45.  In  October  2016  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  10  months'
         imprisonment (having been allowed  a  full  1/3rd  discount  for  a
         guilty plea) for possession of cannabis with intent to supply,  and
         possession of cocaine (1 month to run concurrent).  It  seems  this
         activated a previous suspended sentence in July 2016 of  14  months
         for possession of cannabis with intent to supply. S72  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 does not apply. The respondent,  in
         his policy guidance accepts  that  length  of  sentence  does  not,
         without more, determine the seriousness of an offence for exclusion
         purposes.

     46. Mr Allisson's November 2018 skeleton argument reproduced an extract
         from the Secretary of State's policy guidance on what constitutes a
         'serious crime'.  Mr  Jarvis  did  not  dissent  from  this  and  I
         reproduce that which is relevant in this appeal:

             "...In deciding whether a crime is serious enough  to  justify
             loss of protection, the  tribunal  must  take  all  facts  and
             matters into account, with regard to the nature of the  crime,
             the  part  played  by  the  accused  in  its  commission,  any
             mitigating or aggravating features and  the  eventual  penalty
             imposed. .... Examples of serious crimes include, but are  not
             limited to, murder,  rape,  arson  and  armed  robbery.  Other
             offences which might be regarded as serious can include  those
             which are accompanied by the use of  deadly  weapons,  involve
             serious injury to persons, or if there is evidence of  serious
             habitual  criminal   conduct.   Other   crimes,   though   not
             accompanied by violence, such as large-scale fraud,  may  also
             be regarded as serious for the purposes of exclusion."

     47.  Although  not  subject  to  s72,  Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that   in
         determining the issue of exclusion, the factors relevant to  a  s72
         certificate were still relevant. He  stressed  the  seriousness  of
         drugs offences and the  effect  on  society  as  a  whole  of  such
         offences.

     48. I accept that submission and accept also that drugs offences are to
         be considered as particularly serious in the context with  which  I
         am concerned. I  particularly  take  note  of  the  fact  that  the
         appellant received a suspended sentence for drugs  offences  and  a
         very short time thereafter he committed further offences  including
         possession of cocaine. A suspended sentence is a sentence passed on
         condition  that  the  criminal  commits  no  new  offences  of  any
         description during the period of  suspension,  yet  this  appellant
         disregarded that and committed a fresh offence of a not  dissimilar
         nature involving controlled drugs.

     49. According to  the  OASys  report,  the  arrest  which  led  to  the
         conviction had taken place at a  property  managed  by  Aspire  who
         house and assist young people in  the  community.  The  appellant's
         motivation, as stated by him and recorded in the OASys report,  was
         that he had an expensive cocaine habit and this was the  motivation
         behind the criminal activity ie the decision to continue to  supply
         controlled drugs of Class B. The report states that  the  appellant
         recognises the impact  and  consequences  on  the  victims  of  his
         offending and that he was led by  peer  group  pressure.  The  most
         recent offence for which he was convicted indicates  an  escalation
         in the seriousness of his offending and,  according  to  the  OASys
         report, indicates that he may  be  at  risk  of  further  offending
         because the potential for financial  gain  outweighs  the  risk  of
         being apprehended. The report states that that the writer does "...
         not assess that drug misuse is linked  to  RoSH  (risk  of  serious
         harm) and re-offending as [AA's] addiction has ceased".

     50. The appellant was at the time of the  OASys  report  (19th  October
         2018) drug free and remains so. His first offences in the  UK  were
         in 2015; he has been lawfully resident in  the  UK  since  December
         2002 and has had indefinite leave to remain since  April  2009.  So
         far as I am aware there have been no other offences  for  which  he
         has been charged or convicted and no other arrests.

     51. The appellant is recorded in the OASys  report  as  not  being  the
         "instigator" of the criminal offences. He was however one of  three
         people dealing drugs in a hostel of young people; he was part of  a
         supply chain providing drugs to vulnerable young people. The supply
         of  Class  B  drugs  carries  a  maximum  sentence  of   14   years
         imprisonment; the sentencing guidelines contemplate sentences of up
         to 10 years; 'street dealing' of Class B drugs fall into a category
         with a sentencing range up to 4 years custody. Dealing in drugs  is
         very serious, has grave implications for society and is  recognised
         as  such  by  the  sentencing  powers  available   on   conviction.
         Nevertheless I recognise that, in this case, the appellant was  not
         sentenced at the higher end and the examples given of those who are
         to be excluded from protection includes those convicted of  murder,
         rape, arson and serious fraud.

     52. Taking all of these factors into account I find that the  appellant
         is not excluded from protection under Article 15(c).

         Relocation

     53. For the reasons given above I have found that the appellant  cannot
         return to Kirkuk (Article 15(c) QD). The appellant would be removed
         to Baghdad where there is no Article 15(c) risk.  For  the  reasons
         given above I have found that,  on  the  evidence  before  me,  the
         appellant will be unlikely to be able to obtain a  CSID.  I  cannot
         distinguish AAH on the basis of the evidence  before  me.  Applying
         AAH, I am satisfied that without  a  CSID  or  valid  passport,  if
         travelling to the IKR, there is a real risk that the appellant will
         be detained at a checkpoint  until  the  authorities  are  able  to
         verify his identity and that it is not reasonable to require him to
         travel between Baghdad and the IKR (where, on the authority of AAH,
         it seems he would be admitted) absent  an  ability  to  verify  his
         identity. He would not be able to fly to the IKR without a CSID  or
         passport.

     54. Accordingly I find that it would be unduly harsh for the  appellant
         to relocate to the IKR.

     55. There remains however the fact that the appellant is to be  removed
         to Baghdad. In the absence of identity documents,  it  is  accepted
         that he will be destitute. Nevertheless, applying the approach  set
         out in Said and MA, there would be no breach of Article 15(b)QD  or
         Article 3 ECHR; I am satisfied that in those  terms  relocation  to
         Baghdad, in as much as that is where he is to  be  returned,  would
         not be unduly harsh.

         S117C Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002[6].

     56. The appellant is a foreign criminal as defined by s117D.  Exception
         1 does not apply: he has not lived in the UK for most of his  life.
         Mr Allisson, quite  properly,  did  not  submit  that  Exception  2
         applied.

     57. As the Court of Appeal explained in NA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA  Civ
         662, Part 5A of the NIAA does not operate in a way as  to  cause  a
         violation of Article 8. S117(6) applies to  foreign  criminals  who
         are sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years  who
         do not meet either of the Exceptions. The issue before me  is  thus
         whether there are very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
         those described in Exceptions 1 and/or 2.

     58. Paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules uses the  same  language  as
         s117C(6). As made clear in NA (Pakistan), a  foreign  criminal  who
         does not meet Exceptions 1 or 2, is entitled to rely on factors set
         out in Exception 1 and/or 2 but must be able to point  to  features
         of his case falling outside  those  circumstances  which  make  his
         claim based on Article 8 exceptionally strong.

     59. Furthermore the effect of NA (Pakistan)  in  bringing  all  foreign
         criminals within the ambit of s117C(6) is such that in  determining
         whether there are very compelling circumstances, I must  take  into
         account the seriousness of the particular  crime(s)  the  appellant
         was convicted of together with any other relevant  public  interest
         considerations. The more serious the crime, the  greater  the  very
         compelling circumstances are required.

     60. The test in s117C(6) is extremely  demanding,  and  a  wide-ranging
         proportionality assessment is required. Although weight  is  to  be
         given to factors that fall within s117B, the public interest in the
         deportation of a foreign criminal is high. As said  in  Hesham  Ali
         [2016] UKSC 60,  "very  compelling  circumstances"  means  "a  very
         strong claim indeed".

     61. AA has been lawfully in the UK since December 2002. He was  'crime-
         free' until 2015 and then committed serious drugs offences in quick
         succession. He has worked since his arrival in the UK and  although
         he has  children  here  in  the  UK  he  either  does  not  have  a
         relationship with them or the relationship he has with them is  not
         such as to engage Article 8.

     62. Mr Jarvis, relying upon  Bossade  (ss117A-D-interrelationship  with
         the Rules) [2015] UKUT 415,  submitted  that  AA  was  and  is  not
         socially and culturally integrated in the UK. Paragraph  5  of  the
         headnote of Bossade reads as follows:

             "5. New  paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  remains
             similar  to  the  old  in  considering  the  foreign  criminal
             deportee's situation both in the UK  and  in  the  country  of
             return. However, so  far  as  concerns  focus  on  a  person's
             situation in the UK, time in the UK is no longer  relevant  as
             such except in the context of lawful residence  (399A(a))  and
             paragraph 399A(b)  introduces  new  criteria  that  relate  to
             social and cultural integration in the UK.  So far as concerns
             focus on the situation in the  country  of  return,  paragraph
             399A no longer  looks  at  'ties'  per  se  but  at  the  more
             inclusive notion of  integration  and  obstacles  thereto.  By
             requiring focus on integration both in relation to a  person's
             circumstances in the UK as well as in the country  of  return,
             the new Rules achieve a much more holistic  assessment  of  an
             appellant's  circumstances.  Thereby  they  bring   themselves
             closer to Strasbourg jurisprudence on Article 8  in  expulsion
             cases which has always seen consideration of  both  dimensions
             as requiring a wide-ranging assessment: see  e.g.  Jeunesse  v
             Netherlands (GC) App.No. 12738/10, 31 October 2014, paragraphs
             106-109."

     63. In contrast Mr Allisson relied upon Tirabi  (Deportation:  lawfully
         resident": s5(1))  [2018]  UKUT  00199  (IAC)  which  although  the
         headnote does not report on the 'social and  cultural  integration'
         point, is, he submitted relevant;  in  particular  he  relied  upon
         paragraph 15 in which the respondent is recorded as conceding  that
         the finding of the First-tier Tribunal judge that the appellant  in
         that case was not socially and culturally integrated because of the
         offence and his continuing danger to society demonstrated a lack of
         integration was incorrect.

     64. Neither Tirabi nor Bossade is authority for  the  proposition  that
         the commission of an offence reflects directly upon  the  issue  of
         integration. In all cases it is a question of fact and  degree  and
         an holistic assessment of the facts and circumstances  overall.  In
         this appellant's case he has been lawfully resident, and  gainfully
         employed for some 13 years before he  committed  offences.  He  has
         children in the UK which although not such as to engage Article  8,
         are  matters  that  can  be  taken  into  account  in   determining
         integration. I do however note that I have very little  information
         about the  children,  or  indeed  the  relationships  and/or  their
         duration, and have therefore placed very little weight on  them  in
         considering integration other than to  take  their  existence  into
         account. The appellant has committed crimes  in  quick  succession,
         the last of which  was  committed  while  subject  to  a  suspended
         sentence, something designed to deter him from  re-offending  which
         of course it did not; the motivation for those was financial  gain.
         The appellant speaks fluent English and is literate and numerate in
         English. He is not, and has not, on the evidence  before  me,  been
         reliant on public funds save whilst in prison. I do  not  know  the
         ages of the children or when he entered into the relationships with
         their mothers' but he has been lawfully in the  UK  throughout  his
         time in the UK and has had indefinite leave to remain  since  2009.
         In the light of all  the  circumstances,  including  those  I  have
         referred to specifically, I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  is
         socially and culturally integrated in the UK.

     65. The OASys report does not  disclose  concerns  that  the  appellant
         would be unable to find adequate employment in  the  UK.  It  makes
         reference to the appellant's awareness that he  requires  funds  to
         support himself during any periods of unemployment and that he  has
         prepared for this. The OASys report does not express  any  concerns
         that periods of unemployment would  lead  to  further  criminality,
         although I note that although the  appellant  has  been  crime-free
         since his release from prison on licence and since  the  expiry  of
         the licence, the  report  does  suggest  an  increase  in  risk  of
         criminality in the second year of release.  He  is  currently  well
         into his second year of release.

     66. It appears, on the face of it, that the appellant is rehabilitated.
         The fact the appellant has not committed any further  crimes  since
         his release does no more than show that the appellant has  returned
         to the place where society expects him to be - a  person  who  does
         not commit crime. Similarly, the fact  that  he  is  now  drug-free
         places him where society expects him to be. I  recognise  that  the
         appellant is rehabilitated although he is still within two years of
         his release. I place no material weight on this  rehabilitation  in
         the  proportionality  balance  in  these  circumstances  -  see  SE
         (Zimbabwe) [2014] EWCA Civ 256.

     67. The appellant will, on return to Iraq, be  destitute.  He  has  not
         lived in Iraq since 2002; he has, so far as  he  knows,  no  family
         there. I do not know how long it took him to travel to Sangatte but
         he was aged 21 when he arrived in the UK.  His  first  language  is
         Kurdish Sorani; he does not speak Arabic and  has  a  very  limited
         understanding of Arabic. He would not be  able  to  travel  out  of
         Baghdad without being at  risk  of  detention  because  he  has  no
         identity documents and  cannot,  on  the  evidence  before  me,  be
         realistically expected to obtain them. Mr Jarvis  in  his  skeleton
         argument refers to there being no restriction on aid from  NGOs  or
         international organisations and that there is an infrastructure  in
         Baghdad. This seems to contradict the acknowledgement by  the  SSHD
         that if the appellant is unable to access a CSID or other forms  of
         identity he would be destitute on return to Baghdad ie without  the
         means  of  subsistence;  lacking  food,  clothing,   and   shelter.
         Integration in  society  facilitates   effective   participation.
         Destitute, the appellant would face very significant  obstacles  to
         his re-integration in Iraq.

     68. The issue however is not simply whether the  appellant  would  face
         very significant obstacles to  re-integration.  He  does  not  meet
         Exception 1 (or  2);  this  appellant  is  required  to  show  very
         compelling circumstances over and above that which is described  in
         Exception 1.

     69. SL (St Lucia) [2018] EWCA Civ 1894 is relied upon by Mr  Jarvis  to
         support his submission that Article  8  is  not  a  'watered  down'
         version of Article 3. Mr Allisson submits that SL,  a  health  care
         case, has little relevance. It is correct that SL is a health  care
         case  but  nevertheless  the  Court  of  Appeal  makes  plain  that
         determining whether there is a  breach  of  Article  8  (if  it  is
         engaged):

             "25.      ... requires  a  balance  to  be  performed  of  the
             interference with family and private life of  all  individuals
             involved, against the public interest and the  private  rights
             and interests  of  others.  Therefore,  the  whole  focus  and
             structure of article 8 is different from article 3."

     70. In this appeal, there  is  no  significant  interference  with  the
         appellant's private life in the UK such as  would,  in  the  normal
         course of events, when placed in the balance  to  be  struck  where
         there is criminality, amount to very compelling circumstances. This
         appellant is a foreign criminal; his earlier sentence was passed in
         the expectation that, although for an  offence  where  a  custodial
         sentence would be the norm, the court was persuaded to suspend  the
         sentence in the expectation, which proved to be misplaced, that the
         appellant would commit no further drug offences.

     71. There is a strong public interest in deporting him. Very compelling
         circumstances requires a  very  strong  case  to  be  made  out  to
         displace the public interest,  bearing  in  mind  particularly  the
         seriousness of his offences.

     72. The appellant will be destitute but that destitution does not  meet
         the threshold of Article 15(b)QD or Article 3.  It  is  not  unduly
         harsh, given that he does not meet Article  15(b)QD  or  Article  3
         threshold, for him to  relocate  from  Kirkuk,  where  the  Article
         15(c)QD threshold is met.  Those  are  factors  to  be  taken  into
         account  in  determining  whether   there   are   very   compelling
         circumstances but very compelling circumstances is  not  equivalent
         to reaching the threshold demanded of Article 3 or Article 15(b)QD.



     73. A close analogy is where in a health case an individual  could  not
         meet the high threshold to receive protection on Article 3 grounds,
         but the combination of  health  and  the  person's  private  and/or
         family life circumstances  are  such  as  to  meet  the  Article  8
         threshold.  A very strong case is required, but  that  is  not  the
         same as concluding that Article 3 must be met.

     74. Destitution is  more  than  a  very  significant  obstacle.  It  is
         possibly life threatening.

     75. In examining whether there are very compelling  circumstances  such
         as to enable the appellant to avoid deportation, the weight of  the
         public interest in deporting the appellant is to be weighed in  the
         balance. The  more  serious  the  crime,  the  greater  the  public
         interest in deporting him.

     76. His sentence of imprisonment is in the  middle  range  for  'street
         dealing' and I give due weight to that; I also  note  however  that
         credit was given for a guilty plea. Drug dealing is a serious crime
         and it is  rightly  punished  with  heavy  sentences,  is  publicly
         abhorrent and deterrence is an  important  factor  in  that  public
         interest.  Although he has  been  lawfully  in  the  UK  since  his
         arrival, his criminal activity continued despite having received  a
         suspended sentence; that counts heavily against him. There is  some
         support for the proposition, given that he is now into  his  second
         year of release without further offences, that he  is  unlikely  to
         commit further offences. But that is of little material  weight  in
         the balancing exercise.

     77. Drawing all of these matters together, I have reached the following
         conclusions. This decision is very  finely  balanced  with  matters
         that speak cogently both for and against the appellant;  a  balance
         has to be struck between those competing  interests.  I  find  that
         what tips the balance in  the  appellant's  favour,  although  only
         just, is that he has been lawfully in the  UK  since  2002  and  he
         would be destitute on his return to Iraq with  no  or  very  little
         hope of being able to rectify that situation and no or little means
         of surviving. I find that the totality of the factors in his favour
         are, just, sufficient to reach the  threshold  of  very  compelling
         circumstances when balanced  against  the  high  threshold  of  the
         public interest in his case in his deportation. If deported to Iraq
         he would be unable to re-establish anything approaching  a  private
         life that was more than meaningless. I am not comparing  the  right
         to respect for a private life established in the UK, but the  right
         to respect for private life that could be established in  Iraq,  in
         the context of the conditions in Iraq. There is a right to  respect
         for private life and in the context of a deportation  to  Iraq  for
         this appellant,  taking  fully  into  account  the  balance  to  be
         considered and the high public interest in his  deportation,  I  am
         satisfied that  in  his  case  the  threshold  of  very  compelling
         circumstances is met.

     78. If it were not for the totality of this appellant's circumstances I
         would have no hesitation is concluding  that  his  deportation  was
         proportionate and  that  he  had  not,  given  the  nature  of  his
         criminality, come anywhere close to  reaching  the  high  threshold
         required to find that he fell within paragraph 117C(6).




         Summary of conclusions

     79. Returning the appellant to Baghdad would not result in a breach  of
         Article 15(b) Qualification Directive.

     80. Returning the appellant to Baghdad would not result in a breach  of
         Article 3 ECHR.

     81. There has not, on the evidence before me, been  sufficient  durable
         change to conclude that conditions in Kirkuk  have  changed;  there
         remains an Article 15(c) risk  in  Kirkuk;  the  appellant  is  not
         excluded from protection under Article 15(c); relocation to Baghdad
         would not be unduly harsh.

     82. There are very compelling circumstances such that the  high  public
         interest in this appellant's deportation is displaced.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing  it  on  human  rights
    grounds.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008)




      Date 4th April 2019
    [pic]


    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker


    -----------------------
[1] Extract from the Immigration Rules:
  339C. A person will be granted humanitarian protection in the United
  Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:
    (i)    they are in the United Kingdom or have arrived at a port of
    entry in the United Kingdom;
    (ii)   they do not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation 2 of
    The Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006;
    (iii)  substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the
    person concerned, if returned to the country of return, would face a
    real risk of suffering serious harm and is unable, or, owing to such
    risk, unwilling to avail themselves of the protection of that country;
    and
    (iv)   they are not excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection.
  339CA. For the purposes of paragraph 339C, serious harm consists of:
    (i)    the death penalty or execution;
    (ii)   unlawful killing;
    (iii)  torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of a
    person in the country of return; or
    (iv)   serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or person by
    reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international or
    internal armed conflict.
  Exclusion from humanitarian protection
  339D. A person is excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection for
  the purposes of paragraph 339C (iv) where the Secretary of State is
  satisfied that:
    (i)    there are serious reasons for considering that they have
    committed a crime against peace, a war crime, a crime against humanity,
    or any other serious crime or instigated or otherwise participated in
    such crimes;
    (ii)   there are serious reasons for considering that they have guilty
    of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations
    or have committed, prepared or instigated such acts or encouraged or
    induced others to commit, prepare or instigate such acts;
    (iii)  there are serious reasons for considering that they constitute a
    danger to the community or to the security of the United Kingdom; or
    (iv)   there are serious reasons for considering that they have
    committed a serious crime; or
    (v)    prior to their admission to the United Kingdom the person
    committed a crime outside the scope of (i) and (iv) that would be
    punishable by imprisonment were it committed in the United Kingdom and
    the person left their country of origin solely in order to avoid
    sanctions resulting from the crime.
[2] The significant part reads: ... I would like to assure you that all  the
returnees papers are checked on arrival and they are received with  courtesy
at Baghdad International airport and may be provided  with  a  certification
letter. The arriving returnees can continue their onward  journey....  Using
their laissez pass or letter (if provided) which help them to pass  through
other designated checkpoints. Please note  that  most  of  them  may  be  in
possession of copies of their national IDs  which  may  have  not  been  not
[sic] disclosed previously. The returnees  can  re-document  themselves  and
apply in their local Civil Status Departments for  a  national  ID  card  on
arrival using copies from his/ her old  documents  or  family  records  with
reference  to  the  page  and  register  number   holding   the   returnees'
information or that of their family. We  can  confirm  that  all  the  Civil
Status  Records  are  preserved  and  held  [illegible]   each   Governorate
Directorate of  Civil  Status  Affairs  and  are  accessible  to  assist  in
determining a returnee's identity with reference to the register and page.

[3] The significant part reads: In addition to our  clarifications  outlined
in our letter of the 5th of September, please note that same procedures  are
applied to all the returnees onward travel from Baghdad to KR G or any  city
in Iraq. The certification letter is issued on a case-by-case and  depending
on the availability/ unavailability documentations (sometimes  requested  by
the returnee),  the  letter  is  issued  by  Baghdad  International  Airport
Police, and contains information about the returnee including name, date  of
birth and clarification that the returnee landed with a  laissez  pass  and
his repatriation procedure is completed  at  the  airport,  this  letter  is
sufficient to pass through checkpoints in case of enquiry, please note  that
in rare occasions  they  may  be  questioned  at  checkpoints.  This  letter
usually not always issued for all the cases, but individually case by  case.
All civil status records have been  preserved  nationally  and  there  is  a
central register backup in Baghdad that includes all the  civil  records  of
all the provenances in the event of any  form  of  damages  or  destruction.
This civil registration backup (Microfilm) covers for records from 1957.
[4] Unaltered by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944
[5] I understand that there is a country  guidance  case  hearing  later  in
2019 which will be  considering  Article  15(c);  although  there  was  some
discussion about possibly adjourning this appeal  to  await  that  decision,
the potential lengthy timescale renders that inappropriate in this case.
[6] 117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving foreign
criminals
  (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
  (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the
  greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
  (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced to
  a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public interest
  requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.
  (4) Exception 1 applies where-
    (a)    C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
    C's life,
    (b)    C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
    and
    (c)    there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration
    into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
  (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting relationship
  with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting parental
  relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation
  on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.
  (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a period
  of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest requires
  deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and
  above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.
  (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken into
  account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to deport a
  foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for the decision was
  the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted.

