
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/10499/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                     |        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 9 February 2018                     |        On 16 February 2018         |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                              Halo Azad Ramzan
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr M Schwenk, instructed by Broudie Jackson Cantor
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Williams promulgated 21.6.17, dismissing on all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    22.4.16, to refuse his protection claim.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    27.9.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 9.2.18 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I found no error of law in the making
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal sufficient  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside.

 5. The essence of the protection claim was the appellant's fear  of  ISIS,
    claiming to have been threatened for not joining them,  as  well  as  a
    fear of his former wife's family, who had threatened and tried to  kill
    him following their divorce.

 6. Judge Williams found that the appellant is still married to  his  wife,
    and she is within the IKR with her influential family. The  judge  also
    found that the appellant was of no specific adverse interest  to  ISIS.
    Whilst it was accepted that his home area of Tuz  Khormato  remained  a
    contested area, so that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  him  to
    return there, the Judge concluded that based on his Kurdish  ethnicity,
    he would be able to return to  Baghdad  and  internally  relocate  from
    there to the IKR.

 7. The grounds of application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal follow on from each other and assert that the judge:

      a) Made perverse irreconcilable  findings  regarding  the  appellant's
         wife, so that the finding that she was in the IKR cannot stand;

      b) Failed to give adequate reasons  for  finding  that  the  appellant
         would be reasonably likely to find employment in the IKR;

      c) Failed to follow the Upper Tribunal decision in AA  (Article  15(c)
         CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) when concluding that the  appellant  could
         be admitted to the IKR, when internal flight is "an impossibility."



 8. There is no merit in any of these grounds.

 9. At [30] the judge concluded that  it  was  not  reasonably  likely  the
    appellant's former wife's family attacked him, setting out between [31]
    and [35] the reasons supporting that conclusion. As part  of  that,  at
    [34], the judge noted inconsistencies in the evidence as to  where  the
    appellant was living after his wife relocated to Kurdistan in  November
    2014. The judge also concluded that the appellant  was  still  married,
    not divorced and rejected the claimed grounds for divorce. None of that
    is inconsistent with the finding at [45] that the appellant's wife  had
    relocated to the  IKR  and  that  the  support  of  his  wife  and  her
    influential family made it reasonable for him to relocate there. It  is
    a misconstruction  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    suggest,  at  [6]  of  the  grounds,  that  the  evidential  basis  for
    concluding that the wife had moved to the  IKR  had  been  rejected  as
    untruthful. The decision does not state that the  judge  rejected  that
    part of the appellant's claim and it  is  clear  that  judge  proceeded
    throughout on the basis that she had.

10. The complaint in the second ground is that at [45] the judge failed  to
    give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the  appellant  would   be
    reasonably likely to find employment in the IKR. The third ground is an
    extension of the first two grounds, asserting that  the  judge  made  a
    material error in respect of the feasibility of relocation to the IKR.

11. As the appellant is not from the IKR he will  not  be  able  to  return
    directly to the IKR with pre-clearance.

12. The judge accepted that it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant to relocate within Baghdad, but found that he would  be  able
    to travel on and internally relocate within the IKR. It follows that he
    would first have to be returned to Baghdad, which can  only  happen  if
    return is feasible.

13. On reading [74] of the RFR,  it  is  not  entirely  clear  whether  the
    Secretary of State position is that the appellant's return is feasible.
    However, at [78] it is pointed out  that  in  interview  the  appellant
    produced a coloured copy of his citizenship card  and  Personal  Status
    Identification paper, copies of which are in  the  respondent's  bundle
    and which appears to me to be his  CSID.  With  these  documents  would
    certainly be sufficient to enable him to apply to the Iraqi embassy for
    a passport or laissez-passer. Reference is made to the  outset  of  the
    substantive asylum interview where he produced  these  documents  along
    with the envelope in which they were sent to him by his family in Iraq.
    It follows that return is feasible, with that information  he  will  be
    able to obtain a laissez-passer. With a CSID, or the ability to get one
    shortly after arrival in Iraq, he will be able to access state support.
    Even if he does not have travel documents and return is  not  feasible,
    the CG provides that a protection claim cannot succeed on  the  grounds
    of risk of harm arising from a lack of Iraqi ID.

14. It would have been better if Judge Williams had addressed  this  within
    the decision, but the omission is not in fact material to  the  outcome
    of the appeal.

15. Relocation to the IKR is addressed at [20]  of  the  (amended)  country
    guidance, see AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944, which states that whether,
    if returned to Baghdad, the appellant can  reasonably  be  expected  to
    avoid any potential undue harshness in that city by travelling  to  the
    IKR, which will  be  fact  sensitive;  and  is  likely  to  involve  an
    assessment of (a) the practicality of travel from Baghdad  to  the  IKR
    (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of securing employment in
    the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance from family and friends
    in the IKR. The guidance also indicates that ethnic Kurds are  able  to
    gain temporary admission to the IKR and none have been  removed.  These
    matters were addressed by Judge Williams within the decision.

16. As drafted, the grounds effectively deny that the appellant  will  have
    the support of his wife and her influential family on relocation to the
    IKR, contrary to the findings of the judge, and it is on the same basis
    that it is also argued that the judge erred by  finding  relocation  to
    the IKR reasonable. However, the judge found that on the basis  of  his
    Kurdish ethnicity the appellant will be able to return to  Baghdad  and
    make his way from there to the IKR. As Mr Schwenk  acknowledged,  there
    are daily scheduled flights from Baghdad to Erbil. It is even  possible
    to purchase flights from the UK to Erbil, travelling via  Baghdad.  The
    appellant will be able to be returned to Baghdad and, even though it is
    not reasonable to expect  him  to  relocate  there,  at  the  most  the
    appellant will be a transit passenger at Baghdad Airport. After gaining
    entry to the IKR the judge found he would have the support of his  wife
    and her influential family. The judge might also have added that he had
    documentation that was his  CSID  or  would  enable  him  to  obtain  a
    replacement. I am satisfied that  on  the  evidence  and  the  CG,  the
    findings of the judge were fully open to him and properly reasoned.

Decision

17. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands, and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
There was no request for anonymity.  Given  the  circumstances,  I  make  no
anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007. I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee  Awards
in Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed and thus there can be no fee award.
     [pic]
     Signed
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
