
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10449/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff CJC                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 March 2019                      |On 10 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                magelland [b]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Bayoumi, Counsel, instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Cameroon, has permission to challenge  the
    decision of Judge Suffield-Thompson sent on 21 November 2018 dismissing
    his appeal against the decision made by the  respondent  on  16  August
    2018 refusing his protection claim.

2.   The basis of the appellant's claim was that he  would  be  at  risk  on
    return because his action in reporting a fatal  road  accident  to  the
    authorities had led to his being  kidnapped  and  tortured  by  unknown
    persons and to the police targeting him.  The  appellant  claimed  that
    family members of the lorry driver had links with state prosecutors and
    that there was a warrant out for his arrest.

3.   The judge found the appellant's claim not credible and  gave  extensive
    reasons for so finding.  However,  in  the  course  of  evaluating  the
    expert report by Dr D Walker-Said, which had  considered,  inter  alia,
    the issue  of  the  authenticity  of  the  arrest  warrant,  the  judge
    concluded at paragraph 59 that:

         "59.  Her  report  is  not  conclusive  and  therefore,  I   cannot
             categorically find that this document is verified as  genuine.
             However, I do find it  is  plausible  that  the  Appellant  is
             wanted in Cameroon and that  this  is  why  he  so  afraid  of
             returning and  that  Mr.  Baker's  submission  that  he  fears
             returning due to being prosecuted  for  a  crime  rather  than
             being persecuted has merit."

4.   The inclusion of  this  paragraph  in  the  judge's  decision  poses  a
    serious problem arising from the fact  that,  even  if  all  the  judge
    appeared to accept in this  paragraph  is  that  the  appellant  feared
    prosecution (not persecution), the background evidence before the judge
    indicated  that  there  was  a  real  question  as  to  whether  prison
    conditions in Cameroon were such that anyone detained was at real  risk
    of  suffering  ill-treatment  contrary  to   Article   15(b)   of   the
    Qualification Directive and Article 3 ECHR.  At the very least,  having
    made this finding, the judge  should  have  engaged  with  the  country
    materials dealing  with  prison  conditions,  including  the  US  State
    Department report which assessed  "harsh  and  life-threatening  prison
    conditions" to be one of the most significant human  rights  issues  in
    the country.

5.   Mr Mills sought to argue  that  the  judge  in  paragraph  59  was  not
    finding that the appellant's claim to be wanted was credible, only that
    it was "plausible"; but the judge said nothing  in  this  paragraph  or
    elsewhere to suggest that he did not regard plausibility  as  a  strong
    indicator of credibility and this paragraph goes on  to  say  that  the
    submission that the appellant feared returning due to being  prosecuted
    "has merit".  It is simply not possible to read  down  this  paragraph,
    even though everywhere else the judge's findings appear to be that  the
    entirety of his claim lacked credibility.

6.   For the above reasons I consider that the decision of  the  judge  must
    be set aside for material error of law, since I cannot exclude that the
    judge's find was not inadvertent and that, had the judge considered the
    state of the background country evidence on prison conditions,  he  may
    have concluded (on the basis of the finding set out in this  paragraph)
    that the appellant qualified for humanitarian protection.  At the  same
    time, I cannot accept Ms Bayoumi's submission that  I  should  preserve
    the judge's finding regarding prosecution.   What  the  judge  said  at
    paragraph 59 is out of kilter with the rest of the determination and in
    the circumstances I consider it unsafe to preserve any of the findings.

7.   To conclude:

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is  set  aside  for  a
    material error of law.

    The case is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  before  Judge
    Suffield-Thompson) to be heard de novo.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 12 March 2019

[pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
