
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/10786/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6 February 2018                         |On 13 March 2018                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                  THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MARTIN SPENCER
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                                   Mr K M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ogunbusola, Counsel, instructed by Cranbrook
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. By permission to appeal granted by Judge R C Campbell on 2 January 2018
    the appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Lal, to whom we shall refer as the judge, dated 24 November  2017  when
    he dismissed this appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  Home
    Office to refuse to  grant  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection,  the
    decision of the Home Office being dated 12 October 2017.

 2. The grounds of this appeal are that there was a  material  irregularity
    in the decision of the judge in that he refused to adjourn for  further
    enquiries to be made as to the appellant's injuries and  mental  health
    stemming from him being a victim of torture in his country  of  origin,
    Bangladesh, due to his political affiliations.  The appellant wished to
    obtain a medical report concerning his mental health.

Background

 3. The appellant was born on 11 April 1981 and on 12 December 2005 he  was
    granted a visa and work permit to enter and work in the United  Kingdom
    for a period of one year.  That visa expired on 12 December 2006.   The
    appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 22 December  2005.   He  did
    not return to Bangladesh or submit himself to the  authorities  at  the
    expiry of his visa but he remained in the United Kingdom until  he  was
    encountered and detained on 13 July 2017.  He then claimed asylum on 11
    August 2017.  He attended a screening  interview  on  30  August  2017,
    followed by a substantive asylum interview on 27 September.   This  led
    to the initial decision on 12 October refusing the appellant asylum  or
    humanitarian protection.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed against the decision of the Home Office and  the
    appeal hearing came before the judge on 23 November.   In  relation  to
    the subject matter of this appeal before  us  the  judge  set  out  his
    reasons as follows:

         "Preliminary Matters

         10.  Mr Paramjorthy renewed an  application  to  obtain  a  medical
             report with the  appellant's  mental  health  which  had  been
             initially  been  made  by  solicitor's  letter  faxed  to  the
             Tribunal the day  before  the  hearing  at  17.59  hours.   He
             submitted that such a report could be obtained in about  three
             weeks.  Mr Lumb  was  content  to  leave  the  matter  to  the
             Tribunal.

         11.  The Tribunal determined to refuse the application as there was
             no credible material to  suggest  that  such  a  report  would
             assist the Tribunal in respect of the determination it  needed
             to reach.  Counsel accepted that the  report  did  not  go  to
             causation  in  respect  of  the  events  complained  of.   The
             Tribunal was supplied with the Rule 35 report as the appellant
             was currently in immigration detention."

 5. Having thus determined the application for an  adjournment,  the  judge
    proceeded to consider the substance of the appeal, which was dismissed.
     He found that there was considerable doubt as to  the  credibility  of
    the claim because the appellant  admitted  during  the  hearing  on  23
    November that as recently  as  July  2017  he  had  been  "planning  on
    returning voluntarily and his explanation for claiming asylum  a  month
    later was that there was no-one there to look after him", a claim which
    was wholly incredible because it was based on the death of his  parents
    as long ago as 2007.  The judge found that the more likely  reason  for
    the claim for asylum was that the appellant  had  run  out  of  options
    because of the loss of monies built up in the United Kingdom by illegal
    working over the previous years and that he was in detention.

 6. In relation to the substance of the claim for asylum, namely  that  the
    appellant had been involved in political  activity  on  behalf  of  the
    Bangladesh Nationalist Party, which lay behind his claim that he  would
    be politically persecuted if he returned to Bangladesh where the ruling
    party is the Awami League, the judge found that in fact  the  appellant
    was never involved in political activity nor was he involved in a fight
    arising out of political activity and that the appellant was overall an
    extremely poor witness of truth.  The judge  said:  "The  Tribunal  was
    under the distinct impression he was actively misleading the Tribunal."
     The judge did not accept that the appellant had ever been a  political
    activist as claimed and found that the actions of  the  appellant  were
    not those of someone with a genuine fear of persecution but  rather  of
    someone who entered the UK as an economic migrant and only  raised  the
    issue of international protection over eleven years later.

 7. In relation to the appellant's health the judge found as follows:

         "The Tribunal noted the Rule 36 report that  in  detention  he  was
         reported as feeling low and depressed and reporting of  poor  sleep
         but there was nothing  to  suggest  that  he  is  either  receiving
         treatment for any mental health difficulties or the quality of  his
         evidence and recall is somehow affected.  The scarring on the  legs
         which Dr Ali notes is  consistent  with  an  attack  with  a  blunt
         instrument is not determinative or supportive  of  the  appellant's
         claimed political account.  The Tribunal has for the reasons  above
         found the appellant to be an extremely poor witness of truth.  Such
         marking could be caused  by  a  variety  of  accidental  and  other
         factors such as being in a fight but with no political overtones."

 8. In conclusion, the judge found that the appellant was not at real  risk
    of persecution for any Refugee  Convention  reason  on  his  return  to
    Bangladesh and he found  that  the  appellant's  fears  of  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment in breach of Article 3 of the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights or breach of his right to life  under  Article  2  ECHR
    were neither current nor objectively well-founded.

This Appeal

 9. Section 11 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  gives  a
    right of appeal on "any point of law arising from a  decision  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal other than an excluded decision".  In  granting
    permission to appeal Judge Campbell considered it to be  arguable  that
    the judge erred in refusing to adjourn to enable the appellant to  seek
    evidence regarding his mental health.  He referred  to  the  fact  that
    there was a Rule 35 report before  the  Tribunal  which  supported  the
    appellant's claim to be a  victim  of  torture  and  to  suffer  mental
    health.

10. Appearing for the appellant this morning, Mr Ogunbusola, who  has  said
    everything that could  possibly  have  been  said  on  the  appellant's
    behalf, argued that the appeal should be allowed because it would  have
    been fair to adjourn the hearing below and this  appeal  has  been  put
    fairly and squarely on the basis of  fairness.   He  said  that  mental
    impairment could explain the appellant's failure  to  remember  details
    and why he had been confused and muddled in  his  interview.   He  said
    that there should have been alarm bells  ringing  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's mental ability from his failure since 2005 in the  time  he
    had been in the UK to prosper or make significant progress.  He pointed
    out the fact that after twelve years the  appellant  was  still  living
    alone in a one bedroomed flat.  He submitted that  a  report  that  the
    appellant was suffering from mental impairment would have  been  highly
    material to the issues before the First-tier Tribunal had such a report
    been obtained and shown the  appellant  to  be  suffering  from  mental
    impairment.

11. Asked whether since the hearing before the judge the appellant had made
    any effort to obtain such a report to substantiate the suggestion  that
    such a report would have been of assistance to the First-tier  Tribunal
    we were told that no such report had been obtained and indeed, although
    the appellant has now been released from detention for a period of four
    weeks  it  appears  that  he  has  not  been  examined  by  a   medical
    practitioner with a view to a report being obtained.  Thus we take with
    a pinch of salt the suggestion from Mr Ogunbusola that a report  should
    be available "pretty soon".

12.  For  the  respondent  Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that  there   are   fatal
    difficulties to this application.  He said that once  Counsel  for  the
    appellant had accepted in the court below that there was  no  causation
    in relation to the events complained of it is difficult  to  understand
    how a medical report would have assisted the judge and what issues such
    a report could have gone to.  He referred to the passages which we have
    already quoted in relation to the Rule 35 report from Dr  Ali  and  the
    complete absence of any suggestion of mental health  problems  such  as
    would have justified an adjournment.  He pointed out Dr Ali's  evidence
    that the injuries complained of were consistent with  various  ways  of
    such injuries being sustained and were not  necessarily  indicative  of
    torture.   He  submitted  that  the  approach  of  the  judge  to   the
    application to adjourn was not only reasonable but was correct  and  he
    submitted that there was no material error in the judge's approach.

13. Rule 21 provides:

         "(1) Where a party applies for an adjournment of a  hearing  of  an
             appeal, he must -

             (a)   if  practicable,  notify  all  other  parties   of   the
                  application;

             (b)  show good reason why an adjournment is necessary; and

             (c)  provide evidence of any fact or  matter  relied  upon  in
                  support of the application.

         (2)  The Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing of an  appeal  on  the
             application of a  party,  unless  satisfied  that  the  appeal
             cannot otherwise be justly determined."

14. The overriding objective is enshrined in Rule 4, which provides:

         "The  overriding  objective  of  these  Rules  is  to  secure  that
         proceedings before the Tribunal are handled as fairly, quickly  and
         efficiently as possible; and, where appropriate,  that  members  of
         the  Tribunal  have  responsibility  for  ensuring  this,  in   the
         interests of the parties to the proceedings and in the wider public
         interest."

    In that respect we note that the application  for  an  adjournment  was
    first made at 17.59 hours the day before the hearing and therefore  was
    very late.  No explanation could be given to us for why the application
    was made so late.

15. In our judgment, the decision of the judge not to adjourn to allow  the
    appellant to obtain further medical  evidence  was  one  which  he  was
    wholly entitled to make in the circumstances as they  presented  before
    him and that decision does not, in our judgment, betray  any  error  of
    law.  We note that in the course  of  his  extensive  interview  on  27
    September 2017 the appellant did not once refer to having been tortured
    nor did he rely upon torture as a ground for seeking asylum.   In  that
    regard it was of significance that it was accepted by  Counsel  on  his
    behalf that the Rule 35 report did not go to causation  in  respect  of
    the events complained of.  The judge considered that he could  properly
    determine the issues arising on the appeal from  the  decision  of  the
    Home Office without seeing such a medical report and, in our  judgment,
    that was a decision which lay within the judge's  discretion.   Indeed,
    it is arguable that had the judge acceded to the application to adjourn
    that would have been in breach of Rule  21,  which  provides  that  the
    Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing of an appeal unless satisfied  that
    the appeal cannot otherwise be justly determined.

16. The judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    application had been made at  such  a  late  stage.   Furthermore,  the
    decision  was,  in  our  judgment,  retrospectively  justified  by  his
    findings in relation to the appellant's credibility and the genuineness
    of his application for asylum  and  humanitarian  protection,  findings
    made having heard the appellant and considered  all  the  evidence  are
    ones with which we would not interfere.

17. In those circumstances we  do  not  consider  that  the  appellant  was
    deprived of a fair hearing and this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 2 March 2018

Mr Justice Martin Spencer

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 2 March 2018


Mr Justice Martin Spencer






