
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10820/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 April 2019                             |On 14 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     FH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. A. Bhachu, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Hagan, promulgated on 19 February 2019,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse a grant of asylum.
 2. As this is an asylum appeal I have made an anonymity direction.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "At para 5 & 6 the grounds challenge the Judge's  decision  not  to
         accept diagnoses of PTSD by  both  Dr  Sinha  and  Dr  Hoare.   The
         reasons given at para 6 of the grounds why the Judge erred by doing
         so are arguable.  They may be further substantiated by  the  recent
         decision of KV (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD  [2019]  UKSC  10  as  to  the
         relevance of reports being compliant (as the Judge found that these
         were) with the Istanbul Protocol.


         Given that the Judge would have considered all the evidence in  the
         round, all grounds may be argued".


 4. I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  following  which  I
    reserved my decision.

Error of Law

 5. At the hearing Mr. Bramble conceded that there  was  an  error  in  the
    Judge's approach to the medical evidence, in particular with  reference
    to the last sentence of [39].  This sentence states as follows:


         "From the advice received from medical members in my capacity as  a
         Judge  in  the  Social  Entitlement  Chamber,  I  am   aware   that
         amitriptyline has to be prescribed at a dose of at least 75 mg, and
         ideally much higher, to function as an antidepressant".


 6. It was accepted that the Judge had gone beyond his remit in making this
    finding.  There was no objective evidence to  support  this  statement.
    It was accepted by Mr. Bramble that this was an error of law, and  that
    this affected the Judge's consideration of  the  Appellant's  PTSD  and
    mental health.  Mr. Bramble also acknowledged that the  Respondent  had
    accepted that the Appellant suffered  from  PTSD  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter (see [76] and [143]).  At [76] it states:


         "On viewing the report and analysing its contents  with  regard  to
         the expert involved and  the  details  within  the  report,  it  is
         accepted that you have PTSD and severe depressive episodes".


 7. There is no reference in the decision to the Judge having said  at  the
    hearing that he intended to go behind this concession.


 8. Mr. Bramble also accepted that the Judge had erred in failing  to  take
    into account, and give weight to, the evidence of the  witness,  having
    found him to be reliable.   At [68], the account given  by  Mr.  L  was
    accepted.  "Although this evidence was brief I see no reason  to  doubt
    Mr. L's integrity.  I accept  his  account."   He  accepted  that  this
    evidence went to the Appellant's  claim  under  Articles  3  and  8  on
    medical grounds.


 9. However, while Mr. Bramble accepted that the approach under Articles  3
    and 8 on medical grounds would be materially affected  by  the  Judge's
    errors in his consideration of the medical evidence and the evidence of
    the witness, he submitted that the asylum decision remained intact, and
    should stand.  He submitted that the appeal should be retained  in  the
    Upper Tribunal to be remade on Articles 3 and 8.

10. Given this concession, I have  considered  whether  the  error  in  the
    consideration of the medical evidence also affects the asylum decision,
    or whether they can  be  separated  in  the  manner  submitted  by  Mr.
    Bramble.  I have had regard to the skeleton argument and also the  case
    of KV.

11. Credibility findings must be made having considered the evidence in the
    round.  Therefore, any finding by the Judge that he cannot rely on  the
    medical evidence regarding PTSD and depression must have an  impact  on
    his assessment of the asylum appeal.  I find that the medical  evidence
    goes to the Appellant's credibility, insofar as it goes to  his  mental
    state, in particular his diagnosis of PTSD.  I therefore find that  the
    error also affects the asylum decision.

12. Further I have given careful consideration to the issue of  alternative
    causes following the case of KV.  At [47] the Judge states:


         "It is not unreasonable to conclude  from  the  scarring  that  the
         appellant could have been mistreated by Sunni Muslims  in  Pakistan
         as he claims.  Equally, however, he might have been harmed by other
         people, and in  different  circumstances,  from  those  he  claims.
         Viewed in isolation, either is possible.  It seems to me  that  the
         safest approach is to view the evidence of physical mistreatment in
         the context of the evidence as a whole".


13. Ms. Bhachu submitted that the Judge had erred in  putting  forward  two
    alternative causes for the scarring and torture, and in failing to come
    to a conclusion.  She submitted that, if two alternative considerations
    were put forward, one needed  to  be  adopted  and  one  needed  to  be
    rejected.  The two different alternatives had to be considered and  the
    likelihood of one versus the other had to be compared.  She referred to
    [31] of KV which states:


         "The third point arises out of the tribunal's final conclusion that
         there were only two real possibilities, namely  that  KV  had  been
         tortured and that his wounding was SIBP.  The  point  is  that  the
         likelihood of both possibilities had to be compared with each other
         before either of them could be discounted. And  the  contention  is
         that,  when  it  came  to  compile  the  final   section   of   its
         determination entitled "Assessment of the Appellant's Appeal",  and
         in particular the final subsection, entitled "Conclusion", in which
         it discounted the possibility of  torture,  the  tribunal  made  no
         reference  to  the  likelihood,  or  rather   on   any   view   the
         unlikelihood, that the wounding was SIBP."


14. Ms. Bhachu submitted that this decision was "on all  fours"  with  that
    referred to in KV.  Two alternatives had been put forward by the  Judge
    at [47] but he  had  not  come  to  any  conclusion  in  the  following
    paragraphs as to which of those was more likely.   She  submitted  that
    the Judge had to assess both alternatives and if he was  rejecting  the
    medical evidence, it had to be clear on what basis that had been  done.



15. I have carefully considered whether the Judge gives  any  consideration
    to the alternatives put forward at [47], and I find that he  does  not.
    Following KV, I find that this is a material error of law.

16. I have also considered the reasons given for attaching less  weight  to
    the scarring report which supports the Appellant's account.  The  Judge
    found that Dr. Sinha's report was Istanbul Protocol compliant at  [33].
    However, at [41] he found that the report carried  "substantially  less
    weight than might otherwise have been the case" for reasons given  from
    [34] to [40].   These reasons include the statement at [39]  where  the
    Judge went beyond his remit and made  findings  based  on  his  matters
    deemed to be within his own knowledge.

17. At [46] the Judge considers Dr. Sinha's evidence of the  scarring.   He
    states:


         "There is, of course, the evidence of Dr Sinha that  he  found  the
         scarring on the  appellant's  (sic)  to  be  consistent  or  highly
         consistent  with  his  account.   That  is,  on  the  face  of  it,
         supportive of the appellant's case.  It needs to  be  treated  with
         caution, however.  What Dr Sinha found was that  the  scarring  was
         consistent with the appellant having been physically mistreated  as
         claimed.  I do not seek to look behind that  conclusion.   What  Dr
         Sinha did not find, because he could not have that  knowledge,  was
         that the physical mistreatment happened in the  circumstances  that
         the appellant claims.  This is significant in the context  of  this
         case.  Dr Sinha was examining a man who, in February 2018,  was  54
         and who was 30 at the time of the alleged events.   There  is  much
         about his life that is not reliably known.  It  is  known  that  he
         entered the United  Kingdom  illegally,  having  made  the  journey
         across Europe through illicit means.  It is also known that he  has
         had contact with some level of criminality in this country since he
         had a false passport".


18. The Judge found that in Dr. Sinha's opinion the scarring was consistent
    or highly consistent with  the  Appellant's  account.   However,  while
    stating that he did not seek to look behind the  conclusion  that  "the
    scarring was consistent  with  the  appellant  having  been  physically
    mistreated as claimed", he then does exactly that.

19. I find that the Judge  has  erred  in  his  treatment  of  the  medical
    evidence, in relation to scarring as well as mental health.  He did not
    give adequate or proper reasons for rejecting the finding of Dr.  Sinha
    that the scarring was consistent with the Appellant's claimed  account.
    I find that the credibility findings are infected by these errors.   He
    then raised two alternatives, but failed to compare the  likelihood  of
    one with the other, contrary to the case of KV.

20. I find that the decision involves the making of material errors of law.
     I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February 2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary  to  enable  this  appeal  to  be  remade,  given  that   the
    credibility findings cannot stand, and having regard to the  overriding
    objective, I find that it is appropriate to  remit  this  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involves the making of material
    errors of law and I set the decision aside.  No findings are preserved.

22. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-made.

23. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge O'Hagan.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 10 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

