
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10829/2018
                                                               PA/10870/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31st January 2020                 |On 9th April 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                   HO  (1)
                                   KO  (1)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Fountains Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") made an anonymity direction and it is
    appropriate to continue that direction.  Unless and until a Tribunal or
    court directs otherwise, the appellants are granted anonymity.  No
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them
    or any member of their family.  This direction applies both to the
    appellants and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 2. The appellants are brothers and both nationals of Afghanistan.  The
    first appellant arrived in the UK on 24th August 2016 and claimed
    asylum on 17th October 2016.  The second appellant arrived in the UK on
    9th August 2019 and claimed asylum on 30th August 2016.  Each of their
    claims was refused by the respondent for the reasons set out in two
    separate decisions dated 28th August 2018. The appellants appealed to
    the FtT and their appeals were dismissed by FtT Judge Fox ("the judge")
    for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 31st May 2019.


The decision of FtT Judge Fox


 3. The claims made by the appellants are summarised at paragraphs [5] to
    [8] of the decision.  The appellants and their brother [M] gave
    evidence.  Their evidence is set out at paragraphs [33] to [52] of the
    decision.  The judge noted that each of the appellants had previously
    claimed they left Afghanistan in December 2015.  The judge considered
    the evidence of the first appellant that he had not claimed to have
    left Afghanistan in December 2015 and his claim that the date had
    erroneously been provided by his previous representatives.  At
    paragraph [73], the judge considered the oral evidence of the first
    appellant confirming he left Afghanistan, and arrived in the UK on 24th
    August 2018 after a journey which lasted 8 to 9 months, to be
    consistent with the previous account that he had left Afghanistan in
    December 2015.


 4. At paragraph [68] of his decision the judge noted that the core of the
    appellants claim post-dates their flight from Afghanistan.  At
    paragraph [75], the judge states:


         "The second appellant's evidence is also tainted by a chronology
         whereby the core of the claim postdates flight from Afghanistan. It
         is not credible that the appellants would seek to escape from an
         event which was yet to occur nor was within their reasonable,
         contemplation at the material time. This discrepancy damages their
         credibility and the core of the claim."


 5.  The judge turned to consider the risk upon return. At paragraph [85],
    the judge found the appellants have failed to demonstrate to the lower
    standard, that they cannot return to their home region. Nevertheless,
    the judge also considered whether the appellants can internally
    relocate. At paragraphs [86] and [87], the judge stated:


         "86. ... The appellants will return as adults. They speak Pashto.
         By their own evidence they relocated to Kabul where they resided
         without incident notwithstanding the father's alleged death. The
         appellant's mother returned to the home region where she resided
         with her daughter-in-law and grandchildren.


         87.  There are numerous other family members present in Afghanistan
         who may also be available to assist the appellants if required. In
         addition and in the alternative there is no reliable evidence to
         demonstrate why [M] cannot provide practical support to the
         appellants upon their return and he has an established family home
         currently occupied by his wife and children which the appellants
         may be able to benefit from."


 6. At paragraph [88], the judge concluded:


         "For the reasons stated the appellants have failed to demonstrate
         that they are of any interest to the Taliban or the Afghan
         authorities. AS cannot assist the appellant in the circumstances.
         In addition reliance upon Article 15(c) alone is insufficient; AK
         applied."


 7. The judge recorded at paragraph [89], that he had been invited to
    depart from the country guidance.  At paragraphs [89] and [90], the
    judge stated:


         "89. Ms Sepulveda has invited the tribunal to depart from all the
         country guidance cases relevant to the instant appeal. She relies
         upon generic country reports in this endeavour. There is no
         reliable evidence which engages with the issues or addresses the
         appellants' alleged subjective claim.


         90.  Without the benefit of expert evidence to address the specific
         issues at appeal in the context of the appellants' subjective
         evidence, I am not persuaded to depart from all the country
         guidance provided by the Upper Tribunal as invited."


The appeal before me


 8. The appellants sought permission to appeal on five grounds. First the
    judge has provided inadequate reasons for finding the appellants
    account of events not to be credible. Second, the judge failed to
    adequately consider the background material in the assessment of the
    risk upon return. Third, the judge failed to make findings on material
    matters. Fourth, the judge failed to consider relevant evidence and
    finally, the judge failed to apply the Joint Presidential Guidance Note
    No 2 in the assessment of the evidence of the second appellant who was
    a child at the date of the hearing. Permission to appeal was granted by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird on 3rd July 2019.


 9. At the outset of the hearing before me, Mr Howard confirmed that the
    appellants rely upon the second, third and fourth grounds of appeal
    only.  Mr Howard submits the second appellant was a child at the time
    of the hearing before the FtT. He accepts the judge was aware of the
    claim that the appellant's mother had passed away shortly before the
    hearing of the appeal and the judge had regard to the Presidential
    Guidance regarding vulnerable witnesses. There is no criticism of the
    judge's conduct of the appeal.   Mr Howard submits that in the skeleton
    arguments that were relied upon by the appellants, there was extensive
    reference to the background material regarding the situation in the
    appellant's home area.  He submits the judge did not refer to the
    background material concerning children in Afghanistan and the evidence
    that demonstrates that children are specifically targeted by anti-
    government groups for recruitment, child labour and forced labour.  He
    submits the background material demonstrates that being a child in
    Afghanistan is a factor that places the child at risk of persecution.
    Mr Howard submits that if the judge had had that background material in
    mind, he would have reached a different conclusion as to risk of
    indiscriminate violence that the appellants would be exposed to, upon
    return.


10. Mr Howard submits the judge failed to make findings on material
    matters.  At paragraphs [83] and [84], the judge refers to the claim
    regarding the risk from pro government forces. He submits the judge
    erred in his view that the matters form no part of the appellant's
    claim.  He drew my attention to paragraph [21] of the second
    appellant's witness statement dated 7th November 2018 in which the
    second appellant states ".. I also fear that I will be arrested and
    imprisoned by the government authorities, because they had threatened
    to imprison me and the men in my family, because we did not give them
    information on the Taliban when they had pressured us to give them this
    information".  A similar claim is made at paragraphs [26] and [27] of
    the first appellant's witness statement dated 2nd November 2018.  Mr
    Howard submits it was therefore incumbent upon the judge to address
    that claim, and the risk upon return that arises.


11. Finally, Mr Howard submits that in reaching his decision that the core
    of the appellants claim post-dates their flight from Afghanistan, the
    judge failed to have any regard to the evidence set out in the witness
    statement of the first appellant in particular, that addresses the
    issues concerning the dates.


12. In reply, Mr Bates submits that judge was plainly concerned about the
    chronology given by the appellants.  The judge refers, at paragraphs
    [31] and [32] to the extensive evidence before him, and at paragraphs
    [39] to [44] refers to the evidence of the first appellant.  Mr Bates
    submits the judge properly took the chronology into account.  The
    appellants had tried to distance themselves from what they have said
    previously, as set out in paragraphs [5] to [8] of the decision.  The
    judge did not accept the appellants had been truthful and rejected the
    first appellants claim that his representatives were responsible for
    drafting an inaccurate statement.  In reaching his decision Mr Bates
    submits, the judge was entitled to note that no steps had been taken by
    the appellants against their previous representatives and it was open
    to the judge to conclude that the chronology tainted the core of their
    claim.    Mr Bates submits the judge essentially found that the
    appellants had left Afghanistan before any difficulties arose and on
    their own account of events, the Taliban kept attending the family home
    but did not forcibly recruit the appellants.  Mr Bates accepts the
    appellants' witness statements do refer to a fear from government
    forces that was connected to the core of their claim.  He submits the
    judge carefully considered the evidence of the appellants taken
    together with the evidence of their brother, [M] and there was an
    overall assessment of the risk that the family is exposed to.  The
    government has no interest in the family and although Daesh was
    mentioned by the appellants, there was no claim that the appellant's
    have been targeted by Daesh.  At paragraph [83], the judge acknowledges
    the submissions regarding the risk from pro-government forces and
    Daesh.


13. Mr Bates accepts that a number of generic reports were relied upon by
    the appellants and the judge was invited to depart from the relevant
    country guidance.  He submits the background material probably needed
    to be considered, but it would have to be strong background material
    that establishes a risk upon return for these appellants, to depart
    from the Country Guidance.


14. In my judgement, the decision of the FtT is tainted by a material error
    of law.  The judge rejected the appellants account of events.  At
    paragraph [68] of his decision, the judge states "Upon the available
    evidence the core of the appellant's claim post-dates their flight from
    Afghanistan...".   The judge appears to have reached that conclusion
    based upon the chronology of events that is set out in the summary of
    the appellants claim set out at paragraphs [5] to [7] of the decision.


         "5.  The appellants claim that their brother [D] was imprisoned in
         late 2013 or approximately February 2014 by the authorities due to
         involvement with the Taliban. [D] was released from prison in
         approximately February 2016 on condition that he provide the
         authorities with information about the Taliban. The authorities
         visited the appellants' home in March 2016 for this purpose.


         6.   According to the first appellant the Taliban visited the
         appellants' home in late 2015 to ask why the government were
         visiting their home. The Taliban attempted to forcibly recruit the
         appellants at that time. On the last visit [D] assured the Taliban
         that the appellants would join them and to return the following day
         for that purpose. The appellant relocated to Kabul the following
         day.


         7.   According to the second appellant the Taliban visited the
         appellants home in March 2016 asking [D] and the appellants to join
         the Taliban. The Taliban visited the appellants home on a regular
         basis until the appellants relocated to Kabul. The appellants
         father was murdered in Kabul by the Taliban 20 days after they
         arrived in Kabul."


15. It is not entirely clear where that summary comes from.  The reference,
    at paragraph [5] to the appellants brother [D] having been released
    from prison in approximately February 2016 on condition that he provide
    the authorities with information about the Taliban, appears to have
    been extracted by the judge from paragraph [17] of the decision letter
    in respect of the second appellant's claim.  The decision letter
    summarises the claim made by the second appellant and states:


         "17. [D] was released by Afghan government in approximately
         February 2016 on the condition that he provided information about
         the Taliban. The government forces were visiting your home in
         approximately March 2016 over a period of a month asking your
         brother for information about the Taliban. (WS Para 5) (AIR Q71)."


16. The respondent appears to claim that that is what was said by the
    second appellant in a witness statement, and in response to question 71
    of the interview completed on 8th February 2017. I have considered both
    of those documents.  The second appellant's witness statement appears
    at 'C1' of the respondent's bundle and at paragraph 5 he does not claim
    that his brother [D] was released in approximately February 2016. In
    that statement, the second appellant claims "[D] was working for the
    Taliban and the government arrested him following which he was
    imprisoned for around two years. The government released on the
    condition that he becomes an informer for them providing them with
    information about the Taliban...".  At question 71 of the asylum
    interview record, the second appellant was asked how long after the
    initial threat, he stayed in Laghman.  He claimed the family was under
    pressure from the government and the Taliban and they stayed in Laghman
    for a month after his brother was released, and they then moved to
    Kabul.


17. For his part, in his witness statement dated 18th June 2018 that was to
    be found at 'C1' to 'C3' the respondent's bundle, the first appellant
    stated at paragraph 5 that his brother [D] was released in October
    2015.  In his witness statement dated 2nd November 2018, prepared
    specifically for the hearing of the appeal the first appellant states
    at paragraph [11]:


         "11. In reference to paragraph 14 (RFRL), I would like to clarify
         that I had not stated in WS1 that the government forces started
         visiting my home in March 2016. This is not recorded in WS1 or my
         Asylum Interview Record, dated 21.06.2018 (AIR)."


18. The judge rejected the core of the appellant's account on the
    understanding that the core of the claim post-dated their flight from
    Afghanistan.  At paragraph [75], the judge states it is not credible
    that the appellants would seek to escape from an event which was yet to
    occur nor was within their reasonable contemplation at the material
    time.  In reaching his decision, it appears the judge simply adopted
    the matters set out in the respondent's decision letters, without
    considering the claim made by the appellants that there were errors in
    the decision.  Having carefully considered the material that was before
    the judge, I accept the submission made by Mr Howard that in reaching
    his decision that the core of the appellants claim post-dates their
    flight from Afghanistan, the judge failed to have any regard to the
    evidence set out in the witness statement of the first appellant in
    particular, that addresses the issues concerning the chronology.  In my
    judgement, the judge failed to engage with the evidence of the
    appellants, and I have no confidence that the judge would have rejected
    the core of the appellant's account and reached the same conclusions as
    to the relevant chronology, if the judge had engaged with that
    evidence.


19. That is in itself sufficient for me to conclude that the appropriate
    course is for the decision of the FtT judge to be set aside, without
    consideration of the other grounds relied upon.  In any event, Mr Bates
    acknowledges the Tribunal had been asked to depart from the country
    guidance and the background material relied upon by the appellants
    probably needed to be considered. The assessment of the risk upon
    return, must inevitably be undertaken by reference to the factual
    matrix as found by the Tribunal.


20. In my judgment, the judge rejected the  core  of  the  account  without
    properly addressing whether the events relied upon by the appellants do
    in fact post-date  their  departure  from  Afghanistan  and  failed  to
    adequately address the appellants evidence  in  this  respect.   As  to
    disposal, the assessment of a claim for asylum such as this is always a
    highly fact sensitive task, and the appellants  are  entitled  to  have
    their claim properly considered by the FtT.  In all the  circumstances,
    I have decided that it is appropriate to remit this appeal back to  the
    FtT for hearing afresh, having considered paragraph 7.2 of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.  The nature  and
    extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will  be  extensive.  The
    parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing
    in due course.



Notice of Decision


21. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of FtT Judge  Fox  promulgated  on
    31st May 2019 is set aside, and I remit the matter  for  re-hearing  de
    novo in the First-tier Tribunal, with no findings preserved.





Signed                                  Date          23rd March 2020


 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

