
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10479/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 August 2019                            |On 18 September 2019          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                 Yassine [M]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Morocco.  He appealed to the First-tier
Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision on 10 August 2018
refusing his claim for international protection and also certifying under
section 72 of the 2002 Act certifying his protection claim on the basis
that he was guilty of a particularly serious crime and posed a continuing
risk to the public.

2.   The judge found that the appellant had not been guilty of a
particularly serious crime and therefore rebutted the presumption and
therefore the certification was lifted.  However, on the basis that she did
not find the appellant credible, she dismissed the asylum and humanitarian
protection appeals.

3.   An earlier hearing was adjourned on the basis that it had been argued
in the Secretary of State's Rule 24 response that the First-tier Judge had
erred in finding that the appellant had rebutted the presumption that the
offence for which he was convicted was particularly serious.  It was common
ground that the representatives needed time to prepare legal argument as to
whether the respondent could raise such an issue in a Rule 24 response or
was required to do so by way of appeal.

4.   At the hearing Ms Everett withdrew the Rule 24 response.  She did not
consider, despite what had been decided by the Upper Tribunal in Smith
[2019] UKUT 216 (IAC), that it could be argued that a Rule 24 response was
a proper forum for the challenge that was set out there.  Accordingly, that
point went no further.

5.   As regards the judge's credibility findings, it was common ground that
the points made in the grounds set out a sound challenge to those findings
which were required to be set aside.  The extent of remaking of the
decision is such that it will have to be remitted for a full rehearing in
the First-tier Tribunal, subject only to the fact that the judge's findings
that the appellant was not guilty of a particularly serious crime are to be
preserved.  The matter will be relisted before a First-tier Judge at Hatton
Cross.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent set out above.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 4 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
