
                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10179/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under Rule 34              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7th July 2020                   |On 17th July 2020                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA



                                   Between

                                     AI

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)




 1. An anonymity direction was made by Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor in the
    directions sent to the parties on 6th May 2020.  As this  a  protection
    claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless and  until  a
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, AI is granted anonymity. No report
    of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any
    member of his family.  This direction applies  amongst  others  to  all
    parties. Failure to comply with this direction could lead  to  contempt
    of court proceedings.


 2. The appellant is a national of El Salvador.  He arrived in  the  UK  on
    29th May 2019  and  claimed  asylum.  The  claim  was  refused  by  the
    respondent for reasons set out in a decision dated  9th  October  2019.
    The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy  on
    25th November 2019 and dismissed for reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 4th December 2019.  the appellant applied for permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on five grounds. Permission was granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on 19th February 2020.  In doing so,  she
    noted:


            "The grounds submit the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  undertook
           research after the hearing. It is correct the  judge  refers  to
           two websites although it is not clear what those websites  show.
           Of more concern is the reference to a  refworld  document  which
           was not before the parties and upon which the judge  appears  to
           have placed considerable weight.


 3. On 6th May 2020 directions were sent  to  the  parties  setting  out  a
    provisional view expressed by Upper Tribunal  Judge  O'Connor  that  in
    this case it would be appropriate to determine whether  the  making  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an  error  of
    law, and if so, whether that decision should be set  aside,  without  a
    hearing.  He set out directions giving the appellant an opportunity  to
    submit further submissions in writing to support the assertion that the
    decision of the FtT is vitiated by an error  of  law.   The  directions
    also provided an opportunity for the respondent to respond in  writing,
    and, for the appellant to file and serve any further reply.


 4. In response to the directions issued, the  appellant's  representatives
    sent a letter to the Tribunal dated 26th May 2020.  They request a face
    to face oral hearing as  the  appellant  does  not  speak  English  and
    requires an interpreter for the proceedings. They submit the  appellant
    does not have access to modern technology where he  would  be  able  to
    actively take part in a video hearing. Furthermore, they submit the FtT
    Judge relied upon her own post-hearing research and as the parties were
    not given any opportunity to make submissions upon the material, it  is
    important that the appellant is present and can comment upon  what  was
    before the FtT Judge.  The appellant's representatives submit that this
    is not  an  appeal  that  is  suitable  for  determination  by  written
    submissions, and the appeal is not suitable for a  remote  hearing,  by
    video.


 5. The respondent has provided a written response  dated  28th  May  2020.
    The respondent accepts the 'Refworld' document was not a document  that
    was before the FtT and accepts that the appellant had no opportunity to
    address  the  evidence  referred  to  by  the  Judge  in  reaching  her
    conclusion that there  would  be  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the
    appellant and his family. In the circumstances, the  respondent,  quite
    properly in my judgment, does not oppose the appeal  and  submits  that
    the appropriate course is for the decision of the FtT to be  set  aside
    and the appeal to be remitted to the FtT for hearing afresh.


 6. Rule 34 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  provides
    that the Upper Tribunal may make any decision without a  hearing.   The
    Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed by a  party  when
    deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider a matter, and  the  form
    of any such hearing.  In reaching my decision, I have had regard to the
    matters set out in the  letter  from  the  appellant's  representatives
    dated 26 May 2020 and the concerns that they express.


 7. In light of the concession made by the respondent, I am satisfied  that
    it is in accordance with the overriding objective and the interests  of
    justice for there to be a timely determination of the question  whether
    there is an error of law in the  decision  of  the  FtT.   Taking  into
    account the view expressed by the appellant, it is entirely appropriate
    for the error of law decision to be determined on the papers, to secure
    the  proper  administration  of  justice.   There  is   no   procedural
    unfairness to the appellant by my setting aside the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Foudy and remitting the appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for  hearing  afresh  as  proposed  by  the  respondent.   The
    appellant will have a full and proper opportunity to  have  his  appeal
    heard by the First-tier Tribunal when the necessary arrangements can be
    made.


 8. There was, as the respondent accepts, a material error of  law  in  the
    decision of the FtT, and it follows that  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Foudy promulgated on 4th December 2019 is set aside.


 9.  As  to  disposal,  having  considered  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement of 25th September 2012  I  am  satisfied
    that the nature and extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary  will
    be extensive and in my judgement, the appropriate  course  is  for  the
    matter to be remitted to the FtT for hearing afresh  with  no  findings
    preserved.  The parties will be advised of the date of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


10. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of FtT Judge Foudy promulgated  on
    4th December 2019 is set aside, and I remit the matter  for  re-hearing
    de novo in the First-tier Tribunal, with no findings preserved.


Signed      V. Mandalia                            Date  7th July 2020


 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
