
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10637/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 February 2019                  |On 26 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                     SM
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Radford of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Somalia  born  in  2001.   He  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent made on 20 August 2018  to  refuse
    his claim for asylum.

 2. The respondent did not believe the appellant's claim that  he  belonged
    to the Ashraf clan and  that  Al  Shabaab  had  killed  his  father  in
    Mogadishu and that such prompted him, in fear of further attacks, to go
    into hiding and to leave Somalia.

 3. He appealed.

First-tier Hearing

 4. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 2  October  2018  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Stedman dismissed the appeal.

 5. His findings are at paragraph [15ff].  In summary, the judge found that
    the appellant is a member  of  the  Ashraf  clan  [20].   He  did  not,
    however, believe that the  appellant's  father,  a  business  owner  in
    Mogadishu, while he may have been a target for extortion was killed  by
    Al Shabaab.  There was a discrepancy between himself and his aunt as to
    the year of that incident.

 6. Further, the judge did not believe that about a year later in  fear  of
    revenge by the appellant, he had been shot by Al  Shabaab.   Whilst  he
    has a wound to his leg which is consistent with  a  gunshot  wound,  he
    could not say why he thought his attackers were Al  Shabaab;  had  they
    feared revenge they would have acted more quickly; the injury if got in
    the manner claimed would have required hospital treatment.   His  claim
    of not going to hospital for fear of Al Shabaab was also not believed.

 7. The judge concluded that on return the  appellant  "fit  and  healthy,"
    "relatively industrious and confident" would be no  different  "to  any
    other young men of his ethnicity in Mogadishu who are not targeted  for
    any reason."  Further, he has family to whom he can return.

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was refused.   However,
    permission was granted on 18 January 2019 on reapplication to the Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law Hearing

 9. At the error of law hearing before me the grounds  made  three  points.
    Because it was agreed that the decision showed  material  error  it  is
    necessary to refer only to the first, namely that the judge  failed  to
    consider  evidence  given  in  re-examination   when   conducting   the
    credibility assessment.

10. At [27] the judge stated:-

         "... I found that appellant's aunt's evidence that the  appellant's
         father had been killed in 2017 presented a clear inconsistency with
         the appellant's account that his father had been killed in 2014.  I
         find this inconsistency to go to the heart of the claim.  The death
         of the appellant's father by  the  Al  Shabaab  and  the  effective
         targeting of the family thereafter would surely have been  a  basic
         conversation point between the appellant and the witness.  I do not
         think that it is a minor matter.   I  find  that  it  substantially
         detracts from the credibility of the main account."

11. The problem is that  it  was  agreed  by  Ms  Cunha  that  the  judge's
    understanding of the evidence was incorrect.  During re-examination the
    appellant's aunt clarified that she had only heard of  the  appellant's
    father's death in 2017, not that it took place in 2017.

12. As indicated, it is clear that the judge placed  a  substantial  weight
    upon this inconsistency to the point that he stated: "it  substantially
    detracts from the credibility of the main account"  and  goes  to  "the
    heart of the claim".

13. However, he failed to mention that  this  had  been  clarified  at  re-
    examination and did not even consider the re-examination evidence.

14. I agreed with parties that  in  failing  to  have  regard  to  material
    evidence the judge erred.

15. In light of the importance he placed on  the  inconsistency  such  must
    taint his other findings  including,  as  Ms  Cunha  pointed  out,  the
    availability of family in Mogadishu.  It was agreed that the case  must
    be reheard.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows material  error  of  law.
    It is set aside.  The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate
    under Section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007
    and Practice Statement 7.2 to remit to the First-tier Tribunal  for  an
    entirely  fresh  hearing  on  all  issues.   No  findings  stand.   The
    member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to consider  the  case  are
    not to include Judge Stedman.

17. An anonymity order is made.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   Failure  to
    comply with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date 22 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

