
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/10123/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 July 2019                       |On 12 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                             & UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  HAMZA [Y]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by McGlashan
                    MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Gillespie, promulgated on 26 November 2018.

 2. The grounds are firstly directed against paragraphs 48 and  57  of  the
    decision, where the judge declined to accept the appellants' account of
    their travel history and of the loss of their passports.

 3. That line was not taken in the respondent's decision, so the appellants
    had not been on notice that those assertions might be in issue.

 4. Since the hearing in the FtT, the appellants have tendered evidence  to
    support their claims about their travel history, and  to  show  that  a
    report was made to the police at the claimed time  about  the  loss  of
    their passports.

 5. Procedural unfairness is established.  We are satisfied that the  error
    was capable of making a material difference to the outcome.  The  judge
    gave other reasons, but this aspect is mentioned at the  beginning  and
    again at the end of his consideration, in which it evidently  played  a
    significant part.  We cannot say  that  on  excising  this  error,  the
    outcome must have been the same.

 6. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

 7. The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate under section  12
    of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to the  FtT
    for an entirely fresh hearing.  The member(s)  of  the  FtT  chosen  to
    consider the case are not to include Judge Gillespie.

 8. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]
            9 July 2019
            UT Judge Macleman




