
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/10071/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 April 2018                           |On 1 May 2018                     |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     RM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Franco, Counsel instructed by Schneider
                    Goldstein
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer

Anonymity:

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on [ ] 1976 who entered
    the UK as a visitor in February 2008. On 29 March 2017 he claimed
    asylum. The application was refused on 22 September 2017. The appellant
    appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul. In
    a decision promulgated on 27 November 2017, the judge dismissed the
    appeal. The appellant is now appealing against that decision.

 2. The appellant claims to be at risk of persecution in Bangladesh because
    of his involvement with and support for the Bangladesh National party
    (BNP). He claims that in 2006 a case was filed against him because of
    fighting with the Awami League following which he was arrested and
    detained for two weeks before being granted bail. He claims that he
    was, and would be, targeted because he was well-known and politically
    active, and that in February 2010 he was sentenced in his absence to 4
    years in prison. He also claims that the police have visited his home
    in Bangladesh and that his family face problems because of him. In
    addition, the appellant claims to have been involved in BNP politics
    whilst in the UK.

 3. In support of his claim, the appellant adduced, inter alia, a warrant
    for his arrest and a First Information Report which he claims to have
    obtained through his advocate in Bangladesh; a letter from the BNP
    office in London; and photographs of a meeting in London with the vice
    chairman of the BNP. He also relied on supportive witness statements
    (and oral evidence given at the First-tier Tribunal hearing) from his
    sister and cousin.

 4. The appellant's explanation for not applying for asylum between 2008
    and 2017 was that he was advised by a solicitor in 2008 that if he made
    an application he would be arrested. He also claims that he paid a firm
    of solicitors to make a human rights application and believed he had a
    pending application, but the firm subsequently disappeared.

 5. The respondent did not accept that the appellant was or had been a
    member of the BNP or that he had been arrested or sentenced in his
    absence and refused his application.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The judge identified the core issue as being whether the appellant's
    claim to be a BNP activist was credible. The judge did not accept the
    appellant's account of being a BNP activist and gave several reasons:

      1) The judge found the appellant's answers in his asylum interview to
         be formulaic and "no more than anybody could say if they were
         pretending that they were in fact activists".

      2) The judge was critical of the appellant's demeanour. At paragraph
         19 the judge stated: "I also took into account the appellant's
         demeanour during the course of the interview, and his background."

      3) The judge found, at paragraph 19, that the letter of support and
         photographs of the appellant at BNP events "were not supported by
         oral testimony and did not indicate that he was a genuine BNP
         supporter.

      4) The judge weighed against the appellant the delay in making the
         application and did not accept his claim to have instructed
         solicitors to make a human rights application or of having been
         advised to not apply for asylum.

      5) The judge also weighed against the appellant that the appellant's
         lawyer from Bangladesh had not explained how he procured the
         documentation about the arrest.

 7. The appellant made a human rights claim. The judge addressed this in a
    single paragraph, where he stated that the appellant had "not
    demonstrated there were any significant obstacles to his returning to
    Bangladesh where he has close family and cultural ties".

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 8. There are multiple grounds of appeal. The key arguments, in sum, are
    that:

      1) The judge directed himself that the standard of proof was "a
         relatively low standard" and it impossible to say what standard was
         actually applied.

      2) The judge referred to the appellant's demeanour "at interview" when
         he was not present at the asylum interview.

      3) The judge improperly found that evidence in the form of photographs
         and a letter should be discounted because they were not supported
         by oral testimony.

      4) The judge should have "considered with greater care' the witness
         evidence about the solicitor who prepared the human rights
         application disappearing.

      5) The judge erred by not accepting the appellant's claim that he was
         advised that if he made an asylum claim he would be detained and at
         risk of deportation without appreciating that in light of the
         discrediting of the fast track system this advice was arguably
         correct.

      6) The judge erred by misapplying the Tanvir Ahmed standard when, at
         paragraph 22, he characterised it as "applying the ordinary
         principles of common sense".

      7) The judge erred by failing to deal properly with the appellant's
         article 8 ECHR claim.

 9. At the error of law hearing, Mr Franco argued that the judge erred by
    applying himself principally to the delay in making the asylum
    application and that this "infected" his assessment of the claim with
    the consequence that inadequate consideration was given to evidence
    supporting the claim such as the documents from Bangladesh confirming
    the arrest.

10. Mr Franco also argued that the judge's reference to Tanveer Ahmed being
    a "common sense" standard showed a mis-understanding of the law. He
    also maintained that the judge's comment at paragraph 22 that "The
    documents have not been subject to an independent verification in the
    UK" indicated a degree of misunderstanding by the judge given that any
    meaningful verification would necessarily have to take place in
    Bangladesh, not in the UK.

11. Mr Franco was also critical of the judge's failure (as he saw it) to
    address the letter from the BNP in the UK. He also maintained that the
    judge had relied on speculation when, at paragraph 21, he stated that
    members of the appellant's community would have been aware of the
    asylum process.

12. Ms Willocks-Briscoe's response was that the judge had applied the law
    correctly and had given adequate reasons. She argued that the judge was
    entitled to give weight to the delay in making the application and his
    approach to documentary evidence was consistent with Tanveer Ahmed.

Analysis

13. I reject the appellant's submission that the judge applied the wrong
    standard of proof. At paragraph 19 the judge referred to there being a
    "relatively low standard." On any legitimate view, this is a reference
    to the lower standard of proof applicable in asylum claims. There is
    nothing in the substance of the decision to indicate that the judge did
    not follow his own direction to apply the lower standard.

14. I also reject the claim that the judge misapplied or misunderstood
    Tanveer Ahmed. Although it is unclear why the judge has referred to
    there being a "common sense" test, the point the judge appears to be
    making at paragraph 22 is that he needed to consider the reliability of
    the documents the appellant sought to rely on. Whether or not this is
    "common sense" it is adequately clear from the decision that the judge
    has adopted the approach required by Tanveer Ahmed.

15. The appellant's case is not advanced by the submission that the judge
    at paragraph 19 referred to the appellant's demeanour at the asylum
    interview despite not being present. It is readily apparent, when
    reading paragraph 19 as a whole that the judge was referring to the
    hearing (and reference to the interview was a mis-statement). It may be
    that the judge ought not to have drawn a negative inference from his
    perception of the appellant's demeanour without, at the very least,
    giving a clear explanation (which the judge has not done). However,
    this is not an argument that was made in the grounds or by Mr Franco.

16. Similarly, there is no merit to the argument that the judge ought to
    have considered with greater care the evidence of witnesses about the
    appellant's claimed human rights application in 2008 through solicitors
    who disappeared. There was no evidence before the judge to corroborate
    that the solicitors existed; that instructions were given to
    solicitors; that solicitors were paid; or that an application was made.
    In these circumstances, it was clearly open to the judge to not accept
    the appellant's account concerning the instruction of solicitors to
    make a human rights application.

17. The judge was also entitled to reject the appellant's claim that he was
    following advice when he decided not to make an asylum application and
    to find that the appellant's community would be aware of the asylum
    procedure. The appellant's case was that he was involved with the BNP
    in the UK. Indeed, to support his claim he submitted a letter from a
    leading BNP member in the UK. In these circumstances, it is not
    speculation, as argued by Mr Franco, to make the observation that the
    appellant would have come into contact with people familiar with asylum
    applications.

18. The appellant's argument that he was correct to not apply for asylum
    because the fast track system has been "discredited" is misconceived.
    The relevant consideration is what the appellant is likely to have been
    told when he first came to the UK regarding the making of an asylum
    application, not what the Court of Appeal decided many years later
    about an aspect of the Immigration System that may or may not have been
    relevant to the appellant had he made a timely application.

19. Mr Franco contended that the judge's focus on the delay in making an
    application clouded his assessment of other factors and there has been
    a failure to give proper reasons for rejecting the appellant's
    credibility. However, I reject this argument for two reasons. Firstly,
    at paragraph 20, the judge correctly summarised the significance of
    delay, stating that it was a material but not determinative
    consideration. Secondly, although the judge undoubtedly gave
    substantial weight to the delay, he gave other reasons, unrelated to
    the delay, to explain why the appellant's credibility was rejected,
    such as the (non)reliability of the documentary evidence and the
    "formulaic" responses in the asylum interview.

20. I remind myself of Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013]
    UKUT 85 (IAC), where the headnote states:


             (1) Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation
             of the conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal  is
             determined,  those  reasons  need  not  be  extensive  if  the
             decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to the material
             accepted by the judge.


             (2)  Although a decision may contain an error of law where the
             requirements to give adequate reasons are not met,  the  Upper
             Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the First-
             tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection of law, the
             fact-finding process cannot be  criticised  and  the  relevant
             Country Guidance has  been  taken  into  account,  unless  the
             conclusions the judge draws from the  primary  data  were  not
             reasonably open to him or her.

21. This is a case where the judge has directed himself correctly to the
    law, considered the material issues and evidence that were before him,
    and carried out an adequate fact finding process. The judge's reasons,
    although brief, are understandable and adequate; and it is readily
    apparent, when reading the decision as a whole, why the appellant was
    unsuccessful. For the reasons give above, I am satisfied that the judge
    has not made a material error of law.



Decision

22. The appeal is dismissed.

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material
    error of law and stands.
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  29 April 2018        |


