
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                        Appeal   Number:
PA/10596/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 25 April 2019                        |                                 |
|                                        |On 08 August 2019                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                             Mr Deonarine Sukul
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Appearances:

For the Appellant:     Ms Sood, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Guyana, date  of  birth  1  January  1968,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 9 November  2015,  to
    make a deportation order because the decision to deport him placed  the
    UK in breach of its obligations under the European Convention on  Human
    Rights.

2.   It was plain, and it has never really  been  argued  to  the  contrary,
    that there was a wholly proper basis for the deportation  order,  given
    the provisions of Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act and the fact that
    the Appellant had been convicted of criminal offences which had led  to
    his being sentenced to eight years' imprisonment on 14 June  2013.  The
    offences appear to have occurred in 2011.  It therefore  followed  that
    there was an important and strong case in favour  of  his  deportation.
    As such therefore the relevant provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    particularly paragraphs A398, 398C, 399(a) as well as 399A, fell to  be
    considered.

3.   His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Beech who on 26  March
    2018 allowed the appeal on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted in the Upper Tribunal on  20  December  2018  and  I
    considered the error of law issues at a hearing on 5 March 2019.

4.   I concluded that the judge  had  provided  a  detailed  and  considered
    decision, that all findings of fact were to stand but that I  concluded
    the judge had not sufficiently reasoned why the provisions  of  Section
    117C (6) of the NIAA 2002 applied.  I did not  disagree  with  the  law
    which the judge applied, so much as the sufficiency  of  the  reasoning
    that was given. The relevant relationship between the need  to  provide
    circumstances which are very compelling circumstances  over  and  above
    those provided within paragraphs 399 (unduly harsh)  or  399A(c)  which
    may in short be referred  to  as  the  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration into Guyana are understood and by the provisions of Section
    117C (6) as  the  judge  correctly  pointed  out  the  public  interest
    requires deportation unless there were very  compelling  circumstances,
    over and above those described in Exception 1 or Exception 2 of Section
    117C(4)(5).  The findings made by the judge on Exception 1 (D66-67) and
    Exception 2 (D 60-61) stand.

5.   The relationship under the Rules was clarified by  NA  Pakistan  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 661 in which the Court of Appeal rejected the Upper Tribunal's
    interpretation of Section117C(6) of the NIAA 2002  , with reference  to
    serious offenders under the legislative provisions. The Court of Appeal
    stated "[58]..... Matters relevant to  an  assessment  whether  a  case
    falls within Exception 1 and Exception 2 may also be  relevant  to  the
    assessment under  Section  117C(6)  where  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and  2."
    The Court of Appeal has rejected the approach that  the  considerations
    must be, in effect, greater than the  circumstances  which  to  qualify
    under Exceptions 1 or 2.

6.   It was conceded before the Court of Appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    that the evidence does not necessarily have to be over and  above  that
    which  was  of  the  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  but
    sufficient to show that it was a truly exceptional case when  assessing
    the Article 8 issues of proportionality.

7.   For the avoidance of doubt I have reached  my  conclusion  in  remaking
    this case on the basis of the findings of fact  fully  and  extensively
    set out by Judge Beech in her decision  (D),  of  which  there  was  no
    material criticism by the parties.  Judge Beech helpfully set  out  the
    background of the Appellant's presence in  the  UK  and  there  was  no
    challenge to the findings that she  made  that  such  was  his  history
    within the United Kingdom that within the terms of Exception 1 (Section
    117C(4) ) there were very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    integration into Guyana, the country to which he  was  proposed  to  be
    deported(D62-68).  Similarly there was no  material  challenge  to  the
    judge's findings on the genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with the qualifying children(D50) (Section 117C (5)),  of  whom  I  was
    told the eldest A, date of birth 11 December 2004, had commenced living
    with his father, whilst his father maintained contact, as the judge had
    found, with the child M, date of birth 10 February  2007,  (D50).   The
    Appellant's involvement in caring on a full-time basis for child A  was
    not materially challenged before me. The Judge found the Appellant also
    had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his three older
    children who were not qualifying children  (50)  for  the  purposes  of
    Section117C.

8.   It seemed to me that that change in circumstance of A  was  undoubtedly
    material and  gave more weight  to  the  issue,  which  the  judge  had
    considered, of the impact of the Appellant's removal  on  the  children
    and their best interests as much as to evidence relating to the ability
    of the mother of A and M to cope with bringing the children up  on  her
    own.

9.   Ms Sood, Counsel for the Appellant, argued much the same points on  the
    legal issues and the facts before me as  had  been  put  to  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Beech.  Similarly, before me, the  judge's  findings  on
    whether it was unduly harsh for the children to live in Guyana were not
    challenged (D60).  I note (D61) that the judge found the  evidence  did
    not show the effects  of  the  deportation  of  the  Appellant  on  the
    children would be unduly harsh if they remained in the UK  without  the
    Appellant.  I take into account the factual change that  has  occurred,
    not least with A no longer remaining  with  his  mother.   This  was  a
    matter upon which there was evidence at the hearing and it did not seem
    to me that Mr Clarke was arguing that that change in circumstances  did
    not bear on the issue of whether it was unduly harsh  to  separate  the
    Appellant and the children, particularly A.

10.  As I have indicated, the Judge very fully and extensively set  out  the
    obstacles to integration and why Exception 1 would apply.  I  take  the
    view that the emphasis to be given to the relationship with A  and  the
    role the Appellant was playing to a greater extent was material to  the
    issue of unduly harsh.  I concluded that it would be unsettling  indeed
    for the child  A  but  given  the  relatively  recent  nature  of  that
    relationship in terms of  living  with  his  father,  but  it  has  not
    elevated that element of the case to being unduly  harsh  in  terms  of
    separation of the Appellant from A or M for the purposes of  Exception2
    (Section 117C (5) ).

11.  I, therefore, following the approach helpfully identified in  the  case
    of Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60, have taken the judge's findings and  used
    them as a  platform  for  my  own  conclusions  on  whether  there  are
    circumstances over and above those identified within Section  117C  (6)
    of the NIAA 2002.

12.   The  judge  accepted  that  there  was  a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship between the Appellant and A and M, as  well  as  with  his
    older children by a different relationship.  Those older children  were
    adults.  The  judge  accepted  that  context  and  the  role  that  the
    Appellant played in the life of his mother.  There was  no  doubt  that
    the Appellant's criminality was of a  very  serious  nature,  involving
    untold potential for damage to UK society and people living within  it,
    as well as confidence in society.

13.    The following points were made on Appellant behalf.   First,  he  has
    not reoffended.  Secondly, he  understood  and  has  insight  into  the
    significance of his criminality. He has been  rehabilitated.   Thirdly,
    that the Appellant played an active role in the care  of  his  children
    and whilst of course he has not been able to work he has supported them
    in other  ways.  To  return  him  to  Guyana  would  effectively  sever
    meaningful contact with A and M.  Fourthly, the  positive  element  was
    the direct approach that the Appellant has taken in the upbringing of A
    in terms of giving him guidance, notwithstanding his  own  criminality.
    At least some confidence can be found in that his three older  children
    are all law-abiding and responsible individuals.

         Fifthly, in his favour was said to be the fact  that  it  would  be
    very difficult, given his age (about 51 years) and  when  he  left  his
    home country aged 14, that he would have difficulties in making a  life
    for himself there  in  Guyana.   Sixthly,  it  was  said  that  he  has
    rehabilitated himself and whilst the public would have concerns about a
    convicted foreign criminal remaining in the United Kingdom he will  not
    reoffend. Seventhly there was also a public interest in the children be
    brought up with both parents playing their roles.

14.  I accept, in his  favour,  the  impact  of  his  criminality  which  he
    understood upon family members in the UK. Although he  may  have  to  a
    degree exaggerated it he has been involved at least  in  care  for  his
    mother.  I consider that the Appellant  had  been  maintaining  contact
    with his children who at least one if not  both  visited  him  when  in
    prison, he has family support from an older  half-sibling  and  he  has
    meaningful relationships within his family in  the  UK.   I  take  into
    account the positive comments made by the  Probation  Service  and  the
    position of a potential employer but it seemed to me essentially  those
    are neutral points and to be expected of someone if they seek  to  show
    circumstances which outweigh the public interest in  removal  and  show
    that the Respondent's considerations are disproportionate.

15.  It did not seem to me that the children M and  A  could  reasonably  be
    asked to go and live in Guyana, even if their mother agreed  which  she
    did not, but plainly the impact on them would be of some  significance.
    The Appellant has moved away from his  criminal  associations  and  has
    managed to obtain work trials and been offered employment not just from
    charitable organisations but also a business.  I find the Appellant has
    turned his life around and plainly has done so in the  context  of  the
    greater understanding of the consequences of his criminality on his two
    minor children and wider family.

16.     The Appellant continued to be involved in the life of  child  M,  in
    having contact and dealing with for  example,  her  homework/timetable.
    The Appellant said, which was not challenged, that  since  his  release
    from prison, healthcare concerns about his daughter M  have  diminished
    as she has greater confidence in her contact with him.  I note that the
    Appellant was the testamentary and spiritual guardian to  his  sister's
    five children in the UK and the extent to  which  he  was  involved  in
    their lives.   I noted the  child  A  has  reached  a  relatively  more
    important period in  his  educational  development  and  there  was  no
    challenge to the evidence of how the Appellant expressed  his  control,
    organisation of his son's life, the part he plays in caring for him and
    controlling his lifestyle in a manner which only  a  'hands-on'  father
    could probably do.

17.     It seemed to me that  these  factors  do  demonstrate  circumstances
    which show that they take this matter over and above the  circumstances
    arising under Section 117C(4)  Exception 1  and that the impact of  his
    being deported, in terms of the adverse effect  upon  his  two  British
    children whose best interests lie in remaining in the  UK,  demonstrate
    that they are sufficient to meet the requirements of the  Section  117C
    (6) . I  find  these  matters  show  that  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstance over and above those in Exception  1  which  outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation

18.  For these reasons I find that the appeal should  be  allowed.   I  have
    not set out the many pages of  the  judge's  careful  analysis  of  the
    evidence but since her findings stand  and  there  was  no  substantive
    challenge by Mr Clarke to the substance of any  additional  evidence  I
    heard and accept it in that context.

DECISION

The appeal is allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order was sought and none is required.

FEE AWARD

No fee was paid and therefore no fee award is appropriate.
[pic]
Signed                                  Date 20 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
