
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/10222/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |        Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th August 2017                   |        On 15th August 2017           |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     FA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Libya.


 2. Both parties, with permission, appeal against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge T. Jones), who, in a determination promulgated  on
    the 10th March 2017, dismissed FA's claim for protection.

 3. The Appellant's immigration history is set out within the determination
    and the decision letter of the 8th September 2016. The Appellant  is  a
    national of Libya and he is married  with  children  all  of  whom  are
    Libyan citizens and are presently within the United Kingdom.  In  terms
    of his immigration history, he applied for a student Visa on 5 May 2008
    valid until August 2009. He entered the United Kingdom on 27 July  2008
    and then applied to further leave to remain  as  a  student  which  was
    granted in 2009 and his leave was extended to 2010.  He  then  made  an
    application for a student dependent Visa and was issued from April 2010
    until January 2011. He entered the UK using this Visa in April 2010. He
    applied for a second visa on 31 May 2011 and this Visa was  issued  and
    valid from 6 June 2011 until 31 July 2015.

 4. Whilst in the UK with extant leave he made a claim for asylum on 27 May
    2015.  Thereafter he was interviewed on the 24th November 2015  and  he
    provided documentary evidence in support of his claim.  His  claim  was
    refused in a decision letter of the 8th September 2016.

 5. The basis of his claim is set out in the decision  letter  and  in  the
    determination at paragraphs 11-19. In essence it was  claimed  that  he
    had formed an association in  Libya  in  order  to  educate  people  to
    distance themselves from the Islamic  militia  groups.  It  was  common
    ground that he had minimal involvement with the group as  he  had  been
    studying in the UK and had only spent two or three weeks in Libya since
    2013 but that he had kept in touch  with  that  particular  group.  The
    Appellant claimed that as a result of this group IS  were  looking  for
    him and gave an account of them  having  detained  and  questioned  his
    brothers and cousin and that three members of his group had died in two
    separate incidents.

 6. The Secretary of State did not accept the factual basis of his  account
    relating to the protection claim. The documents that he  provided  were
    considered at paragraphs 27 to 35 but it was found that those documents
    did not give weight to his claim. Whilst it was not  accepted  that  he
    was of any adverse interest to IS,  the  decision  letter  went  on  to
    consider internal relocation at paragraphs 43 to 48 it  was  considered
    that he could relocate  to  another  city  in  Libya.  It  was  further
    considered that there were no substantial grounds for believing that he
    faced a real risk of serious harm and  that  he  was  not  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection. The decision letter also  considered  Appendix
    FM and paragraph 276 ADE and leave outside of the Rules relating to  an
    Article 8 claim. In this  respect,  in  the  light  of  his  individual
    circumstances   it   was   decided   that   there   were   "exceptional
    circumstances"  and  that  it  would  be  appropriate  to   grant   him
    discretionary leave outside of the rules for a limited period. Thus his
    claim for protection was refused on asylum grounds and that he was  not
    entitled to humanitarian protection, but that it was decided  to  grant
    him discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside of  the
    rules until March 2019. It appears that that also applies to his family
    members who are his dependents.

 7. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 23rd  February  2017.
    The judge had the opportunity of hearing the evidence of the  Appellant
    and for his evidence  to  be  the  subject  of  cross-examination.  The
    findings are set out at paragraphs 31 to 48. He made reference  to  the
    Country  Guidance  decision  of  AT  and   Others(Article   15c;   risk
    categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 00318 and set out  the  head  note  to
    that decision.

 8.  At  paragraph  33  he  made  reference  to  the  Home  Office  country
    information guidance dated June 2016 and  at  paragraph  34  cited  the
    decision of the Tribunal in FA (Libya: Art 15 (c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT
    00413 to the effect that the country guidance case of AT was  heard  as
    long ago as November  2013  and  that  situation  in  Libya  is  "ever-
    changing".

 9. His findings of fact relating to the protection claim are  set  out  at
    paragraphs 30 to 41. In summary, the judge rejected his  factual  claim
    in its entirety. It is not necessary for me to set out  those  findings
    as there is no challenge to the judge's credibility  findings  in  this
    regard in the written grounds of appeal.

10. At paragraphs  42  to  48  he  considered  the  issue  of  humanitarian
    protection. In this context he  considered  the  argument  advanced  on
    behalf of the Appellant  that  the  indiscriminate  violence  in  Libya
    constituted a risk which met the Article 15 (c) threshold. In  reaching
    his conclusions, the judge at paragraph  43  rejected  the  Appellant's
    argument that the situation  throughout  Libya  amounted  to  an  armed
    conflict that raised a risk of serious harm. He found as follows " I do
    not find the country guidance decision to support this. I do  not  have
    the benefit of background material or country experts report to  assist
    me to determine otherwise."

11. At paragraph 44 he considered the issue of return being  "unduly  harsh
    or unreasonable". He made reference to a FCO  annual  report  regarding
    Libya for 2015 which made reference to "armed groups  continue  to  act
    with impunity" and described "indiscriminate  weapons  fire,  including
    shelling by Armed Forces on both sides of the national conflict, caused
    high numbers of civilian casualties, particularly in Benghazi,  and  in
    the suburbs of Tripoli." He then set out  the  country  information  at
    paragraph 2.4.1 which referred to travel within Libya being  restricted
    by violence and conflict.  It  made  reference  to  roadblocks  control
    points and that the south of the country was subject to checkpoints and
    roadblocks operated by the government by militias.

12. At paragraph 45 of the  determination  he  noted  that  there  were  no
    enforced returns to Libya and that whilst there was one airport that he
    had been told of, but in the absence of documents from the Secretary of
    State, he recalled flights being very limited  and  intermittent  given
    the "ever-changing security situation". He recorded that "I take as  an
    indication of the dangerous situation in Libya".


13. The judge made reference to the head note in FA(Libya) (as  cited)  and
    in particular, that the question of whether a person is that Article 15
    (c  )  risk  in  Libya  should,  until  further  country  guidance,  be
    determined on  the  basis  of  the  individual  evidence  in  the  case
    concluded as follows:

    "48. I have considered  all  the  individual  evidence  in  this  case,
    including the circumstances of the Appellant. I  understand  and  taken
    account all that  has  been  said  as  a  difficulty  with  travel  and
    checkpoints, and its overview, have read the reference noted  above  is
    to no enforced returns in light of this {52 above} is such-that  whilst
    I am not satisfied there is an Article 15 ( c) risk if he  were  to  be
    returned at this time to his home area. I find that any endeavour to do
    so, would be unreasonable or unduly harsh - though in saying  this,  it
    has to be recognised situation is ever-changing. The Appellant and  his
    family situation will doubtless be revisited in the due course  and  in
    light of their circumstances at the time."

14. In the notice of decision  he  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  1951
    Convention and the 1950 convention but stated as follows;

         "I do not allow the appeal under the qualification directive, but I
         ALLOW the appeal due to return being unreasonable or  unduly  harsh
         for the Appellant at this time."

15. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision  on  the  basis
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law. It was submitted  that
    the judge at paragraph [44 had noted from the  evidence  from  the  FCO
    regarding the country conditions in Libya and concluded that they  were
    "unduly harsh and unreasonable". Furthermore, the judge found  this  to
    be an "indication of the dangerous situation in Libya" (see  [45)).  It
    was arguable that the finding that the Appellant could  not  return  to
    Libya because it was "unduly harsh and unreasonable" was  due  to  risk
    persecution/breach of humanitarian protection. Thus  it  was  concluded
    that the determination disclosed material errors of law.

16. The Respondent also  sought  permission  to  appeal  on  the  following
    grounds.

               1) It was submitted that it was unclear  on  what  basis  the
                  judge had allowed the appeal. Having found  the  Appellant
                  did  not  satisfy   the   Refugee   Convention   nor   the
                  Qualification Directive, he  allowed  the  appeal  on  the
                  basis that return would be unduly harsh. It  was  asserted
                  that that was error of law.

               2)  Furthermore the judge had failed to give adequate reasons
                  as to why the Appellant would be unable  to  return  given
                  the fact that he has no specific profile which would place
                  him at any enhanced risk.

               3) It was submitted that the judge had failed  to  apply  the
                  relevant case law and had set  out  the  country  guidance
                  decision  of  AT  and  others,  however  in  allowing  the
                  Appellant's appeal on the basis the return would be unduly
                  harsh, he failed to apply  the  findings  in  the  country
                  guidance to his decision. The Appellant is a  person  with
                  no enhanced profile and does not satisfy  the  refugee  or
                  humanitarian  protection  conventions  and  thus  he  fits
                  within the categories of failed asylum seeker only and  as
                  such, country guidance indicates that it  will  be  up  to
                  return safely to Tripoli and would either travel  overland
                  to his home area or relocate to another area (paragraph 15
                  and 21).

               4) As the Appellant  had  been  granted  discretionary  leave
                  valid until 2019, it was submitted that  the  question  of
                  return at the date of hearing being unduly harsh does  not
                  arise. It is a  matter  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
                  consider the point of removal.

17. On  29  March  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nightingale  granted
    permission to both parties for the following reasons:

    " the Appellant's grounds argue that the judge erred in concluding that
    the  harshness  of  the  conditions  did  not  meet  the  qualification
    directive. The respondent argues the judge's reasoning is  unclear  and
    the basis upon which the appeal was allowed is unclear. The  respondent
    also argues that  the  country  guidance  of  AT  and  others  was  not
    followed.

    AT and others have now been replaced as country guidance  by  FA.  This
    ground is not arguable. It is arguable, however, that  the  basis  upon
    which the appeal was allowed is unclear. The Respondents ground one  is
    arguable.

    It is also arguable that the judge failed to have regard to the "unduly
    harsh  and   unreasonable"   conditions   in   assessing   humanitarian
    protection. The Appellant's grounds are also arguable.

    It is also arguable that the judge had no  jurisdiction  to  allow  the
    appeal on the basis stated.

    Permission is granted to both  the  Appellant  and  the  respondent  as
    indicated above."

18. Since the promulgation of the First-tier Tribunal's decision  in  March
    2017, there has been a further Country Guidance decision issued  by  an
    Upper Tribunal presidential panel reported on 28 June 2017  as  as  ZMM
    (Article 15 (c) Libya CG[2017] UKUT 00263 (IAC).

19. The head note to that decision reads as follows :

    "the violence in Libya has  reached  such  high-level  but  substantial
    grounds are shown believing that a returning civilian would, solely  on
    account of his presence on the territory of  that  country  or  region,
    face a real risk of being subject to a threat to his life or person."

20. Since the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  the  grant  of
    permission a letter was sent on 3 August 2017 to the Respondent  making
    reference to the decision in ZMM (as cited)  and  requesting  that  the
    appeal should be allowed at  the  hearing  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.

21. At the hearing before me, there was agreement between the parties  that
    there was a material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that the decision should be set aside and remade  by  this
    Tribunal by substituting a decision to allow the appeal on the basis of
    Article 15 (c) and allowing the appeal on that ground.

22. In the light of the submissions made by the parties  in  their  written
    grounds and in the agreement reached before the  Tribunal,  that  there
    was a material error of law in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, it is the case that the decision  reached  cannot  stand  and
    must be set aside. I am satisfied that the judge did error  in  law  as
    both parties have submitted. It is plain from reading the determination
    and the grounds from each of the parties that there is no challenge  to
    the judges finding that the Appellant  had  not  demonstrated  that  he
    would be at risk of persecution for a Convention reason  and  thus  had
    dismissed his claim for asylum based  on  the  factual  account  given.
    However there was an alternative argument advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant which related to the issue  of  humanitarian  protection  and
    Article 15 (c). In this respect the judge appeared  to  find  that  the
    Appellant was not entitled to humanitarian protection but  allowed  the
    appeal due to return  being  "unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant at this time" which made reference to the route of return. As
    the respondent submitted it was unclear how the judge could  allow  the
    appeal in those terms having found the Appellants did not  satisfy  the
    Refugee Convention nor that he was entitled to humanitarian protection.
    Similarly, as the Appellant submits, if the judge found, as he appeared
    to do that the circumstances were  such  that  the  circumstances  were
    dangerous for returnees  to  Libya  (having  referred  to  the  country
    materials and in particular,  the  FCO  report)  then  he  should  have
    allowed the appeal having found an Article 15 (c) risk.

23. In the light of the decision of the most  recent  country  guidance  as
    referred to in the preceding paragraphs, the Appellant's appeal will be
    remade. Both advocates submit that the correct course  and  outcome  is
    that the appeal should be allowed on the basis of Article 15 (c).

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. The decision is set aside and remade as  follows;  I
    remake the decision in respect of Article 15 (c) by allowing the appeal
    on that ground.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

  [pic]                             Date 14/8/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
