
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10375/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22nd June 2017                         |On 3rd July 2017                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                     y h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ramzan Sharif (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lodge sitting at Birmingham on 30th November  2016.
    The Appellant had appealed the Respondent's decision to  refuse  asylum
    dated 13th September 2016 and in respect of Article 8 of  the  European
    Human Rights Convention.

 2. The Grounds of Appeal state that the Appellant, who is  a  national  of
    Eritrea born on 21st February 1993, had  a  witness  appearing  on  his
    behalf by the name of Tersit Gebru.  Despite the fact  that  the  judge
    recorded her oral evidence (at paragraphs 16 to 18), the record of  her
    evidence does not reflect the contents of  her  witness  statement  (at
    paragraphs 37 to 40 of the Appellant's bundle) which makes  clear  that
    she knew the Appellant in Eritrea between 2000 and 2002.

 3. On 20th March 2017, the Upper Tribunal granted permission on the  basis
    of the failure to engage with and make findings on the evidence of  the
    witness arguably rendered  the  judge's  findings  on  the  Appellant's
    nationality and his credibility flawed and unsustainable.

 4. On 20th April 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect that the Respondent did not oppose the
    Appellant's application  for  permission  to  appeal  and  invited  the
    Tribunal to determine the appeal with fresh oral (continuance) hearing,
    because the judge did not appear to have made any findings with regards
    to the Appellant's witness, Tersit Gebru.

 5. At the hearing before me on 22nd June  2017  Mr  Sharif,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, relied upon the Grounds of  Appeal,  but  also
    stated that in the light of  the  Rule  24  response,  the  appropriate
    course of action now was that this matter should be  remitted  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, so  that  evidence  of  Tersit  Gebru  can  be
    properly heard, properly recorded, and properly evaluated.   In  reply,
    Mr Mills, appearing as Senior Home Office Presenting Officer,  accepted
    that this must be the appropriate course of  action  because  not  only
    does the Rule 24 response accept that there is an error of law, but  if
    there is such an error,  then  the  entire  basis  of  the  credibility
    findings in relation to the Appellant, comes cascading down.  In  these
    circumstances, the  appeal  has  to  be  reheard  completely  with  the
    evidence taken again.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed to the extent that it is remitted back to a judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal, to be reheard again, other  than  Judge  Lodge,  at  the
    earliest convenience, given that there was a failure to properly record
    the evidence of Tersit Gebru, because that evidence  went  directly  to
    the Appellant's nationality, and the credibility of his claim.

 7. An anonymity direction is made.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 2nd July 2017

