
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10938/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 7th December 2018                  |on 11th January 2019           |
|                                      |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     MU
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr E MacKay, McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Debra Clapham dismissing an appeal on protection and human
      rights grounds.

   2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He claims to be at risk
      from the authorities in Sri Lanka because of his brother's connection
      with the LTTE.  His brother had a shop in Sri Lanka where he and his
      business partner bought gold from members of the LTTE.  The appellant
      claims that he was detained twice, in December 2008 and July 2009, and
      was tortured.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not believe
      the appellant's evidence.

   3. Lengthy grounds seeking permission to appeal were lodged.  Permission
      was granted on the general grounds that the judge arguably did not
      have regard to the totality of the evidence and did not give adequate
      reasons when making her adverse credibility finding.

   4. At the hearing before me the focus was on the 7th and 8th grounds of
      the application.  The 8th ground concerned the judge's finding at
      paragraph 132 of her decision that it was not credible that, if the
      appellant had escaped from detention as he claimed, he would have been
      able to walk through the airport in Sri Lanka with a passport in his
      own identity.  For the respondent, Mrs O'Brien rightly acknowledged
      that the judge failed to take into account the explanation given by
      the appellant at paragraph 27 of his witness statement to the effect
      that his father had paid a substantial bribe through an agent to
      facilitate the appellant's travel to the UK.

   5. The 7th ground concerned the judge's finding at paragraph 130 of her
      decision to the effect that there was no indication that the person
      who helped the appellant escape from detention in August 2009 was
      seeking a bribe.  This finding did not take into account paragraph 27
      of the appellant's witness statement, where he said the man wanted a
      bribe, which was paid by the appellant's father.  Mrs O'Brien again
      acknowledged that in making her finding the judge failed to have
      regard to this evidence.

   6. It is not necessary for me to examine in further detail the grounds of
      the application.  Mr MacKay made the general point that although in
      her decision the judge gave a detailed account of the hearing, she did
      not give reasons for rejecting the evidence before her.  I am
      satisfied that in relation to the two instances examined above the
      judge failed to have regard to relevant evidence and because of this
      did not give adequate reasons for her adverse credibility findings.
      These findings concerned matters which were central to the appellant's
      claim, namely his escape from detention and his departure from Sri
      Lanka.  The findings made by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal are
      unsafe and should not be allowed to stand.  The decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal is accordingly set aside.

   7. Both parties were agreed that the appeal should be remitted to a
      differently constituted First-tier Tribunal with no findings
      preserved.  Because the findings made by the Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal cannot be relied upon, remittal is the proper course, in
      terms of paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement.

Conclusions
   8. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   9. The decision is set aside.

  10. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings
      preserved to be reheard before a differently constituted Tribunal.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  In order
to preserve the positions of the parties until the appeal is finally
decided, I consider an anonymity direction should be made.  Until a court
or tribunal directs otherwise no report of these proceedings shall directly
or indirectly identify the appellant or any member of his family.  This
direction applies to the appellant and the respondent.  Failure to comply
with the direction may lead to contempt of court proceedings.


M E Deans
                24th December 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

