
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10757/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 July 2020                      |On 28 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     HJR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant was born in 1981  in  Iran  of  which  country  he  is  a
    citizen. The  appellant  claims  to  have  arrived  United  Kingdom  in
    September 2015. His claim for asylum was refused and  he  appealed  but
    his appeal was dismissed.  He  became  appeal  rights  exhausted  on  2
    February 2017. He lodged further submissions which  led  to  a  further
    refusal by the respondent  of  his  claim  for  asylum.  The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on
    28 January 2020, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. This appeal has been affected by  the  arrangements  brought  in  as  a
    consequence of the  Covid-19  emergency.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Allen
    issued directions on 12 May 2020 indicating that the Upper Tribunal had
    taken the provisional view that matters of  error  of  law/the  setting
    aside  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  may   be   dealt   with
    appropriately without a hearing. Both parties have responded  to  those
    directions and the appeal is been put before me for determination.

 3. Both parties unequivocally agree that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
    law, in particular by failing to make any or any  proper  consideration
    of the appellant's sur place activities in  the  United  Kingdom.  Both
    parties agree that the decision should be  set  aside  and  the  appeal
    returned  to   the   First-tier   Tribunal.   Having   considered   the
    representations of both parties  having  read  the  file  carefully,  I
    agree. There  will  need  to  be  further  fact-finding  particular  in
    relation to the appellant's sur place activities. Such fact-finding  is
    more appropriately carried out  at  a  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal rather than the Upper Tribunal.

 4. I therefore set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision. The  appeal  is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal for that  tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision at or following a hearing de novo.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the FTT are set aside. None of  the  findings  of  fact
    shall stand. The appeal is returned to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not
    Judge French; 1.5 hours; Kurdish Sorani interpreter) for that  tribunal
    to remake the decision at or following a hearing de novo.


Signed                              Date 14 July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
