
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10192/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3rd July 2019                     |On 18th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             Bzhar Najat Shareef
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzam (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Broe, promulgated on 11th October 2018  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Priory Courts on 18th September 2018.  In the determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iran, and was born on 21st  March
    2000.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  13th
    August 2018,  refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he is a Sunni Muslim, from
    the IKR.  He cannot return back to Iran because he fears his stepfather
    who has threatened to beat him up.  This is because the stepfather sees
    the Appellant as not his son.  He has beaten him in the past and kicked
    him out of the house once or twice a month.  When  this  has  happened,
    the Appellant has gone to live on the streets.  He  cannot  go  to  his
    uncle's because they disowned his mother after she remarried.  And  two
    years after her remarriage, the stepfather began to sexually abuse  the
    Appellant. The Appellant refused to have sex with  the  stepfather  who
    would touch him when he was asleep.  Eventually the Appellant would not
    allow him to touch him and the stepfather said that he  would  not  let
    him remain in the house if he did not agree to have sex with  him.   He
    said he would kill him if he told anyone.  The stepfather  became  more
    aggressive.  The mother did not assist him (paragraph 20).  In the end,
    the Appellant was given some money to the tune of  500  euros,  by  his
    older brother, with whom the Appellant had initially lived, but who was
    no longer prepared to keep him, and with that money, the Appellant  was
    able to leave Iraq and come to the UK, travelling  through  Greece  and
    other countries.

The Judge's Finding

 4. The judge, at the outset of the determination, made it clear, under the
    heading "My Findings of Credibility and Fact" that, "I am aware of  the
    provisions of Section 8 of the Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimant, etc.) Act 2004" (see paragraph 18).  The judge then  went  on
    to consider the Appellant's claim, observing how the Appellant was just
    under 18 when he left Iraq and exactly 18 when he claimed asylum in the
    UK (see paragraph 19).  The judge found the  Appellant's  claim  to  be
    inconsistent that his life was under threat,  given  that  he  did  not
    claim asylum in Greece or in  Spain  through  which  he  had  travelled
    (paragraph 20).  The failure to claim asylum when  going  through  safe
    countries  damaged  the  Appellant's  credibility,  including  when  he
    travelled through  Italy.   The  judge  held  that  this  was  not  the
    behaviour of a person generally seeking protection.  He went on to  say
    that, "I accept that the Appellant has provided two photographs showing
    him to facial injuries but there  is  nothing  to  link  those  to  his
    stepfather" (paragraph 21).  In the end, the judge concluded  that  the
    Appellant could return to Iraq and that "he would be  returned  to  the
    Kurdish region where he has relatives who can offer support" (paragraph
    23).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.



The Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in the  following
    two respects.  First, he applied Section 8 of the 2004 Act to  conclude
    that the Appellant's credibility was damaged, and in so doing prevented
    himself from looking at other issues that were relevant  to  his  claim
    for protection, and in this the judge violated the principles  set  out
    in SM (Section 8: Judge's process) Iran [2005]  UKAIT  00116.   Second,
    the judge did not actually make any proper finding in relation  to  the
    Appellant's claim that he was sexually abused  by  his  stepfather  and
    threatened by him and beaten up, and thrown out of the house.   All  he
    had said (paragraph 22) was in one sentence,  namely,  that  "I  accept
    that the Appellant has provided two photographs  showing  him  to  have
    facial injuries but nothing linking those to  his  stepfather".   There
    was also, however, a third ground, and this was that the judge did  not
    make a finding as to whether the Appellant had a CSID card,  which  was
    necessary given the latest case law of AAH (Iraq) [2018] UKUT 212.

 7. On 14th December 2018, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal
    on the basis that it was arguable that the judge  did  err  in  law  by
    failing to assess whether the Appellant could travel  from  Baghdad  to
    Erbil on the basis of the latest country guidance case  of  AAH  (Iraq)
    which did require consideration, rather than a consideration of the old
    authorities, to which the judge had regard.  Second,  it  was  arguable
    that the judge failed  to  take  account  of  the  Appellant's  claimed
    history of sexual abuse, and  therefore  his  potential  vulnerability,
    when considering his credibility, on the basis that Section 8 had  been
    engaged, and this violated what had been said in SM [2005] UKAIT 00116.



Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 3rd July 2019, Mr Mohzam,  appearing  as  a
    solicitor on behalf of  the  Appellant,  relied  upon  the  grounds  of
    application.  He stated that the judge had made no findings on the core
    aspects of the substantive claim before the Tribunal  when  considering
    the appeal, save as to say that there were two photographs showing  the
    Appellant to have facial injuries (at paragraph 21).  Second, the judge
    appears  to  have  concluded  against  the  Appellant  as  lacking   in
    credibility on the basis of Section 8, which is set out at  the  outset
    at paragraph 18 of the determination.  Third, it was incumbent upon the
    judge to apply the latest country guidance case of  AAH  (Iraq)  [2018]
    UKUT 212, because this went directly to the  question  of  whether  the
    Appellant had a CSID card, enabling to return back to Iraq.

 9. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that the reliance upon AAH (Iraq)  was
    academic, given that the Appellant was a person who originated from the
    IKR, and that by the time that this latest country  guidance  case  was
    promulgated in June 2018, it was well-known  that  there  were  flights
    going internally from Baghdad to Erbil, of which  the  Appellant  could
    avail himself, as a person who had originated from the IKR.  Therefore,
    the failure of the judge to have regard to the latest country  guidance
    case, was not a material error of law.  Second, and in any  event,  the
    fact that the judge drew attention  to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant
    "would be returned to the Kurdish region where he has relatives who can
    offer support" (paragraph 23) meant that any error in this respect  was
    academic also because the Appellant  could  relocate  to  his  area  of
    origin where he had his brothers available who were in  a  position  to
    help him.  Mr Mills stated that he will accept that there was an  error
    in the judge not making a finding as on the core event of the  father's
    sexual abuse of the Appellant,  but  this  was  not  a  material  error
    because the judge had also found that "he has relatives who  can  offer
    support" (paragraph 23).

10. In reply, Mr Mohzam submitted that the losing  party  was  entitled  to
    know why they had lost and in this case the judge had not made findings
    on the core aspects of the Appellant's claim, and this  being  so,  the
    matter should be remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  the
    finding of an error of law.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of a finding of an error of law such that I should set aside
    the decision.  My reasons are as follows.

12. First, this is a case where the Appellant has  given  extensive  detail
    about the sexual abuse from his stepfather, which resulted in his being
    thrown onto the streets, and his finding refuge with his  brother,  who
    also then could not keep him for much longer, such  that  he  gave  him
    money to go away from Iraq.  The Appellant is a person who, on the face
    of it, is a Claimant with a history of sexual abuse and, if  that  were
    to be the case then he would be potentially vulnerable, but no findings
    are made in this respect.  There is only one sentence  in  relation  to
    this at paragraph 23.

13. Second, although the judge does not expressly say so, the reference  to
    the fact that the judge was "aware of the provisions of Section 8"  (at
    paragraph 18), at  the  outset  of  the  Section  on  "My  Findings  of
    Credibility and Fact" appears to suggest that the judge did not feel it
    necessary to make any further findings of fact.  This  is  contrary  to
    what was decided in SM [2005] UKAIT 0016, where the Tribunal  had  held
    that the blanket application of Section 8 "has the incidental effect of
    interfering with the well-established Rule  that  the  finder  of  fact
    should look at the evidence as a whole, giving each  item  of  it  such
    weight as he or she considers appropriate" (paragraph 7).  The Tribunal
    made it quite  clear  that  "given  the  terms  of  Section  8,  it  is
    inevitable that the general fact-finding process is somewhat distorted,
    but that distortion must be kept to a minimum" (paragraph 9).  In  this
    case, that distortion has been unnecessarily amplified by a failure  to
    make a finding on the core aspect of  the  claim,  namely,  the  sexual
    abuse that the Appellant suffered from his father.

Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law.  I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I remake
    the decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted back  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be determined  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge  Broe,
    pursuant to practice statement 7.2(b).

15. An anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2019



