
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/10716/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |           Decision & Reasons           |
|                                    |Promulgated                             |
|On 12 June 2017                     |           On 28 June 2017              |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     DM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, Counsel, instructed by Turpin & Miller
                    Solicitors (Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana and his date of birth  is  5  April
    1977.  He made an application for asylum based on his sexuality and the
    Respondent refused the application on 21 September 2016.  The Appellant
    appealed against the decision and his appeal was dismissed by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Phull, in a decision promulgated on  5  January
    2017, following a hearing on 2 December 2016.  Permission  was  granted
    to the Appellant by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 2 May 2017.

2.   The judge heard evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  made  findings  at
    paragraphs 6, 7 and 8.   The  judge  did  not  accept  the  Appellant's
    evidence in relation to his sexuality.  She did not accept that he  was
    bisexual.  The grounds argue that the judge made  a  factual  error  in
    relation to the Appellant's evidence.  It is  not  necessary,  for  the
    purposes of this decision, to record and engage with all the grounds of
    appeal because on this ground alone the application succeeds. The judge
    made a material error of law which was conceded by Mr Bramble.

3.   Having considered the Appellant's asylum  interview,  particularly  his
    answers to questions 172  to  188  and  the  evidence  in  his  witness
    statement  at  paragraphs  18  to  21,  I  conclude  that   the   judge
    misunderstood this  evidence.   She  did  not  take  into  account  the
    totality of the Appellant's evidence in respect  of  the  relationships
    with William and Emmanuel and the Appellant's evidence that he had paid
    them for sex.  The judge misunderstood the evidence concluding that  it
    was the other way around and that he, the Appellant, had been paid. She
    attached significant weight to this when rejecting his  evidence  about
    his sexuality.  Whilst it was to the judge to find that  the  Appellant
    was  not  credible,  she  made  adverse  credibility  findings,  having
    misunderstood the evidence or by failing to properly  engage  with  it.
    Either way, this amounts to a  material  error  and  I  set  aside  the
    decision.

4.    Both  representatives  agreed  that  there  was  a  need  for  a  full
    rehearing. None of the findings can be salvaged. The  parties  were  of
    the view that, in the light of the full fact finding exercise which  is
    now required, the appropriate venue is the FtT. I remit the case to the
    FtT.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date:  22 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam



