
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10771/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 March 2019                      |On 04 April 2019                   |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     O T
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Rutherford instructed by Rodman Pearce
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the rehearing of the human rights element  of  the  appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  of  26  August  2018
    refusing asylum and human rights claims.

2.   I need say no more about the asylum claim as the judge  dismissed  that
    and there was no challenge to that conclusion.  The appeal was  allowed
    in respect of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, but
    following an error of law decision before Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan,
    errors of law were found in that decision and the judge  directed  that
    the human rights claim was to be remade in the Upper Tribunal.

3.   The appellant adopted  the  supplementary  witness  statement  dated  4
    March 2019 that was in the supplementary bundle.  She was asked  a  few
    questions by Ms Rutherford.  She said that if she returned  to  Nigeria
    with her husband and children she would have nowhere to live as she had
    no ties there.  She had nothing there and it would  be  very  hard  and
    there was no-one there to help her or her husband on return.   She  had
    no contact with friends or family members there.  Her  husband  had  no
    family in Nigeria.  It will be really hard for the children and she did
    not know how to explain it to them.  They were in school in the  United
    Kingdom and her younger child who had come to the United Kingdom at the
    age of 2 months believed that he had  been  born  in  London.   It  was
    difficult enough for them even to move  house  in  the  United  Kingdom
    quite apart from going to live in Nigeria.

4.   On cross-examination the appellant said that she was 30 when  she  came
    to the United Kingdom.  She was not working in Nigeria before she  came
    to the United Kingdom as she had her first child in 2006 so she did not
    do anything after school.  She agreed that she  and  her  husband  were
    educated in that they had been to school.  She was asked  why  she  and
    her husband could not work  in  Nigeria  and  she  said  she  had  been
    attacked in Nigeria and this had been the basis of her asylum claim and
    it was a really difficult deadly situation.  She had come to the United
    Kingdom after giving birth to her second child.  She could not go  back
    to Nigeria.  She was facing a hard lifestyle there.  Her husband  could
    not protect her or the children.  She had already lost  one  child  and
    could not risk anybody's life.

5.   It was put to her at the asylum claim had not been believed in that  it
    had not been appealed and she said the solicitors had told her to  wait
    for the result from the Home Office and she had  not  been  advised  to
    appeal.  Her mother was dead and she did not know where her father was.
     She had no siblings and did not have anybody.  Her husband had  worked
    for a few years in Nigeria as a research officer.  She was asked why he
    could not provide for her and the family on return and  she  said  they
    could not go together and he did not want to risk  his  life  and  they
    were all at risk.  When asked from whom they were at risk she said  she
    was attacked and it really affected him too and he  had  been  attacked
    because of them and had a scar on his leg.  As to whether they could go
    and live elsewhere in Nigeria she said they had moved to  three  States
    and it had not stopped.

6.   Ms Rutherford had no further points to raise by way of  re-examination.



7.   In his submissions Mr Melvin referred to his written  submissions.   He
    had no real issue with the evidence given.  The children were at school
    in the United Kingdom and the elder child had  friends  at  church  and
    would like to live in the United Kingdom.  He  relied  on  the  written
    submissions.  The question was whether it would be  reasonable  in  the
    real world to expect the whole family to return as a group to  Nigeria.
    There had been a lot of overstaying by the parents.  The  asylum  claim
    had been disbelieved.  The best interests of the children were  not  to
    remain in the United  Kingdom,  and  even  if  it  were,  it  would  be
    reasonable for the family to return to Nigeria.

8.   Mr Melvin  referred  to  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.  None of the  family  members  had  leave  to
    remain.  There had been applications over the years.  Mr Melvin did not
    accept the appellant's evidence today that she had no family in Nigeria
    or that there was a problem there.  Her asylum claim was without  merit
    or credibility so there was no risk on return.  Both parents were well-
    educated.  There was a full education system available and English  was
    spoken in the schools.  The parents  could  maintain  their  family  by
    working in Nigeria.  It was not in the  children's  best  interests  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and even if it were it was  reasonable  to
    expect them all to return to Nigeria.  The  children  were  settled  in
    school and it was not argued that it  was  a  crucial  stage  of  their
    education.

9.   In her submissions Ms Rutherford relied on  and  developed  the  points
    made in her skeleton argument.  The question was whether  it  would  be
    reasonable in all the circumstances  for  the  children  to  return  to
    Nigeria.  The two eldest were qualifying children.   It  was  in  their
    best interests to remain in the United  Kingdom.   Letters  written  by
    them had been put in.  Neither had any recollection of Nigeria and they
    saw themselves of being like their peers in the United  Kingdom.   They
    were at important stages of their education.  They would have been here
    for nine years in June and that was a long time for children  of  their
    age.  They had their life here and ties to the community in the  United
    Kingdom including the church and the Boys Brigade.  It was not in their
    interest to remove them from the culture in which they had grown up.

10.  In the real world it was the case that  neither  parent  had  leave  to
    remain but this was not the responsibility of the children.  They  were
    not to be punished for their parents' sins as held  in  Zoumbas  [2013]
    UKSC 74.

11.  With regard to the Secretary of State's policy which had been  put  in,
    it was accepted that if a child had been in the United Kingdom  for  at
    least seven years then they would not normally be expected to leave the
    United Kingdom.  The decision in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4  did  not
    preclude the possibility of  success.   There  is  a  factor  weighing.
    Seven years after the age of 7 was different from the seven years  from
    birth.  The circumstances of the case were significant.  There would be
    difficulties on return and integration and it would be unreasonable  to
    expect them to leave the United Kingdom.

12.  I reserved my determination.

13.  The  essential  issue  in  this  is  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention and whether, the specific issue, it will  be  reasonable  to
    expect the children to leave the United Kingdom.  The eldest child O is
    now aged 12 years and 6 months, and was aged 3 years and 10 months when
    he came to the United Kingdom.  The other qualifying child is E who  is
    aged 8 and came to the United Kingdom at the age of  2  months.   There
    are two other children, OR and OP, the former aged  6  and  the  latter
    being nearly 2.  They have both spent their entire lives in the  United
    Kingdom.

14.  It is clear from what was said by the Supreme  Court  in  KO  (Nigeria)
    that "reasonableness" is to be considered in the real  world  in  which
    the children find themselves.  A real world question here  in  response
    to the question "why would the child be expected to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom?" is "because the parents have no right to remain in the United
    Kingdom".  This is the  background  against  which  the  assessment  of
    reasonableness has to be conducted.  So as noted by Lewison  LJ  in  EV
    (Philippines) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  at  paragraph  58,  the  ultimate
    question is: "is it reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent
    with no right to remain to the country of origin?"

15.  Ms Rutherford referred me to the section of  the  Secretary  of  State'
    policy which tells decision  makers  how  to  consider  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect a child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is
    clearly important to consider the child's best interests as  a  primary
    consideration.  It is necessary to consider whether there is a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship, which is clearly the  case  here.
    The next issue considered is whether the child is a British citizen  or
    has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period  of  at  least
    seven years.  The latter criterion applies to the two oldest  children.
    It is said that in a case of such a qualifying child the starting point
    is that the Home Office would not normally expect a qualifying child to
    leave the United Kingdom and that it is  normally  in  a  child's  best
    interests for the whole family to remain together which means  that  if
    the child is not expected to  leave  then  the  parent  or  parents  or
    primary carer of the child will also no be expected to leave the United
    Kingdom.

16.   The  guidance  goes  on  to  say  that  there  may  be  some  specific
    circumstances where  it  would  be  reasonable  either  to  expect  the
    qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom with the  parents  or  for
    the parents to leave the United Kingdom and for the child to stay.  The
    latter does not apply in this case.  As regards points that may make it
    reasonable for a qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom with  the
    parent, relevant factors are noted as being that the parent or  parents
    or child is/are a citizen of the country and therefore  able  to  enjoy
    the full rights of being a citizen in that country, there is nothing in
    any country specific information which suggests that  relocation  would
    be unreasonable, the parent or parents or child have  existing  family,
    social, or cultural ties with the country and if there are wider family
    or  relationships  with  friends  of  relationships  with  friends   or
    community overseas that can provide support.  Also  removal  would  not
    give rise to a significant risk to the child's health and there are  no
    other specific factors raised by or on behalf of the child.

17.  The eldest child in his witness statement says he has a lot of  friends
    both in churches, social groups and has known no other  home  than  the
    United Kingdom.  The second child E has  his  dreams  to  live  in  the
    United Kingdom and he refers to his best friends with whom he  goes  to
    school and attends church.  There are also documents from  the  schools
    as to their presence in the schools and a letter from the Boys' Brigade
    branch  which  the  boys  attended  until  2018.   There  are   various
    certificates and attestations with regard to the children.

18.  With regard to the best interests of the children I am  satisfied  that
    those best interests are for them to remain in the United Kingdom  with
    their parents.  They have been settled here for  in  the  case  of  the
    qualifying children most of their lives and  all  their  lives  in  the
    cases of the  other  children.   They  are  clearly  settled  into  the
    community here and in schools and in  particular  with  regard  to  the
    oldest child who is now 12, he has spent significant years of his  life
    in the United Kingdom and can understandably be regarded as seeing this
    as his home.

19.  Though I do not find credible the evidence of the appellant that  there
    are no family or friends in Nigeria, I attach weight to the  amount  of
    time the children have been in the United Kingdom, the ages they are at
    and the fact that the two eldest children are both qualifying children.
     Clearly they can properly be regarded as  having  put  down  roots  be
    integrated into life in the  United  Kingdom.   It  is  in  their  best
    interests for the children to  stay  together  with  the  rest  of  the
    family, and I do not consider that  the  factors  that  might  make  it
    reasonable for a qualifying child to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  with
    their parents is set out in the respondent's guidance  relevant  though
    they clearly are with regard to such matters as the citizenship of  the
    family,  the  absence  of  country's  specific  information  suggesting
    relocation would be unreasonable,  the  absence  of  evidence  to  show
    significant risk  to  the  children's  health  or  any  other  specific
    factors, that particular factor weight in this case is  the  amount  of
    time they have spent in the  United  Kingdom  and  in  particular  with
    regard to the eldest child the age that he is now at and his degree  of
    integration that must I think follow from  that.   Accordingly  I  find
    that it would not be reasonable to expect  the  eldest  child  nor  the
    second child to leave the United Kingdom, and  as  a  consequence  this
    appeal succeeds on human rights grounds under Article 8 of the European
    Convention on Human Rights.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed   Date 02 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
