
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/10496/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 April 2018                          |On 11 May 2018                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     HD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION continued)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Bagral, Counsel instructed by Sohaib Fatimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity:

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan born on 22 June 1992, is
    appealing against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence
    promulgated on 29 November 2017 whereby the judge dismissed his appeal
    against the decision of the respondent dated 4 October 2017 to refuse
    his protection claim.

Background

 2. On 20 September 2007 the appellant entered the UK clandestinely. He was
    apprehended by the police along with several other individuals after
    being seen climbing out of a lorry. He was interviewed by an
    immigration officer at a police station. The immigration officer's note
    of the interview, dated 20 September 2007, (hereafter "the Note") is
    brief (half a page). The Note mentions that eight males were arrested
    and in the reception of the police station. The only record in the Note
    of the appellant's reason for coming to the UK is following paragraph:

         "[The appellant] spoke Pushtu and I used interpreter 1234 - he
         stated that [sic] left Afghanistan six months ago and arrived today
         in the back of a lorry. He said he was from Jalalabad. Subject
         stated that he had problems in Afghanistan with the government and
         his family. He stated that he has a friend in the UK but that
         someone else in the group had the contact details."

 3. Shortly after the above-described interview with an immigration officer
    the appellant absconded.

 4. In November 2010 the appellant established contact with the respondent
    but absconded again.

 5. Further submissions were made on the appellant's behalf in August 2015
    and his asylum interview took place on 6 January 2016.

 6. The appellant claims, inter alia, that his father was a prominent
    commander in Hizb-e-Islami (hereafter "HI") and that he is at risk as a
    consequence of his connection to HI.

 7. The appellant made the claim about his father being prominent in HI in
    his witness statement, oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and
    his asylum interview. However it was not mentioned in the Note (see the
    section of the Note quoted in paragraph 2 above).

Decision of the First-Tier Tribunal

 8. The judge did not find the appellant credible and rejected his account
    in its entirety. In particular, the judge did not accept the
    appellant's claim to be the son of a prominent HI commander or that he
    had himself been a member of HI. The judge gave several reasons for
    rejecting the appellant's credibility. Prominent amongst these was that
    there was no mention of HI in the Note (see paragraph 2 above), in
    respect of which the judge made the following findings:

          i) At paragraph 12 the judge stated that the failure to mention
             HI to the immigration officer who wrote the Note undermined
             the appellant's credibility.

         ii) At paragraph 17 the judge stated: "if his fear was in any way
             connected with [HI], whether [sic] him being a member through
             association with his father, some semblance of this connection
             ought to have featured in his very first account, given on 20
             September 2007."

        iii) At paragraph 28 the judge stated that the failure to mention
             HI to the immigration officer on 20 September 2017
             "fundamentally undermines the core of his claim"

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 9. Several grounds of appeal were pursued by the appellant. The first, and
    strongest, ground is that it was irrational for the judge to find that
    the appellant's credibility was undermined by the absence of a
    reference to HI in the Note.

10. Ms Isherwood's position was that it was a matter for the judge to
    determine the weight to give to the Note and there was a clear
    inconsistency between the appellant's account as recorded in the Note,
    where HI is not mentioned, and the subsequent accounts where HI
    features significantly.

Analysis

11. The appellant arrived UK, aged 15, in the back of a lorry. He was taken
    to a police station where he was interviewed by an immigration officer.
    It is apparent from the Note that the appellant was one eight people in
    the police station who were interviewed and that the interview was
    brief. The Note contains only one sentence which relates to the reasons
    why the appellant left Afghanistan, which is the following: "Subject
    stated that he had problems in Afghanistan with the government and his
    family".

12. The Note does not indicate that the appellant was asked to explain the
    basis for his asylum claim or that something analogous to a screening
    interview was conducted. On the contrary, the clear impression formed
    from reviewing the Note is that the immigration officer briefly
    interviewed the appellant to determine what steps should be taken and
    did not engage in any substantive questioning about why he had left
    Afghanistan or why he had come to the UK.

13. Having carefully reviewed the Note, it is my view that it was not open
    to the judge to find that the absence of a reference in it to HI
    undermines the appellant's credibility. This is because:

      1) The Note is not a record of a screening or substantive interview of
         the appellant and on its face it appears to be no more than a
         summary of a short discussion with the appellant the purpose of
         which was to determine the next steps to take.

      2) The note contains no details whatsoever about the reason the
         appellant left Afghanistan and there is only one sentence
         addressing this issue, which is written in broad terms that could
         cover almost anything.

      3) There is no indication in the Note that it is a complete record of
         what was discussed and it cannot be inferred from the absence of a
         mention of HI in the Note that the appellant did not in fact
         mention the organisation to the immigration officer.

  14. The appellant's claim is set out in his asylum interview and witnesses
      statements. In all of these documents he had given a consistent
      account of involvement with, and his father being prominent within,
      HI.




  15. There may well have been reasons to find the appellant not credible
      (the judge has given several in the decision) but the absence of a
      reference to HI in the Note was not one of them. Given the
      significance the judge has given to the Note (describing it at
      paragraph 28 as fundamentally undermining the core of the appellant's
      claim) the judge's finding in respect of the Note cannot be separated
      from the rest of the credibility findings and has materially affected
      the credibility assessment. The error of law was therefore material.



  16. Given the extent of judicial fact finding which is likely to be
      necessary for the decision to be re-made this case falls within
      paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and
      Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal and
      should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

   1. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
      material error of law and is set aside in its entirety.


   2. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  afresh
      by a different judge.
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan         Dated 5 May
