
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
pa/10091/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31 May 2019                          |On 04 July 2019                     |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                 Amin Arfali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:        Ms L Brakaj, Legal Representative (Iris Law Firm)
                    (Middlesbrough)
For the Respondent:     Ms R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant a national of  Iraq,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Stone of the First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  sent  on  31
    October 2018 dismissing his appeal against the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 6 August 2018 refusing his protection claim.

2.   The grounds as  amplified  succinctly  by  Ms  Brakaj  raise  two  main
    points, it being contended that the judge erred (1) in failing to  make
    clear or adequate finding in respect of the appellant's claimed risk of
    persecution from his own  family  based  on  their  view  that  he  had
    violated family honour by marrying a woman of his own choice when  they
    had promised him to a cousin; and (2) in  failing  to  make  any  clear
    findings on whether he could obtain renewed CSID  documentation  so  he
    could settle in the IKR.

3.   I am not persuaded by ground (1).  Its principal  target  is  paragraph
    64 wherein the judge states:

         "64. I find that the Appellant has not shown to the lower  standard
             that he was subjected to persecution by his family in the IKR.
               His  evidence  on  the  issue  lacks  internal   logic   and
             consistency.  He says that he was in a relationship  with  his
             wife for four years before his marriage but  his  family,  who
             knew about the relationship one year into it, did  nothing  to
             stop  the  relationship   until   the   marriage.    This   is
             inconsistent with the evidence that they would  now  kill  him
             because of a breach family honour if he was returned  to  IKR.
             He continued to live with his family after they discovered his
             relationship with his wife for 3 years.  He says he was  shot,
             but produced no  medical  evidence  of  any  such  injury.   I
             appreciate that no corroboration is  required,  but  when  the
             evidence is an alleged bullet wound, I would have expected  to
             see a medical report."

4.   Albeit  brief,  this  paragraph  identifies  two  shortcomings  in  the
    appellant's account of risk from his own family:  an  inconsistency  in
    his account and an  insufficiency  of  evidence  to  support  it.   The
    grounds fail to identify  any  error  in  relation  to  the  identified
    inconsistency and in my judgment it was a material  inconsistency.   On
    the appellant's own account, his family had  come  to  know  about  his
    relationship with his later wife at a time when he was still living  at
    home and he had stated at Q130 :"[In those four years I was attached to
    my family..."  Earlier the appellant had suggested that his family  had
    allowed him to have the relationship  whilst  he  was  living  at  home
    because he did not do anything illegal or contrary to Islamic religion,
    but if they had reacted to the extent of  attacking  him  during  these
    four years, they clearly did not tolerate or accept it.   Further,  the
    appellant had provided no support for this aspect of  his  claim.   The
    grounds aver that it was unreasonable of the judge to consider that the
    appellant could have obtained medical evidence to corroborate his claim
    to having sustained a bullet wound ("it is unclear how helpful  medical
    evidence would have been in establishing the provenance  of  a  gunshot
    wound from almost a decade ago").  I am not  persuaded  there  was  any
    unreasonableness.  It is medically uncontroversial that  bullet  wounds
    leave scars that can be long-lasting or at  least  detectable.   It  is
    true, that  even  if  the  appellant  had  obtaining  medical  evidence
    confirming he had suffered a bullet wound a decade ago, that would  not
    prove "provenance", but it may well have added  significant  weight  to
    his account.
5.   I would observe further that what the judge said at  paragraph  64  has
    to be read in the context of the decision as a whole.   The  respondent
    had already raised several concerns about this aspect of his account in
    the refusal decision, including the appellant's failure to  mention  it
    in the SEF interview and his failure to  explain,  why,  if  it  was  a
    matter of family honour, his relatives who lived in  several  areas  of
    Iraq would not have taken steps to  harm  him  when  he  had  moved  to
    Kirkuk.

6.   It is true that the judge's reasoning in relation  to  the  other  main
    plank of the appellant's claim  -  risk  from  ISIS  -  was  much  more
    detailed but that does not mean that the reasons given in paragraph  64
    were legally flawed.

7.   Ground 2 is linked to  ground  1  but  is  still  distinct  because  it
    concerns  whether  the  judge  was  entitled,   having   rejected   the
    appellant's account of risk on return from either his own family in the
    IKR or ISIS in Kirkuk (but having found nevertheless that he could  not
    be returned to Kirkuk because it was generally unsafe), to find that he
    could relocate to the IKR.  It  is  submitted  that  rejection  of  the
    appellant's  account  of  risk  of  persecution  from  his  family  was
    insufficient to establish that his family would be able to support  him
    (and his wife) in the IKR.

8.   The judge's treatment of the issue is set out at paragraph 70-72:

         "70: The respondent  has  suggested  that  relocation  to  IKR  was
             reasonable.  Paragraph 17 of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]
             UKUT 544 (IAC) stated that the Respondent  would  only  return
             someone to  IKR  if  they  originated  from  there  and  their
             identity had been precleared by the KRG.  Those conditions may
             apply to this Appellant.


         71.  AAH (Iraqi Kurds) internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG  UKUT  00212
             (IAC) gives country guidance  relevant  to  this  appeal.   It
             states that whether an appellant can obtain a replacement CSID
             within a reasonable time depends on a number of factors, which
             include:


              71.1.    Whether he has any other ID -  the  Appellant  has  a
             copy CSID;


              71.2.    Is the area held or formerly held by  ISIS  -  Kirkuk
             is, and;


             71.3 Are there any male family members who can support  -  the
                  Appellant has family in IKR, but says he is estranged from
                  them and is at risk of honour crime at their hands?


         72.  I find that on balance, the Appellant could be returned to the
             IKR."

9.   Once again, it  is  important  to  consider  what  the  judge  said  at
    paragraphs  70-72  in  the  context  of  the  decision  as   a   whole,
    particularly the reference in paragraph 71.3 to the appellant  say[ing]
    he  is  estranged  from  [his  family..."   This  links  back  to   the
    appellant's own evidence as recorded at paragraph 17-18 as well  as  to
    the judge's summary of the submissions he  received  on  the  issue  at
    paragraphs 43, 44 and 51 and 60.  These demonstrate that the judge  was
    fully aware that the appellant was claiming not just  that  his  family
    wished to harm  him  but  they  would  not  support  him.   When  these
    paragraphs are read together, it is sufficiently clear that  the  judge
    rejected the appellant's account of his family circumstances  in  full,
    disbelieving both that they wished to harm him or that they  could  not
    support him.

10.  I would observe that in my event the issues that arose in  the  context
    of relocation to the IKR were confined to whether he would have support
    in obtaining a CSID and
          whether he would  have  family  support  in  relocating.   On  the
    former issue, the appellant had had a CSID  previously  (see  paragraph
    71.1) and on his own evidence had family members on his wife's side who
    would be able to assist in obtaining a new CSID.  On the latter  issue,
    applying the guidelines set out in AAH, the appellant was  someone  who
    could expect a positive response to his resettlement in the IKR: he was
    a former Peshmerga and had also had experience in running  a  business.
    Even if for some reason his own family would not  assist,  on  his  own
    evidence there was no reason why his wife's  family  in  nearby  Kirkuk
    could not arrange to assist him and his wife if necessary.

11.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly his decision must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date: 1 July 2019

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

