
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10360/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21st November 2018              |On 11th December 2018              |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     NP
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms D Friel, McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Boyd dismissing an appeal on protection and human rights
      grounds.

   2. The appellant is a national of Iran of Kurdish origin.  He claims his
      father was involved in the KDPI.  After his father's death the
      appellant became involved and this led to him having to flee from
      Iran.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not find the
      appellant's evidence credible.

   3. Lengthy grounds challenging the judge's findings were submitted on
      behalf of the appellant in the application for permission to appeal.
      Permission was granted on the ground that it was arguable that in
      reaching his decision the judge failed to have regard to the totality
      of the evidence.  If the judge took into account information given in
      the appellant's witness statement in response to the reasons for
      refusal letter, he made no findings upon it and gave no reasons for
      rejecting it.  In particular, the judge arguably failed to take into
      account the appellant's explanation for his supposed lack of knowledge
      of the KDPI and the appellant's evidence in his witness statement
      about his father's death.

Submissions
   4. Ms Friel appeared at the hearing to replace an absent colleague.  She
      had not had time to prepare for the hearing prior to the day it took
      place.  She nevertheless guided me with great care through the grounds
      set out in the application for permission to appeal.  On behalf of the
      Tribunal I would like to record my gratitude to Ms Friel for the
      effort she made and for her care and professionalism.

   5. For the respondent Mr Govan said he opposed the appeal, although there
      was no section 24 response.  The grounds of the application seemed to
      require the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal to carry out a forensic
      examination of the appellant's witness statement.  It was contended on
      behalf of the appellant that a number of minor errors would amount to
      a decision which was unsafe.  This was essentially a challenge based
      on perversity.  The errors were not material.

   6. Mr Govan began by looking at the first specific ground, which
      concerned the appellant's evidence that he had not been required to
      take any tests to join the KDPI.  This evidence was inconsistent with
      background evidence on what potential members had to do.  There were
      other related issues, such as the appellant being unable to remember
      the date he joined the KDPI.  There was no reason to suppose the
      appellant's explanation for why he did not take any tests in order to
      join the KDPI would have changed the judge's mind.  There was no
      material error.

   7. Mr Govan continued by referring to the second ground, which concerned
      the appellant's knowledge of the KDPI.  This was no more than a
      disagreement with the judge's finding.  The appellant's evidence was
      of long family ties to the KDPI.  He had studied politics and could
      have picked up information about the KDPI even if it was not part of
      his course.  The judge referred to the appellant's evidence on this as
      lacking plausibility.  It was a relatively minor part of the decision.

   8. The third ground related to the causes of the appellant's father's
      death.  The judge recorded that, according to the appellant, his
      father was regarded by the KDPI as a martyr, but the judge found it
      was more likely that the appellant's father died of heart and lung
      disease.  According to the grounds the judge did not have regard to
      the appellant's witness statemen, in which he said his father had been
      under house arrest and unable to obtain medical treatment.  The
      appellant's father had spent a long time in the mountains as a
      peshmerga in difficult weather conditions and the family believed this
      had contributed to his disease.  Mr Govan commented that there could
      be many possible causes of lung disease and the appellant was not sure
      how his father had contracted this.

   9. The fourth ground related to the evidence of the appellant's brother.
      The judge said this evidence did not provide anything useful.  The
      brother's knowledge of the appellant's alleged involvement with the
      KDPI post-dated the appellant's arrival in the UK.  There was nothing
      wrong with this finding, which was one the judge was entitled to make.

  10. The fifth ground related to the appellant's claim that other KDPI
      sympathisers in his town knew his full name notwithstanding that
      sympathisers were under instructions to use only first names.  The
      judge did not find it credible that if the appellant was a member of
      KDPI his full name would be known to party sympathisers.  Mr Govan
      submitted that the judge was entitled to find as he did.  This
      concerned the weight to be given to the evidence and the ground was
      again no more than a disagreement with the judge's finding, for which
      adequate reasons were given.

  11. The sixth ground related to a letter from the KDPI office in Paris
      regarding the appellant's alleged membership.  According to evidence
      before the Home Office from the Danish Refugee Council, any letter
      from the Paris office about an alleged member would have been sent
      direct to the Home Office as the asylum administration for the UK.
      Such a letter would never be handed to the asylum seeker himself.  The
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal recorded that on 3rd August 2017 the
      appellant's representatives faxed the KDPI asking for a copy of a
      letter which had supposedly been sent to the Home Office in order that
      it could be translated.  The response in the form of a letter from the
      Paris office of the KDPI was dated 9th August 2017.  This was the only
      letter from the KDPI before the judge.  The judge pointed out that the
      procedure to avoid forgery had not been followed and the judge
      considered that he could not rely on the document in question.  It was
      pointed out in the application for permission to appeal, however, that
      the judge also heard oral evidence from an individual referred to by
      the judge as RL, who was the chairman of the KDPI committee in the UK
      and who spoke to the letter being genuine.  According to the grounds,
      no reasonable judge would have discarded the letter on the basis that
      the stated procedure had not been followed.

  12. Mr Govan pointed out that the evidence of RL was noted by the judge at
      paragraph 38 of the decision.  The judge had the opportunity of asking
      RL how well he knew the appellant.  There was no evidence to back up
      RL's claim that he had been in contact with other people in the KDPI.
      The judge was entitled to make the finding which he did and, although
      this point might carry more weight than any of the other grounds, no
      error had been established.

  13. The seventh ground concerned the appellant's wife's lack of knowledge
      prior to leaving Iran of the appellant's activities for the KDPI.  The
      judge was entitled to find that the appellant's wife's evidence was
      not helpful.

  14. It was pointed out that at paragraph 34 of the decision the judge
      stated it was implausible that the appellant's wife had no knowledge
      of his KDPI activities but at paragraph 38 the judge stated that the
      appellant's wife's evidence did not assist the appellant as she had no
      knowledge of his alleged activities.  Mr Govan said these findings
      were not inconsistent.  The finding at paragraph 38 was stating that
      in any event the appellant's wife did not know about his activities.
      The finding at paragraph 34 showed that her evidence was taken into
      account.

  15. The eighth ground was that the appellant failed to have regard to the
      evidence of other witnesses, including the appellant's brother and the
      witness referred to as RL, about the appellant's activities in Iran.
      Mr Govan submitted that the appellant's own actions were at the core
      of the claim for protection.  The judge was justified in rejecting the
      appellant's own evidence and gave appropriate reasons for doing so.
      The judge gave reasons for not relying on the evidence of RL.

Discussion
  16. After hearing submissions I reserved my decision on the question of
      whether there was an error of law in the decision of the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal.

  17. I will begin my consideration of the decision with the treatment of
      the KDPI letter of 9th August 2017.  During the course of the hearing
      before me it transpired that the parties had further correspondence on
      this matter from November 2017 which had not been put before the First-
      tier Tribunal.  It came to light only because the bundle of evidence
      relating to this matter to which Ms Friel referred, having picked up
      the file to cover for her absent colleague, was clearly different from
      the bundle lodged with the First-tier Tribunal.  The correspondence
      concerned the same letter of 9th August 2017 which was before the
      First-tier Tribunal.

  18. The point which was made in the application for permission to appeal
      was that the judge failed to have proper regard to the evidence
      relating to the letter from KDPI.  The judge should have taken into
      account that the letter was sent from the fax number in Paris for the
      KDPI.  This fax number was on the letter and was referred to a fax
      receipt in an accompanying file note from the appellant's
      representatives, and on an extract from the KDPI website.  There was
      also the evidence of RL as chairman of the KDPI committee in the UK
      speaking to the genuineness of the letter.

  19. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the letter from the
      KDPI Paris office on the grounds that it had been sent to the
      appellant's representatives instead of to the Home Office, contrary to
      the invariable practice of the KDPI according to the report by the
      Danish Refugee Commission.  The judge does not appear to have
      considered at all the possibility that in this instance the normal
      procedure was not followed, notwithstanding the oral evidence of RL,
      as a KDPI official (albeit in the UK not France) that the letter was
      genuine.  Furthermore, the judge did not consider the possibility that
      the date on the copy of the letter which was sent to the appellant's
      representatives was not the same as the date on the original letter,
      assuming an earlier original existed.  The date on the letter, 9th
      August 2017, post-dated the representatives' request of 3rd August
      2017 for a copy of the letter so it could be translated.  It was this
      which seems to have led the judge to conclude that the procedure in
      the Danish report had not been followed.  In these circumstances the
      judge did not give wholly adequate reasons for concluding that the
      letter should not be relied upon.

  20. As Mr Govan contended, taken singly none of the grounds of the
      application might be sufficient to show a failure in reasoning by the
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal amounting to an error of law.  The
      judge was not required to conduct a forensic examination, as Mr Govan
      put it, of the appellant's witness statement.  At the same time, the
      judge was most certainly not entitled to disregard large parts of this
      statement in which the appellant attempted to give explanations for
      matters which were identified in the respondent's refusal letter as
      omissions or discrepancies.  Had the judge omitted to mention
      specifically one or two such explanations it might have been implied
      that the judge had taken them into account but did not consider them
      to be material.  In the application for permission to appeal, however,
      page after page is devoted to listing explanations given by the
      appellant to which the judge gave no apparent consideration.

  21. It is not necessary to list all of these.  They begin with how the
      appellant joined the KDPI and continue through the nature of the
      appellant's studies and his knowledge of the KDPI, the ill health of
      the appellant's father, how the appellant was known within the KDPI,
      and how much his wife knew of his activities.  Indeed, in relation to
      the evidence given by the appellant's wife the judge found first that
      it was implausible that she did not know about his activities and then
      that, as she did not know of these activities, her evidence did not
      assist the appellant.  Mr Govan sought to reconcile this apparent
      inconsistency and might have succeeded in doing so were there not so
      many other causes of concern arising from the judge's findings.  It
      simply cannot be implied that the judge has done a proper and adequate
      job in making findings upon the evidence before him.

  22. There is then the evidence of the other witnesses to consider,
      including the appellant's brother and LR.  The evidence of LR was
      dismissed in its entirety on grounds which are not fully sustainable.
      There was the issue of whether proper procedures had not been followed
      in relation to the letter from KDPI.  The judge expressed concern
      about LR having become acquainted with the appellant only a few months
      previously.  More worryingly, however, the judge referred to a lack of
      documentary evidence to support RL's evidence of having been in touch
      with others in making inquiries about the appellant.  The application
      for permission to appeal points out that in itself this would not
      justify rejecting LR's evidence, which had to be evaluated by the
      judge.  It is difficult to be satisfied that the judge gave adequate
      reasons for dismissing the evidence of RL in its entirety.

  23. I have made the point already that in this appeal it is the cumulative
      criticisms of the basis on which the judge made his findings which
      give cause for concern.  There is in addition the fact that although
      the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal took place on 16th November
      2017 the judge's decision was not promulgated until 1st May 2018.  The
      causes of this delay are not specified.  It seems unlikely, however,
      that a delay of this length would be attributable wholly to any
      shortcomings in the tribunal's administration.  It seems likely there
      has been a considerable delay by the judge in completing his decision.

  24. This delay was not founded upon by the appellant and, of course, the
      Upper Tribunal has no specific practice for addressing delay in the
      issuing of a decision by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.  This is
      an appeal, however, in which there were several witnesses and numerous
      disputed issues of fact.  It is not surprising that as the months
      since the hearing slipped by when the judge came to address these
      issues matters would be overlooked or disregarded.

  25. The position is that looking at the decision as a whole the Judge of
      the First-tier Tribunal has not given proper and adequate reasons for
      the findings he made.  The judge has overlooked or disregarded parts
      of the evidence and, in particular, explanations given by the
      appellant in his witness statement, which might have led to different
      findings having been made.  The judge's findings are flawed and unsafe
      and the decision should be set aside.

  26. The parties were agreed that if the decision were to be set aside
      there should be a further hearing.  In view of the nature and the
      extent of the findings of fact required I consider that in terms of
      paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement remittal to a differently
      constituted First-tier Tribunal is required, with no findings
      preserved.

Conclusions
  27. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.

  28. The decision is set aside.

  29. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing by a
      differently constituted Tribunal with no findings preserved.


Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal made a direction for anonymity, notwithstanding a
statement in its conclusions that no direction was made.  In order to
preserve the positions of the parties until the appeal is re-heard I
continue this direction.



M E Deans
                              6th December 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
