
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10205/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Under Rule 34 (P)                    |On 22 June 2020                      |
|On 9 June 2020                       |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     B I
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Obhi promulgated on 21st January  2020  in  which  the
       Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on protection and human rights
       grounds.
    2. The appellant sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted  by  a
       Designated Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal in the following terms:

           "1)    In light of the current country guidance and the  age  of
           the appellant, it is arguable that the appellant could not  have
           left Eritrea illegally and  is  therefore  in  the  category  of
           individuals at risk.


           2) Similarly the  appellant's  sur  place  activities  are  such
           arguably there is a potential risk to the appellant on return to
           Eritrea. The Damian point arises. It is arguable that the  Judge
           has  merely  looked  at  the  motive   of   the   appellant   is
           determinative  of  whether  or  not  he  would  be  at  risk  of
           persecution on return rather than how potential persecutors will
           view the appellant's conduct.


           3) In the circumstances the grounds may be argued."

    3. On 2 April 2020, in accordance with the Covid-19 arrangements  within
       the Upper Tribunal directions were sent to the parties  indicating  a
       provisional  view  had  been  reached  that  it  was  appropriate  to
       determine the question of whether the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
       involved the making of an error of  law  and,  if  so,  whether  that
       decision should be set aside, without a hearing. The party's views on
       this proposal were sought within a specified structured timescale.
    4. The appellant's submissions were received dated 5 May 2020.
    5. The Secretary of State's representative provided her  response  in  a
       letter dated 6 May 2020 in which it is stated: "In  consideration  of
       all relevant material  along  with  the  grounds  and  the  grant  of
       permission the respondent does not oppose the appellant's application
       for permission to appeal. The  Tribunal  are  invited  determine  the
       appeal with a fresh oral (continuance) in the First-tier Tribunal".
    6. A reply received from the appellant's representatives  dated  11  May
       2020 states that in light of the  respondent's  response  the  proper
       approach if for the matter to be returned to the First-tier  Tribunal
       for an oral hearing to be conducted de novo.

Error of law

    7. It is not in dispute between the advocates that the Judge  has  erred
       in law in a manner material to the decision to dismiss the appeal for
       the reasons set out in the application seeking permission  to  appeal
       and the grant of permission to appeal.
    8. I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  with  no
       preserved findings. The parties agree that it is appropriate  in  all
       the circumstances for the appeal to be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal but that is a matter for the Upper Tribunal.
    9. There is arguable merit in the appellant's representative's assertion
       that in light of it not being in dispute  that  the  appellant  is  a
       national of Eritrea and of national service age, who had been  called
       up for and commenced  national  service,  who  sought  protection  in
       Italy, and who entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  2009  and  maintain
       contact with the respondent who had made no attempt  to  remove  him,
       that the Judge was required to deal with  the  question  of  how  the
       appellant will be perceived on return and in particular whether as he
       is of draft age  he  will  be  perceived  as  the  draft  evaders  or
       deserter, in accordance with the country guidance case law.  It  also
       arguable the Judge was required to engage with the reasons  given  by
       the appellant for his comments in relation to Italy, the  appellant's
       sur plus activities for the Eritrea National Salvation Front  in  the
       UK in light of the fact the evidence showed the Eritrean  authorities
       operate a  network  of  spies  and  are  particularly  interested  in
       political organisation gatherings and protests against the regime and
       any risk this will  create  for  the  appellant  on  return,  and  to
       consider all  the  material  with  the  required  degree  of  anxious
       scrutiny.
   10.  The  above  exercise  will  require  new  and  far   more   detailed
       consideration and further primary findings of fact which may  require
       the submission of additional evidence and further consideration which
       can be undertaken  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  is  the
       specialist fact-finding Tribunal.
   11. In accordance with  the  Practice  Direction  regarding  remittal  of
       appeals to the First-tier Tribunal I consider it  is  appropriate  in
       all the circumstances of this appeal, and in light of the  prevailing
       situation, for the appeal to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
       sitting at Birmingham to be heard afresh by a judge other than  Judge
       Obhi.

Decision

   12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remit  the  appeal  to  the
       Birmingham Hearing Centre to be heard afresh by a  judge  other  than
       Judge Obhi.

  Anonymity.

   13. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 9 June 2020












