
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10684/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7 March 2018                        |On 9 March 2018                     |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     IB
                          anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Khan, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is  made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

    1.   The appellant ('the SSHD') has  appealed  against  a  decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Cruthers dated 11 September 2017,
         in which he dismissed the respondent's appeal on asylum grounds but
         allowed his appeal on humanitarian grounds and on  Article  3  ECHR
         grounds.

Background facts

    2.   The respondent, a citizen of Algeria, claimed that he is  at  risk
         in Algeria  for  two  reasons:  his  desertion  from  the  Algerian
         gendarmerie and the real risk that he will be seriously harmed by a
         drug  trafficking  gang  with  connects  to  a   Colonel   in   the
         gendarmerie, on the basis that he played an  instrumental  role  in
         investigations regarding the gang's activities.


    3.   In a comprehensive decision, the FTT did not accept the respondent
         faces a real risk  of  persecution  for  reasons  relating  to  his
         desertion but accepted he is at real risk of serious harm from  the
         gang, albeit not for a Convention Reason.

Grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal


    4.   In wide ranging grounds of appeal the SSHD  appealed  against  the
         decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   These  grounds  can   be
         summarised as follows:

             Ground 1: the FTT failed to give adequate reasons for  finding
             that the risk from the gang is ongoing.


             Ground 2: it is unclear whether  the  FTT  accepted  that  the
             respondent's friend and colleague, Nassardin was killed by the
             gang or not.


             Ground 3: the FTT failed to  reason  whether  the  authorities
             could provide the respondent with sufficient protection.


             Ground 4: the FTT failed to address internal relocation.

    5.   Permission to appeal was refused by the FTT but granted  by  Upper
         Tribunal Jordan in a comprehensive decision dated 17 November 2017.
           He  noted  that  the  respondent's  account  was   "substantially
         accepted" by the FTT, and it undoubtedly  accepted  that  Nassardin
         was killed.  Judge Jordan went on to observe  that  in  considering
         whether the Algerian state could provide sufficient protection this
         arguably required a "more detailed enquiry" than the FTT conducted.


Hearing


    5.   Mr Harrison relied upon the grounds of appeal and  Judge  Jordan's
         observations,  and  was  content  to  make   no   additional   oral
         submissions.   Mr  Harrison  however  clarified  in   response   to
         questions from me that the only ground of appeal that is pursued is
         ground 3: the failure to give reasons for finding  that  protection
         would not be sufficient.   He  accepted  that  permission  was  not
         granted regarding ground 2; grounds 1 and 2 should be read together
         and come under the  broader  head  of  sufficiency  of  protection;
         ground 3 relates to internal protection but this was not raised  as
         an issue of concern in the decision letter or at the hearing by the
         respondent.


    6.   Ms Khan relied upon a detailed rule 24  notice  and  made  helpful
         submissions in support of this.   She submitted that the only  real
         ground that survives is that relating to sufficiency of protection,
         and when the decision is read as a whole, the FTT provided adequate
         reasons for its conclusion.


    7.   After hearing from both representatives, I reserved  my  decision,
         which I now provide with reasons.


Error of law discussion


    7.   After making detailed and comprehensive credibility  findings  the
         FTT substantially  accepted  the  respondent's  account.   The  FTT
         expressly directed itself to the correct test  in  Horvath  v  SSHD
         [2000] UKHL 37 on assessing sufficiency of protection, and there is
         no reason to consider that this test was not borne  fully  in  mind
         when the FTT weighed up the competing considerations  in  order  to
         determine the issues of real risk and  sufficiency  of  protection,
         which the judge referred to as the "ultimate questions" - see  [73]
         and [74].  Indeed, Horvath is referred to again at  [81]  when  the
         FTT answers the ultimate questions.  The FTT acknowledged  at  [74]
         that these ultimate questions "are quite finely balanced  but  just
         come down in favour of" the appellant.


    8.   The Court of Appeal has recently revisited  the  duty  to  provide
         adequate reasons in MD (Turkey) v SSHD [2017] EWCA 1958.  Singh  LJ
         said this:

             "26. It is important  to  appreciate  that  adequacy  in  this
             context is precisely that, no more and no less. It  is  not  a
             counsel  of  perfection.  Still  less  should  it  provide  an
             opportunity to  undertake  a  qualitative  assessment  of  the
             reasons to see if they are wanting, perhaps  even  surprising,
             on their merits. The purpose of the duty to give  reasons  is,
             in part, to enable the losing party to know why she has  lost.
             It is also to enable an appellate court  or  tribunal  to  see
             what the reasons for the decision are  so  that  they  can  be
             examined in case some error of approach has been committed.


             27. In the present case, in my view, it  was  tolerably  clear
             why the FtT decided the case against the Secretary of State as
             it did. The FtT addressed the main points in  dispute  between
             the parties, including the appellant's credibility,  including
             discrepancies  in  the  appellant's  evidence,  in  particular
             relating to the question of the arrest warrant."

    9.   In my judgment, the SSHD as the losing  party  has  been  provided
         with adequate reasons to know why she has lost.   It  is  tolerably
         clear why the FTT decided the issue of sufficient protection in the
         manner it did.  The FTT's reasoning for this can be paraphrased  in
         the following manner:

             -    There are three specific reasons which suggest  that  the
             respondent may have sufficient protection from the state:


                 (i)   the guidance in RM (Military Service  -  RCD  -  FIS)
                 Algeria CG [2002] UKIAT 0432 indicates that the authorities
                 provide sufficient protection to those in fear of  the  FIS
                 terrorist group;


                 (ii)  the respondent was not in hiding for a period of  two
                 months, after two attempts were made on his life;


                 (iii) the respondent said at interview he  had  received  a
                 degree of protection from the authorities.


             -    Whilst these tend to show that in general  and  for  many
             the Algerian state offers sufficient protection, there are two
             particularly compelling factors in this case,  which  tip  the
             balance and support the respondent's claim  on  the  "ultimate
             questions" i.e. that there is a real risk (applying the  lower
             standard of proof)  that  this  respondent  will  not  receive
             sufficient protection:


                 (i)   two attempts were made to seriously harm /  kill  the
                 respondent in 2015;


                 (ii)  there is no reason  to  believe  that  the  level  of
                 protection afforded to the respondent would be  any  higher
                 than that provided to his friend  and  colleague,  who  was
                 shot and killed after this.

    10.  The FTT could have gone on to consider  matters  in  more  detail,
         including some of the gaps raised by  Judge  Jordan  when  granting
         permission, but that would be to require a counsel  of  perfection.
         It is  sufficiently  clear  that  the  FTT  accepted  that  Colonel
         Aldijali, who was the gendarmerie Colonel in  charge  of  the  Oran
         area and therefore in a position to  obtain  information  regarding
         other areas, was an important power behind the threat, and  that  a
         similar threat had already been successfully carried out.


    11.  I also accept Ms Khan's submission that some of the  gaps  in  the
         evidence raised by Judge Jordan would be  very  difficult  for  the
         respondent to obtain.  In this respect  it  is  noteworthy,  as  Mr
         Harrison accepted, that the SSHD's  own  decision  letter  did  not
         address sufficiency of protection, which would be the normal course
         in decisions such as this, even where credibility is not  accepted.
         It follows that the FTT did not have  any  submission  or  evidence
         from the SSHD as to why protection for  this  respondent  would  be
         sufficient (or why he could relocate when part of the source of the
         threat was connected to the state).  The burden of proof of  course
         remained on  the  respondent,  but  to  the  lower  standard.   The
         respondent, on the other hand, relied upon the US State  Department
         report for 2016 which includes the following:

             "The government did not take sufficient steps to  investigate,
             prosecute,  or   punish   public   officials   who   committed
             violations.   Impunity  for  policy  and  security   officials
             remained  a  problem,  and  the  government  rarely   provided
             information  or   actions   against   officials   accused   of
             wrongdoing."

    12.  The FTT decision provides adequate reasons for its conclusion that
         notwithstanding some matters pointing in  the  opposite  direction,
         there is a real risk that this respondent faces serious  harm  from
         which he cannot expect sufficient protection.

Decision

    13.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making
         of a material error of law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
8 March 2018

