

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10490/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|on 22nd February 2019                 |On 18th March 2019             |
|                                      |                               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                              MR BAHMAN MAWLANI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr B Price, Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Agnew dismissing an appeal on protection and human rights
      grounds.

   2. The appellant is a national of Iran of Kurdish ethnicity.  His claim
      for protection is based upon the following.  In order to supplement
      the income of his family farm he became involved in smuggling goods
      across the border from Iraq to Iran.  He was asked by a friend, Hama,
      to bring in packages for the Kurdistan Free Life Party (PJAK).  He did
      this 6-7 times over two years.  He did not know what was in the
      packages as they were sealed.  The appellant was not a member of PJAK
      and had no interest in politics.

   3. In early August 2017 the appellant was telephoned by his father to
      inform him that Etela'at had raided the family home.  Hama had been
      arrested and had informed the authorities that the appellant was
      transporting PJAK leaflets across the border.  The appellant did not
      return home and his family made arrangements for him to leave Iran
      illegally.  The appellant arrived in the UK on 12th March 2018.  Since
      arriving in the UK he has been involved in a demonstration outside the
      Iranian Embassy.

   4. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not believe the appellant's
      evidence.  The appellant sought to challenge her adverse findings in
      the application for permission to appeal.  Permission to appeal was
      granted principally on the basis that it was arguable that the
      credibility findings made by the judge were not soundly based.

Submissions
   5. At the hearing before me Mr Price indicated that he relied upon all
      the grounds in the application for permission to appeal.  He submitted
      that the judge had listed all the negative factors affecting the
      appellant's credibility and none of the positive factors.  There were
      errors in the negative factors on which the judge had relied.  At
      paragraph 19 of the judge's decision she stated that it was extremely
      unlikely that Etela'at would have left the appellant's family home and
      allowed the appellant's father to warn him by telephone not to return
      and then to go to the appellant on the same day with the means for
      escaping from the country.  Mr Price contended that the judge saw
      Etela'at as competent and efficient.  Etela'at was ruthless but how
      competent was it?

   6. Mr Price referred to paragraph 22 of the decision, where the judge
      quoted from a Home Office report of July 2016.  This was about how the
      family would be treated of a person who was caught with a KDPI flyer.
      The report stated that the family would be harassed until the wanted
      person showed up.  Sometimes a family member would be detained and
      interrogated and if the person escaped the authorities would
      interrogate the family and sometimes a family member would be detained
      and tortured.  Mr Price submitted that the judge had ignored the word
      "sometimes" where it appeared in this account.  Not all family members
      would be detained straightaway but the judge had read this as if
      Etela'at would always detain and harass family members.

   7. Mr Price then turned to the judge's treatment of the appellant's claim
      to have been engaged in smuggling.  The judge did not consider this at
      all and made no assessment of the risk to the appellant from this
      activity.

   8. Mr Price then addressed the judge's treatment of the appellant's sur
      place claim.  The judge accepted that the appellant had attended a
      protest in London and had been photographed holding a Kurdish flag.
      The judge said this was an opportunistic act and the appellant would
      not be identified by the Iranian authorities.  The judge did not
      follow BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011]
      UKUT 36.  It did not matter if the act was opportunistic and the
      appellant attended only once - this would not prevent him being
      identified as an activist.

   9. Mr Price submitted that on the proper application of BA the appeal
      should be allowed outright.  It was emphasised, however, that the
      appellant relied on all the grounds in the application, especially
      those relating to the credibility findings.

  10. Mr Matthews began by pointing out that the judge had taken into
      account a positive factor affecting the appellant's credibility.  This
      was that the appellant had no real interest in politics but was
      sympathetic to the Kurdish cause.  The appellant had been asked to
      help his friend Hama.  It was a much greater risk than ordinary
      smuggling for the appellant to handle political material.  Why would
      the appellant have put his family at risk by doing this?  It was said
      that the appellant should not be expected to speculate on what
      Etela'at might do.  The appeal was heard by an experienced judge, who
      was entitled to find that Etela'at was not so incompetent as it was
      said to be in this case.  The judge referred to background evidence on
      the risk to the appellant's family.  The appellant was not entitled to
      "cherry pick" the background evidence.  The judge was making the point
      that the appellant had done nothing to contact his family since
      leaving Iran.  A person involved with PJAK would be treated no
      differently from a person involved with KDPI.  The appellant had not
      taken any interest in the fate of his family.

  11. Mr Matthews continued by referring to paragraph 25 of the decision,
      where the judge commented on the appellant's ability to provide the
      international dialling code for Iran.  The judge rejected the
      appellant's explanation for how he knew the code, namely that he had
      heard other people say it when dialling Iran.  In any event this
      showed that the appellant had friends who were in contact with people
      in Iran and the appellant could have attempted through them to obtain
      news of his family.  Mr Matthews contended that paragraph 4 of the
      application for permission to appeal did not accurately represent the
      judge's position on this point.

  12. The next point Mr Matthews addressed was about the length of the
      appellant's journey to the UK.  In a statement made on 15th June 2018
      for his Preliminary Information Questionnaire the appellant added 3
      months to his previous account of his journey to the UK.  At paragraph
      28 the judge pointed to the gap of 3 months in the appellant's account
      of his journey given at his screening interview on 13th March 2018 and
      in his amendments to the screening interview submitted on 5th July
      2018.  The judge pointed out that the appellant attempted to fill this
      gap by adding a 3 month period to his journey in the statement with
      his Preliminary Information Questionnaire, referred to by the judge as
      Preliminary Information Form.  Even if the judge made an error in
      relation to this, Mr Matthews submitted it was not material to her
      decision.

  13. In relation to the appellant's smuggling, Mr Matthews submitted that
      the alleged risk to the appellant arose from smuggling political
      material, not smuggling goods.  It was pointed out that if the
      appellant's evidence on smuggling material for PJAK was found not to
      be credible, there was no other basis in the appellant's evidence
      through which the authorities would have become aware of his
      involvement in smuggling.

  14. Turning to the appellant's involvement in a demonstration in the UK,
      Mr Matthews submitted that the appellant had been a demonstrator, not
      an organiser.  His role was that of an "infrequent demonstrator", in
      terms of paragraph 66 of BA.  There was no real risk of him being
      identified by the Iranian authorities and the Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal had treated the issue correctly.

  15. In response Mr Price referred to the background evidence on how the
      authorities treated families of Kurdish separatists.  The appellant
      had described harassment of his family, which was consistent with the
      background evidence.  According to this it was only sometimes that
      family members would be detained.  The judge had erred in her approach
      to the background evidence.  Mr Price referred to the grant of
      permission to appeal, in which it was pointed out that only reduced
      weight should be placed on the record of a screening interview,
      particularly where the matter in question did not relate to a core
      part of the appellant's claim.  There was no finding by the judge on
      the appellant's evidence of having been a smuggler.  Mr Price referred
      to background evidence on the risk to smugglers.  The judge did not
      consider the future risk to the appellant from these activities.

  16. I asked Mr Price about an earlier submission he had made, where he had
      said the judge had taken into account all the negative factors
      affecting the appellant's credibility but not the positive ones.  Mr
      Matthews had referred to what he described as a positive factor which
      the judge took into account.  This was that the appellant had no real
      interest in politics but was sympathetic to the Kurdish cause.  I
      asked Mr Price to tell me what the other positive factors were which
      should have been taken into account.  Mr Price responded that these
      were, first, that the appellant's evidence was consistent with the
      background evidence, in terms of paragraph 339L of the Immigration
      Rules, and secondly, if I understood Mr Price correctly, the general
      credibility of the appellant's account as a whole.

Discussion
  17. I will begin my consideration with the supposed risk to the appellant
      from the demonstration the appellant attended in the UK.  Here I
      broadly agree with Mr Matthews that overall the judge considered this
      matter properly in accordance with the country guideline case of BA.
      As the judge points out at paragraphs 38-41, at this demonstration the
      appellant was not an organiser, mobiliser or leader but a member of
      the crowd.  He had his photograph taken holding a flag.  The
      demonstration received newspaper coverage.  According to the judge's
      earlier findings, the appellant was not known to the authorities in
      Iran as a committed opponent or someone with a significant political
      profile.  While the authorities in the Embassy did sometimes monitor
      demonstrations and the appellant had been in a prominent position
      holding a flag at the front of the crowd, the authorities could not
      monitor all returnees who had been involved in demonstrations.  Any
      risk to the appellant from his involvement in the demonstration did
      not meet the standard of a real risk.  I would add that the judge may
      have placed too much emphasis on the appellant's motive for
      participating in the demonstration but nevertheless her conclusion is
      adequately supported.

  18. I will turn next to the judge's assessment of the risk to the
      appellant as a smuggler.  Here it is important to note that according
      to the appellant's evidence his involvement in smuggling came to the
      attention of the authorities only because he was carrying PJAK
      materials.  The judge found that the appellant's evidence in this
      regard was not credible.  There was no other alleged risk to the
      appellant at present arising from his involvement in smuggling.  The
      background evidence to which I was referred to Mr Price, and which was
      referred to by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 12 of
      her decision, showed that each year dozens of smugglers are shot by
      border guards while attempting to cross the frontier.  Those who are
      caught face imprisonment varying from 6 months to 5 years.  The
      appellant's evidence was though that the authorities had no knowledge
      of his involvement in smuggling apart from the his claim that after
      his friend in PJAK was detained he told the authorities of the
      appellant's involvement in carrying leaflets for PJAK.  If this part
      of the appellant's evidence was disbelieved, then the authorities had
      no knowledge of any smuggling in which the appellant may or may not
      have been involved.  This was not a matter on which the judge was
      required to make a finding.  It was not material to the outcome of the
      appeal.

  19. In his closing submission Mr Price suggested that there would be a
      risk to the appellant from involvement in smuggling if he returned to
      Iran.  The basis for this submission was not clear.  The judge's
      finding was that the authorities did not know the appellant was
      involved in smuggling, even supposing that he was.  If there was a
      hint in Mr Price's submission that the appellant would take up
      smuggling after his return, this is of course not a matter on which
      the appellant could found his current claim for protection.

  20. The next issue is the judge's reference to background evidence on how
      the authorities may treat members of the family of a Kurdish activist
      who has escaped.  It is important to consider the context in which the
      judge commented on this.  The context was that of the appellant's
      evidence that since leaving Iran he had made no attempt to contact his
      family either directly or indirectly.  At paragraph 24 the judge wrote
      that even if the appellant did not want to telephone his family
      directly in case their calls were being monitored, it was not
      plausible or credible that the appellant would not have attempted to
      contact his family even through others to discover their fate and
      reassure them as to his own.  The point the judge was making from the
      background evidence was not whether family members are always detained
      in these circumstances or just sometimes detained but that the
      appellant had shown none of the natural concern for his family which
      might be expected.  According to the judge the appellant then further
      damaged his credibility by his knowledge of the international dialling
      code for Iran even though he claimed he had never used it.  These were
      matters to which the judge was entitled to have regard and the judge's
      findings and reasoning in relation to them disclose no error of law.

  21. There was further contention over the judge's approach to the
      circumstances of how the appellant became aware the authorities were
      looking for him.   The judge took the view that it was "extremely
      unlikely" that Etela'at would have allowed the appellant's father to
      warn him not to return home and to allow him to go to his son to
      provide him with the means of escaping from the country.  Mr Price
      submitted that although Etala'at have a reputation for being ruthless
      this did not mean they were rational or competent.  The judge
      questioned at paragraph 20 whether Etela'at would have informed the
      family why they were looking for the appellant.  This is an
      observation the judge was entitled to make.  The judge also questioned
      whether Etela'at would have left the family to notify the appellant of
      what they had been told.  The judge may have been venturing onto less
      firm ground at this point.  However, in the succeeding paragraph the
      judge wrote that even "if this was what happened" the appellant had
      made no attempt to contact his family to see what consequences they
      might have suffered.  The judge did not write, as Mr Price seemed to
      imply, that the appellant's family members would have been detained or
      tortured, only that this could have happened.  The judge did not
      misapprehend the country information on this point.  Furthermore, the
      judge's observations about how Etela'at might be expected to have
      behaved when they came to detain the appellant were not free-standing
      but, as set out at paragraph 21, fitted into her larger concern about
      the lack of any attempt by the appeal to contact his family.

  22. Concern was also raised about the judge's comments at paragraphs 15
      and 16 about why the appellant would have exposed himself and his
      family to a considerable risk by helping PJAK.  According to the
      application for permission to appeal the judge did not take into
      account the appellant's explanation that he was helping a friend and a
      neighbour and that although he had no particular interest in politics
      he had sympathy for the Kurdish cause.  It was pointed out that the
      judge observed that the person the appellant was helping "was not a
      very close or trusted friend".  For my part I find it difficult to see
      any part of the appellant's explanation which the judge failed to
      consider adequately.  The judge did not accept that the appellant had
      explained sufficiently why he was prepared to take a risk to himself
      which might lead to detention and ill-treatment and even his
      execution, as well as a risk to his family.  This was a view the judge
      was entitled to take.

  23. The final issue for me to consider is the judge's treatment of the
      appellant's evidence about his journey to the UK.  This is challenged
      at paragraph 5 of the application for permission to appeal, where it
      is stated: "At paragraphs 25-29, the Judge states that the Appellant
      has been inconsistent regarding his journey to the United Kingdom.  In
      particular, at paragraph 28 the Judge states that the Appellant has
      filled a gap in his original account outlined in the Screening
      Interview in his "PIF statement".  However, as the Judge notes, the
      PIF statement was dated 15th June 2018 and the gap appears as a result
      of amendments made on 5th July 2018.  It is submitted as therefore
      impossible for a document dated 15th June 2018 to be an attempt to
      fill a gap in an account given on 5th July 2018, and therefore the
      Judge has erred in her consideration of the same."

  24. I do not agree with the course of events as described at paragraph 5
      of the application, quoted above.  At paragraph 25 of her decision the
      judge points out that at his screening interview on 13th March 2018
      the appellant said he left Iran on 5th August and described a journey
      to the UK lasting just under 16 weeks.  At paragraph 27 the judge
      pointed out that the appellant said he left Iran on 5th August but he
      arrived in the UK on the 12th March.  The appellant therefore had to
      account for a journey time of 7 months, not 15-16 weeks.

  25. At paragraph 28 the judge referred to a Preliminary Information Form
      statement dated 15th June 2018 (the form in question is entitled
      Preliminary Information Questionnaire).  It is in this statement that
      the appellant inserted a further 3 month sojourn in the house of an
      agent into the account of his journey, thus accounting for most of the
      missing period arising from his screening interview.

  26. The appellant then on 5th July 2018 supplied the Home Office with
      amendments to his answers at the screening interview on 13th March
      2018.  These amendments, at Annexe E of the Home Office bundle, make
      no mention of the additional 3 month sojourn in the house of an agent
      referred to by the appellant in his statement of 15th June 2018, as
      pointed out by the judge at paragraph 26.

  27. At paragraph 29 the judge records that at the hearing the appellant
      was asked how long his journey took.  He was asked when he left Iran
      and when he arrived in the UK.  The appellant said he was under the
      control of a people smuggler for 3 months.  He then said that he was
      under the control of the smuggler until the day before he reached the
      UK.  The judge very properly drew attention to the unsatisfactory
      nature of the responses given by the appellant at the hearing when
      asked about these matters.  Not surprisingly the judge finds this
      damaging to his credibility.

  28. The judge was fully entitled to found upon an inconsistency over
      journey time arising from the screening interview of 18th March and
      the statement of 18th June.  When the appellant made the amendments of
      5th July to his screening interview, the additional 3 month sojourn in
      the statement of 18th June was left entirely out of account.  The
      discrepancies over the journey time were put to the appellant at the
      hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and he was unable to give a
      coherent and credible explanation.  Far from making an error of law,
      the judge dealt with this matter fairly and fully.  She even pointed
      out she made a mistake at the hearing by referring to a journey of 8
      months rather than 7 months.  She clearly did not consider that this
      minor slip affected the significant inconsistency in the appellant's
      answers.

  29. Further points have been made to the effect that journey time does not
      go to the core of the appellant's claim and that limited reliance
      should be placed upon what is said at a screening interview.  The
      discrepancy over journey time was not a minor matter, however, but a
      significant part of the appellant's evidence of his experiences.
      Furthermore, although the discrepancy may have originated at the
      screening interview, the appellant failed to explain it in his
      amendments of 5th July to his answers at the screening interview.  At
      the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal he was asked to explain the
      inconsistency over his journey as described in his statement of 18th
      June but he completely failed to give a credible and coherent
      explanation.  The judge was entitled to regard this as damaging to the
      appellant's credibility.

  30. The final point to which I shall refer is Mr Price's contention that
      the consistency of the appellant's account with the background
      evidence was in his favour.  Even was there such consistency, however,
      the judge was entitled to treat this as outweighed by discrepancies in
      the evidence and it would not have been necessary to make explicit
      reference to this.  It is apparent, however, that the judge had
      concerns about the plausibility of the appellant's account when
      weighed against the background evidence. This is shown by the judge
      questioning why the appellant would have taken the risk of smuggling
      PJAK material and why he would not have made any attempt, even
      indirectly, to inquire after his family.

  31. I have considered in some detail the arguments made on behalf of the
      appellant to expose flaws in the findings made by the judge.  Far from
      exposing such flaws, however, when scrutinised carefully these
      arguments reveal the strength of the judge's reasoning.  The appellant
      has failed to show any error of law.



Conclusions
  32. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

  33. The decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.



Anonymity
No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  I have not
been asked to make such a direction and see no reason of substance for
doing so.



Fee award
No fee is paid or is payable so no fee award is made.




M E Deans
                                    14th March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


