
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10841/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th April 2018                             |On 2nd May 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                     ASA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss E Stewart-King of Counsel, instructed by Tower
                    Hamlets Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     DECISION BY CONSENT AND DIRECTIONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 39 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and by the consent of the parties the following order is made:

    Upon the  parties'  agreement  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 20 December 2017 discloses a material error  of
    law, it is hereby ordered by consent as follows:

      1) The First-tier Tribunal Judge made errors of law in relation to the
         first, second and third  grounds  as  pleaded  by  the  Appellant's
         Counsel in relation to namely:

      i) the findings concerning the Appellant's credibility; and

     ii) the failure to make adequate findings in respect of the core of the
         Appellant's claim; and

    iii) the failure to properly assess or give adequate reasons in  respect
         of the Appellant's corroborative evidence.

      2) The decision  is  set  aside  in  its  entirety  with  no  findings
         preserved.

      3) The matter is to be remitted to be heard by a Judge of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal other than Judge Samimi.

 2. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore allowed.

 3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for legal error by
    consent.

Anonymity

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 2 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
